A computer is a machine that uses electronics to input, process, store, and output data. Data is information such as numbers, words, and lists. Input of data means to read information from a keyboard, a storage device like a hard drive, or a sensor. The computer processes or changes the data by following the instructions in software programs. A computer program is a list of instructions the computer has to perform. Programs usually perform mathematical calculations, modify data, or move it around. The data is then saved on a storage device, shown on a display, or sent to another computer. Computers can be connected together to form a network such as the internet, allowing the computers to communicate with each other.

The processor of a computer is made from integrated circuits (chips) that contains many transistors. Most computers are digital, which means that they represent information using binary digits, or bits. Computers come in different shapes and sizes, depending on the brand, model, and purpose. They range from small computers, such as smartphones and laptops, to large computers, such as supercomputers.

Two things that often define a computer are that it responds to a specific instruction set in a well-defined manner, and that it can execute a stored list of instructions called a program. There are four main actions in a computer: inputting, storing, outputting and processing.

Modern computers can do billions of calculations in a second. Being able to calculate many times per second allows modern computers to multi-task, which means they can do many different tasks at the same time. Computers do many different jobs where automation is useful. Some examples are controlling traffic lights, vehicles, security systems, washing machines and digital televisions.

Computers can be designed to do almost anything with certain information.  Computers are used to control large and small machines that, in the past, were controlled by humans. Billions of people have a personal computer at home or at work. They are used for things such as calculation, listening to music, reading, writing, or playing games.

Modern computers are electronic computer hardware. They do mathematical arithmetic very quickly, but computers do not really "think." They only follow the instructions in their software programs. The software uses the hardware when the user gives it instructions and produces useful outputs.

Computers are controlled with user interfaces. Input devices which include keyboards, computer mice, buttons, and touch screens, etc.computer are electronic computer hardware.

Computer programs are designed or written by computer programmers. A few programmers write programs in the computer's own language, called machine code. Most programs are written using a programming language like: C, Fortran, JavaScript, Lisp, and Pascal. These programming languages are more like the language with which one talks and writes every day. The compiler converts the user's instructions into binary code (machine code) that the computer will understand and do what is needed.

In 1837, Charles Babbage proposed the first general mechanical computer, the Analytical Engine. The Analytical Engine contained an Arithmetic Logic Unit, basic flow control, punched cards, and integrated memory. It is the first general-purpose computer concept that could be used for many things and not only one particular program. However, this computer was never built while Charles Babbage was alive, because he didn't have enough money. In 1910, Henry Babbage, Charles Babbage's youngest son, was able to finish a part of this machine and do basic calculations.

Before the computer era there were machines that could do the same thing over and over again, like a music box. People began to want to be able to tell their machine to do different things. For example, they wanted to tell the music box to play different music every time. This part of computer history is called the "history of programmable machines", which in simple words means "the history of machines that I can order to do different things if I know how to speak their language."

One of the first examples of programmable machines was built by Hero of Alexandria (c. 10–70 AD). He built a mechanical theater which performed a play lasting 10 minutes and was operated by a complex system of ropes and drums. These ropes and drums were the language of the machine- they told what the machine did and when. Some people argue that this is the first programmable machine.

Some people disagree on which early computer is programmable. Many say the "castle clock", an astronomical clock invented by Al-Jazari in 1206, is the first known programmable analog computer. The length of day and night could be adjusted every day in order to account for the changing lengths of day and night throughout the year. Some count this daily adjustment as computer programming.

Others say the first computer was made by Charles Babbage. Ada Lovelace is considered to be the first programmer.

At the end of the Middle Ages, people started thinking math and engineering were more important. In 1623, Wilhelm Schickard made a mechanical calculator. Other Europeans made more calculators after him. They were not modern computers because they could only add, subtract, and multiply- you could not change what they did to make them do something like play Tetris. Because of this, we say they were not programmable. Now engineers use computers to design and plan.

In 1801, Joseph Marie Jacquard used punched paper cards to tell his textile loom what kind of pattern to weave. He could use punch cards to tell the loom what to do, and he could change the punch cards, which means he could program the loom to weave the pattern he wanted. This means the loom was programmable. At the end of the 1800s Herman Hollerith invented the recording of data on a medium that could then be read by a machine, developing punched card data processing technology for the 1890 U.S. census. His tabulating machines read and summarized data stored on punched cards and they began use for government and commercial data processing.

Charles Babbage wanted to make a similar machine that could calculate. He called it "The Analytical Engine". Because Babbage did not have enough money and always changed his design when he had a better idea, he never built his Analytical Engine.

As time went on, computers were used more. People get bored easily doing the same thing over and over. Imagine spending your life writing things down on index cards, storing them, and then having to go find them again. The U.S. Census Bureau in 1890 had hundreds of people doing just that. It was expensive, and reports took a long time. Then an engineer worked out how to make machines do a lot of the work. Herman Hollerith invented a tabulating machine that would automatically add up information that the Census bureau collected. The Computing Tabulating Recording Corporation (which later became IBM) made his machines. They leased the machines instead of selling them. Makers of machines had long helped their users understand and repair them, and CTR's tech support was especially good.

Because of machines like this, new ways of talking to these machines were invented, and new types of machines were invented, and eventually the computer as we know it was born.

In the first half of the 20th century, scientists started using computers, mostly because scientists had a lot of math to figure out and wanted to spend more of their time thinking about science questions instead of spending hours adding numbers together. For example, if they had to launch a rocket ship, they needed to do a lot of math to make sure the rocket worked right. So they put together computers. These analog computers used analog circuits, which made them very hard to program. In the 1930s, they invented digital computers, and soon made them easier to program. However this is not the case as many consecutive attempts have been made to bring arithmetic logic to l3.Analog computers are mechanical or electronic devices which solve problems.Some are used to control machines as well.

Scientists figured out how to make and use digital computers in the 1930s to 1940s. Scientists made a lot of digital computers, and as they did, they figured out how to ask them the right sorts of questions to get the most out of them. Here are a few of the computers they built:

Several developers of ENIAC saw its problems. They invented a way to for a computer to remember what they had told it, and a way to change what it remembered. This is known as "stored program architecture" or von Neumann architecture. John von Neumann talked about this design in the paper First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC, distributed in 1945. A number of projects to develop computers based on the stored-program architecture started around this time. The first of these was completed in Great Britain. The first to be demonstrated working was the Manchester Small-Scale Experimental Machine (SSEM or "Baby"), while the EDSAC, completed a year after SSEM, was the first really useful computer that used the stored program design. Shortly afterwards, the machine originally described by von Neumann's paper—EDVAC—was completed but was not ready for two years.

Nearly all modern computers use the stored-program architecture. It has become the main concept which defines a modern computer. The technologies used to build computers have changed since the 1940s, but many current computers still use the von-Neumann architecture.

In the 1950s computers were built out of mostly vacuum tubes. Transistors replaced vacuum tubes in the 1960s because they were smaller and cheaper. They also need less power and do not break down as much as vacuum tubes. In the 1970s, technologies were based on integrated circuits. Microprocessors, such as the Intel 4004 made computers smaller, cheaper, faster and more reliable. By the 1980s, microcontrollers became small and cheap enough to replace mechanical controls in things like washing machines. The 1980s also saw home computers and personal computers. With the evolution of the Internet, personal computers are becoming as common as the television and the telephone in the household.

In 2005 Nokia started to call some of its mobile phones (the N-series) "multimedia computers" and after the launch of the Apple iPhone in 2007, many are now starting to add the smartphone category among "real" computers. In 2008, if smartphones are included in the numbers of computers in the world, the biggest computer maker by units sold, was no longer Hewlett-Packard, but rather Nokia.

A "desktop computer" is a small machine that has a screen (which is not part of the computer). Most people keep them on top of a desk, which is why they are called "desktop computers." "Laptop computers" are computers small enough to fit on your lap. This makes them easy to carry around. Both laptops and desktops are called personal computers, because one person at a time uses them for things like playing music, surfing the web, or playing video games.

There are larger computers that can be used by multiple people at the same time. These are called "mainframes," and these computers do all the things that make things like the internet work. You can think of a personal computer like this: the personal computer is like your skin: you can see it, other people can see it, and through your skin you feel wind, water, air, and the rest of the world. A mainframe is more like your internal organs: you never see them, and you barely even think about them, but if they suddenly went missing, you would have some very big problems.

An embedded computer, also called an embedded system is a computer that does one thing and one thing only, and usually does it very well. For example, an alarm clock is an embedded computer. It tells the time. Unlike your personal computer, you cannot use your clock to play Tetris. Because of this, we say that embedded computers cannot be programmed because you cannot install more programs on your clock. Some mobile phones, automatic teller machines, microwave ovens, CD players and cars are operated by embedded computers.

All-in-one computers are desktop computers that have all of the computer's inner mechanisms in the same case as the monitor. Apple has made several popular examples of all-in-one computers, such as the original Macintosh of the mid-1980s and the iMac of the late 1990s and 2000s.

Computers store data and the instructions as numbers, because computers can do things with numbers very quickly. These data are stored as binary symbols (1s and 0s). A 1 or a 0 symbol stored by a computer is called a bit, which comes from the words binary digit. Computers can use many bits together to represent instructions and the data that these instructions use. A list of instructions is called a program and is stored on the computer's hard disk. Computers work through the program by using a central processing unit, and they use fast memory called RAM (also known as Random Access Memory) as a space to store the instructions and data while they are doing this. When the computer wants to store the results of the program for later, it uses the hard disk because things stored on a hard disk can still be remembered after the computer is turned off.

An operating system tells the computer how to understand what jobs it has to do, how to do these jobs, and how to tell people the results. Millions of computers may be using the same operating system, while each computer can have its own application programs to do what its user needs. Using the same operating systems makes it easy to learn how to use computers for new things. A user who needs to use a computer for something different, can learn how to use a new application program. Some operating systems can have simple command lines or a fully user-friendly GUI.

One of the most important jobs that computers do for people is helping with communication. Communication is how people share information. Computers have helped people move forward in science, medicine, business, and learning, because they let experts from anywhere in the world work with each other and share information. They also let other people communicate with each other, do their jobs almost anywhere, learn about almost anything, or share their opinions with each other. The Internet is the thing that lets people communicate between their computers. The Internet also allows the computer user to play an Online game.

A computer is now almost always an electronic device. It usually contains materials that will become electronic waste when discarded. When a new computer is bought in some places, laws require that the cost of its waste management must also be paid for. This is called product stewardship.

Computers can become  quickly, depending on what programs the user runs. Very often, they are thrown away within two or three years, because some newer programs require a more powerful computer. This makes the problem worse, so computer recycling happens a lot. Many projects try to send working computers to developing nations so they can be re-used and will not become waste as quickly, as most people do not need to run new programs. Some computer parts, such as hard drives, can break easily. When these parts end up in the landfill, they can put poisonous chemicals like lead into the ground-water. Hard drives can also contain secret information like credit card numbers. If the hard drive is not erased before being thrown away, an identity thief can get the information from the hard drive, even if the drive doesn't work, and use it, for example, to steal money from the previous owner's bank account.

Computers come in different forms, but most of them have a common design.

A computer has several main parts. When comparing a computer to a human body, the CPU is like a brain. It does most of the thinking and tells the rest of the computer how to work. The CPU is on the Motherboard, which is like the skeleton. It provides the basis for where the other parts go, and carries the nerves that connect them to each other and the CPU. The motherboard is connected to a power supply, which provides electricity to the entire computer. The various drives (CD drive, floppy drive, and on many newer computers, USB flash drive) act like eyes, ears, and fingers, and allow the computer to read different types of storage, in the same way that a human can read different types of books. The hard drive is like a human's memory, and keeps track of all the data stored on the computer. Most computers have a sound card or another method of making sound, which is like vocal cords, or a voice box. Connected to the sound card are speakers, which are like a mouth, and are where the sound comes out. Computers might also have a graphics card, which helps the computer to create visual effects, such as 3D environments, or more realistic colors, and more powerful graphics cards can make more realistic or more advanced images, in the same way a well trained artist can.

Google is an American multinational corporation from the United States. Known for creating and running one of the largest search engines on the World Wide Web, also known as the (WWW). Every day more than a billion people use it. Google's headquarters (known as the "Googleplex") is in Mountain View, California, part of Silicon Valley. Google's motto is "Do the right thing".

Google's American website has an Alexa rank of 1, meaning it is the most widely visited website in the world. It is so widely known that people sometimes use the word "google" as a verb that means "to search for something on Google". By June 2004, Google had 4.28 billion web pages on its database, 880 million pictures and 845 million Usenet messages—six billion things. Because more than half of people on the web use it, "google" has also been used to mean "to search the web". Most importantly, Google created the Google Gnome Game in June of 2018.

Google has a search engine called Google Search, and a browser called Google Chrome (or Chrome for short). Google Search can find pictures, videos, news, Usenet newsgroups, and things to buy online. Google Search is the default search engine for Chrome. Google also has an open-source browser called Chromium, which Chrome is based on.

Larry Page and Sergey Brin, two students at Stanford University, USA, started BackRub in early 1996. They made it into a company, Google Inc, on September 7, 1998, at a friend's garage in Menlo Park, California. In February 1999, the company moved to 165 University Ave, Palo Alto, California, and then later moved to Googleplex.

In September 2001, Google's rating system (PageRank, for saying which information is more helpful) got a U.S. Patent. The patent was to Stanford University, with Lawrence (Larry) Page as the inventor (the person who first had the idea). Google makes a percentage of its money through America Online and InterActiveCorp. It has a special group known as the Partner Solutions Organization (PSO) which helps make contracts, helps to make accounts better and gives engineering help.

Since June 1, 2016, Google has been owned by a holding company called Alphabet Inc.. That company has taken over some of Google's other projects, such as its driverless cars. It is a public company that trades on the NASDAQ under the ticker symbols GOOG and GOOGL.

Google makes money by advertising. People or companies who want people to buy their product, service, or ideas give Google money, and Google shows an advertisement to people Google thinks will click on the advertisement.

Google only gets money when people click on the link, so it tries to know as much about people as possible to only show the advertisement to the "right people". It does this with Google Analytics, which sends data back to Google whenever someone visits a website. From this and other data, Google makes a profile about the person and then uses this profile to figure out which advertisements to show.

The name "Google" is a play of the word googol. Milton Sirotta, nephew of U.S. mathematician Edward Kasner, made this word in 1937, for the number 1 followed by one hundred zeroes (10100).

Google uses this word because the company wants to make lots of stuff on the Web easy to find and use. Andy Bechtolsheim thought of the name. The name for Google's main office, the "Googleplex," is a play on a different, even bigger number, the "googolplex", which is 1 followed by one googol of zeroes 1010100.

The Internet is the world’s largest global communication network for computers and other devices.

It connects many smaller networks from homes, schools, businesses, and governments. These networks share different kinds of information. The short form of the Internet is “the Net.” One of its most popular services is the World Wide Web, which is used by billions of people every day.

The Internet was developed in the United States by the Department of Defence Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). The Internet was first connected in October 1969 and was called ARPANET. The World Wide Web was created at CERN in Switzerland in 1990 by a British (UK) scientist named Tim Berners-Lee.

Today, people use Internet services by paying Internet service providers (ISPs).

Some websites and tools are free, while others may show ads to earn money. There are also ongoing debates about censorship and freedom of speech on the Internet.

The Internet is used for many things, such as electronic mail, online chat, file transfer and other documents of the World Wide Web.

The most used service on the Internet is the World Wide Web (which is also called the "Web" or “www”). The web contains websites, including social media, blogs, and wikis like Wikipedia. Webpages on the Internet can be seen and read by anyone (unless the page needs a password, or it is blocked).

The second biggest use of the Internet is to send and receive e-mail. E-mail is private and goes from one user to another. Instant messaging is similar to email, but allows two or more people to chat to each other faster.

Some governments think the internet is a bad thing, and block all or part of it.  For example, the Chinese government thinks that Wikipedia is bad, so often no one in China can read it or add to it. Another example of the internet being blocked is in North Korea. Some parents and schools block parts of the Internet they think are bad for children to see.

The Internet makes communication easy. Yet, communication can be dangerous, too. People often send secret information, and sometimes other people can steal that information. They can use the Internet to spread lies, steal secrets, or give dangerously bad advice. For example, Facebook has had some problems with privacy settings.

The Internet is a worldwide network of interconnected computer networks that transmit data by packet switching using the standard Internet Protocol (IP). It is a "network of networks" that has millions of interconnected smaller domestic, academic, business, and government networks, which together carry various information and services, such as electronic mail, online chat, file transfer, and the interlinked Web pages and other documents of the World Wide Web. The general public are allowed to use the internet, in almost all countries.

Music is a form of art that uses sound organised in time. Music is also a form of entertainment that puts sounds together in a way that people like, find interesting or dance to. Most music includes people singing with their voices or playing musical instruments, such as the piano, guitar, drums or bass.

Music is sound that has been organized by using rhythm, melody or harmony. If someone bangs saucepans while cooking, it makes noise. If a person bangs saucepans or pots in a rhythmic way, they are making a simple type of music.

There is no simple definition of music which covers all cases. It is an art form, and opinions come into play. Music is whatever people think is music. A different approach is to list the qualities music must have, such as, sound which has rhythm, melody, pitch, timbre, etc.

These and other attempts, do not capture all aspects of music, or leave out examples which definitely are music. Music is a special shared relationship between a person, the person's behavior, and a sounding object.p10 Musical experience and the music, together, are called phenomena, and the activity of describing phenomena is called phenomenology.

Even in the stone age people made music. The first music was probably made trying to imitate sounds and rhythms that occurred naturally. Human music may echo these phenomena using patterns, repetition and tonality. This kind of music is still here today. Shamans sometimes imitate sounds that are heard in nature. It may also serve as entertainment (games), or have practical uses, like attracting animals when hunting.

Some animals also can use music. Songbirds use song to  their territory, or to attract a mate. Monkeys have been seen beating hollow logs. This may, of course, also serve to defend the territory.

The first musical instrument used by humans was probably the voice. The human voice can make many different kinds of sounds. The larynx (voice box) is like a wind instrument.

The oldest known Neanderthal hyoid bone with the modern human form was found in 1983, indicating that the Neanderthals had language, because the hyoid supports the voice box in the human throat.

Most likely the first rhythm instruments or percussion instruments involved the clapping of hands, stones hit together, or other things that are useful to keep a beat. There are finds of this type that date back to the paleolithic. Some of these are ambiguous, as they can be used either as a tool or a musical instrument.

The oldest flute ever discovered may be the Divje Babe flute, found in the Slovenian cave Divje Babe I in 1995. It is not certain that it is really a flute. The item in question is a piece of the femur of a young cave bear, and is about 43,000 years old. However, whether it is a musical instrument or just a bone that got chewed on is an ongoing debate.

In 2008, archaeologists discovered a bone flute in the Hohle Fels cave near Ulm, Germany. The five-holed flute has a V-shaped mouthpiece and is made from a vulture wing bone. The discovery is the oldest confirmed find of any musical instrument in history. Other flutes were also found in the cave. This flute was found next to the Venus of Hohle Fels and a short distance from the oldest known human carving. When they announced their discovery in 2009, the scientists suggested that the find showed that there was a well-established musical tradition when humans colonized Europe.

The oldest known wooden pipes were discovered near Greystones, Ireland, in 2004. A wood-lined pit contained a group of six flutes made from yew wood, between 30 and 50 cm long, tapered at one end, but without any finger holes. They may once have been strapped together.

In 1986 several bone flutes were found in Jiahu in Henan Province, China. They date to about 6,000 BC. They have between 5 and 8 holes each and were made from the hollow bones of a bird, the Red-crowned Crane. At the time of the discovery, one was still playable. The bone flute plays both the five- or seven-note scale of Xia Zhi and six-note scale of Qing Shang of the ancient Chinese musical system.

It is not known what the earliest human music was like. Some architecture and paintings are thousands of years old, but old music could not survive until people learned to write it down. The only way we can guess about early music is by looking at very old paintings that show people playing musical instruments, or by finding instruments in archaeological digs (digging underground to find old things). The earliest piece of music that was ever written down and that has not been lost was discovered on a tablet written in Hurrian, a language spoken in and around northern Mesopotamia (where Iraq is today), from about 1500 BC.

Another surviving piece of early written music was a round called Sumer Is Icumen In. It was written down by a monk around the year 1250. Much of the music in the Middle Ages (roughly 450-1420) was folk music played by working people who wanted to sing or dance. When people played instruments, they were usually playing for dancers. However, most of the music that was written down was for the Catholic church. This music was written for monks to sing in church. It is called Chant (or Gregorian chant).

In the Renaissance (roughly 1400–1550) there was a lot of music, and many composers wrote music that has survived so that it can be performed, played or sung today. Many new types of art and music was made during this time.

Some music was written for use in church services (sacred music) by the Italian composer Giovanni da Palestrina (1525–1594). In Palestrina's music, many singers sing together (this is called a choir). There was also plenty of music not written for the church, such as happy dance music and romantic love songs. Popular instruments during the Renaissance included the viols (a string instrument played with a bow), lutes (a plucked stringed instrument that is a little like a guitar), and the virginal, a small, quiet keyboard instrument.

The Baroque (roughly 1600–1740) was a Western cultural era. It emphasised drama and splendor in sculpture, painting, literature, dance, and music. In music, the term 'Baroque' applies to the final period of dominance of imitative counterpoint, where different voices and instruments echo each other but at different pitches, sometimes inverting the echo, and even reversing thematic material.

The popularity and success of the Baroque style was encouraged by the Roman Catholic Church which had decided at the time of the Council of Trent that the arts should communicate religious themes in direct and emotional involvement. The upper class also saw the dramatic style of Baroque architecture and art as a means of impressing visitors and expressing triumphant power and control. Baroque palaces are built around an entrance of courts, grand staircases and reception rooms of sequentially increasing opulence. In similar profusions of detail, art, music, architecture, and literature inspired each other in the Baroque cultural movement as artists explored what they could create from repeated and varied patterns. Some traits and aspects of Baroque paintings that differentiate this style from others are the abundant amount of details, often bright polychromy, less realistic faces of subjects, and an overall sense of awe, which was one of the goals in Baroque art.

The word baroque probably derives from the ancient Portuguese noun "barroco" which is a pearl that is not round but of unpredictable and elaborate shape. Hence, in informal usage, the word baroque can simply mean that something is "elaborate", with many details, without reference to the Baroque styles of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

In western music, the classical period means music from about 1750 to 1825. It was the time of composers like Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Ludwig van Beethoven. Orchestras became bigger, and composers often wrote longer pieces of music called symphonies that had several sections (called movements). Some movements of a symphony were loud and fast; other movements were quiet and sad. The form of a piece of music was very important at this time. Music had to have a nice 'shape'. They often used a structure which was called sonata form.

Another important type of music was the string quartet, which is a piece of music written for two violins, a viola, and a violoncello. Like symphonies, string quartet music had several sections. Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven each wrote many famous string quartets.

The piano was invented during this time. Composers liked the piano, because it could be used to play dynamics (getting louder or getting softer). Other popular instruments included the violin, the violoncello, the flute, the clarinet, and the oboe.

The 19th century is called the Romantic period. Composers were particularly interested in conveying their emotions through music. An important instrument from the Romantic period was the piano. Some composers, such as Frederic Chopin, wrote subdued, expressive, quietly emotional piano pieces. Often music described a feeling or told a story using sounds. Franz Schubert, for example, wrote songs (called Lied, the German word for "song") for a singer accompanied by a piano player; these Lieder (plural of Lied) told stories by using the lyrics (words) of the song and by the imaginative piano accompaniments. Richard Strauss and Franz Liszt both created narratives and told stories using only music, which is called a tone poem, while Franz Liszt and Johannes Brahms used the piano to play loud, dramatic, strongly emotional music.

Many composers began writing music for bigger orchestras, with as many as 100 instruments. It was the period of "Nationalism" (the feeling of being proud of one's country) when many composers made music using folksong or melodies from their country. Lots of famous composers lived at this time such as Franz Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn, Frederic Chopin, Johannes Brahms, Pyotr Tchaikovsky and Richard Wagner.

From about 1900 onwards is called the "modern period". Many 20th century composers wanted to compose music that sounded different from the Classical and Romantic music. Modern composers searched for new ideas, such as using new instruments, different forms, different sounds, or different harmonies.

The composer Arnold Schoenberg (1874–1951) wrote pieces which were atonal (meaning that they did not sound as if they were in any clear musical key). Later, Schoenberg invented a new system for writing music called twelve-tone system. Music written with the twelve-tone system sounds strange to some, but is mathematical in nature, often making sense only after careful study. Pure twelve-tone music was popular among academics in the fifties and sixties, but some composers such as Benjamin Britten use it today, when it is necessary to get a certain feel.

One of the most important 20th-century composers, Igor Stravinsky (1882–1971), wrote music with very complicated (difficult) chords (groups of notes that are played together) and rhythms. Some composers thought music was getting too complicated and so they wrote Minimalist pieces which use very simple ideas. In the 1950s and 1960s, composers such as Karlheinz Stockhausen experimented with electronic music, using electronic circuits, amplifiers and loudspeakers. In the 1970s, composers began using electronic synthesizers and musical instruments from rock and roll music, such as the electric guitar. They used these new instruments to make new sounds.

Composers writing in the 1990s and the 2000s, such as John Adams (born 1947) and James MacMillan (born 1959) often use a mixture of all these ideas, but they like to write tonal music with easy tunes as well.

Music can be produced electronically. This is most commonly done by computers, keyboards, electric guitars and disk tables. They can mimic traditional instruments, and also produce very different sounds. 21st-century electronic music is commonly made with computer programs and hardware mixers.

Jazz is a type of music that was invented around 1900 in New Orleans in the south of the USA. There were many black musicians living there who played a style of music called blues music. Blues music was influenced by African music (because the black people in the United States had come to the United States as slaves. They were taken from Africa by force). Blues music was a music that was played by singing, using the harmonica, or the acoustic guitar. Many blues songs had sad lyrics about sad emotions (feelings) or sad experiences, such as losing a job, a family member dying, or having to go to jail (prison).

Jazz music mixed together blues music with European music. Some black composers such as Scott Joplin were writing music called ragtime, which had a very different rhythm from standard European music, but used notes that were similar to some European music. Ragtime was a big influence on early jazz, called Dixieland jazz. Jazz musicians used instruments such as the trumpet, saxophone, and clarinet were used for the tunes (melodies), drums for percussion and plucked double bass, piano, banjo and guitar for the background rhythm (rhythmic section). Jazz is usually improvised: the players make up (invent) the music as they play. Even though jazz musicians are making up the music, jazz music still has rules; the musicians play a series of chords (groups of notes) in order.

Jazz music has a swinging rhythm. The word "swing" is hard to explain. For a rhythm to be a "swinging rhythm" it has to feel natural and relaxed. Swing rhythm is not even like a march. There is a long-short feel instead of a same-same feel. A "swinging rhythm" also gets the people who are listening excited, because they like the sound of it. Some people say that a "swinging rhythm" happens when all the jazz musicians start to feel the same pulse and energy from the song. If a jazz band plays very well together, people will say "that is a swinging jazz band" or "that band really swings well."

Jazz influenced other types of music like the Western art music from the 1920s and 1930s. Art music composers such as James Brown and George Gershwin wrote music that was influenced by jazz. Jazz music influenced pop music songs. In the 1930s and 1940s, many pop music songs began using chords or melodies from jazz songs. One of the best known jazz musicians was Louis Armstrong (1900–1971).

"Pop" music is a type of popular music that many people like to listen to. The term "pop music" can be used for all kinds of music that was written to be popular. The word "pop music" was used from about 1880 onwards, when a type of music called music was popular.

Modern pop music grew out of 1950's rock and roll, (for example Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley and Sezen Aksu) and rockabilly (for example Elvis Presley and Buddy Holly). In the 1960s, The Beatles became a famous pop music group. In the 1970s, other styles of music were mixed with pop music, such as funk and soul music. Pop music generally has a heavy (strong) beat, so that it is good for dancing. Pop singers normally sing with microphones that are plugged into an amplifier and a loudspeaker.

"Musical notation" is the way music is written down. Music needs to be written down in order to be saved and remembered for future performances. In this way composers (people who write music) can tell others how to play the musical piece as it was meant to be played.

Solfège (sometimes called solfa) is the way tones are named. It was made in order to give a name to the several tones and pitches. For example, the eight basic notes "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Do" are just the names of the eight notes that confirm the major scale.

Music can be written in several ways. When it is written on a staff (like in the example shown), the pitches (tones) and their duration are represented by symbols called notes. Notes are put on the lines and in the spaces between the lines. Each position says which tone must be played. The higher the note is on the staff, the higher the pitch of the tone. The lower the notes are, the lower the pitch. The duration of the notes (how long they are played for) is shown by making the note "heads" black or white, and by giving them stems and flags.

Music can also be written with letters, naming them as in the solfa "Do, Re, Mi, Fa, So, La, Ti, Do" or representing them with letters. The next table shows how each note of the solfa is represented in the Standard Notation:

The Standard Notation was made to simplify the lecture of music notes, although it is mostly used to represent chords and the names of the music scales.

These ways to represent music ease the way a person reads music. There are more ways to write and represent music, but they are less known and may be more complicated.

People can enjoy music by listening to it. They can go to concerts to hear musicians perform. Classical music is usually performed in concert halls, but sometimes huge festivals are organized in which it is performed outside, in a field or stadium, like pop festivals. People can listen to music on CD's, Computers, iPods, television, the radio, cassette/record-players and even mobile phones.

There is so much music today, in elevators, shopping malls, and stores, that it often becomes a background sound that we do not really hear.

People can learn to play an instrument. Probably the most common for complete beginners is the piano or keyboard, the guitar, or the recorder (which is certainly the cheapest to buy). After they have learnt to play scales, play simple tunes and read the simplest musical notation, then they can think about which instrument for further development. They should choose an instrument that is practical for their size. For example, a very short child cannot play a full size double bass, because the double bass is over five feet high. People should choose an instrument that they enjoy playing, because playing regularly is the only way to get better. Finally, it helps to have a good teacher.

Anyone can make up their own pieces of music. It is not difficult to compose simple songs or melodies (tunes). It's easier for people who can play an instrument themselves. All it takes is experimenting with the sounds that an instrument makes. Someone can make up a piece that tells a story, or just find a nice tune and think about ways it can be changed each time it is repeated. The instrument might be someone's own voice.

Money, also sometimes called currency, can be defined as anything that people use to buy goods and services. Money is what many people receive for selling their own things or services.

There are lots of different kinds of money in the world. Most countries have their own kind of money, such as the United States dollar or the Iranian rial.

The idea of bartering things is very old. A long time ago, people did not buy or sell with money. Instead, they traded one thing for another to get what they wanted or needed. One person who owned many cows could trade with another person who had a lot of wheat. Each would trade a little of what he had with the other. This would support the people on his farm. Other things that were easier to carry around than cows also came to be held as valuable. This gave rise to trade items such as jewelry and spices.

When people changed from trading in things like, for example, cows and wheat to using money instead, they needed things that would last a long time. They must still have a known value, and could be carried around. The first country in the world to make metal coins was called Lydia. These first appeared during the 7th century BC, in the western part of what is now Turkey. The Lydian coins were made of a weighed amount of precious metal and were stamped with a picture of a lion. This idea soon spread to Greece, the rest of the Mediterranean, and the rest of the world. Coins were all made to the same size and shape. In some parts of the world, different things have been used as money, like clam shells or blocks of salt.

Besides being easier to carry than cows, using money had many other advantages. Money is easier to divide than many trade goods. If someone owns cows, and wants to trade for only "half a cow's worth" of wheat, he probably does not want to cut his cow in half. But if he sells his cow for money, and buys wheat with money, he can get exactly the amount he wants.

Cows die, and wheat rots. But money lasts longer than most trade goods. If someone sells a cow for money, he can save that money away until he needs it. He can always leave it to his children when he dies. It can last a very long time, and he can use it at any time.

Not every cow is as good as another cow. Some cows are sick and old, and others are healthy and young. Some wheat is good and other wheat is moldy or stale. So if a person trades cows for wheat, he might have a hard time arguing over how much wheat each cow is worth. However, money is standard. That means one dollar is worth the same as another dollar. It is easier to add up and count money, than to add up the value of different cows or amounts of wheat.

Later, after coins had been used for hundreds of years, paper money started out as a promise to pay in coin, much like an "I.O.U." note. The first true paper money was used in China in the 10th century AD. Paper money was also printed in Sweden between 1660 and 1664. Both times, it did not work well, and had to be stopped because the banks kept running out of coins to pay on the notes. Massachusetts Bay Colony printed paper money in the 1690s. This time, the use became more common.

Today, most of what people think of as money is not even things you can hold. It is numbers in bank accounts, saved in computer memories. Many people still feel more comfortable using coins and paper, and do not totally trust using electronic money on a computer memory.

Many types of money have been used at different times in history. These are:

Commodity money can be used for other purposes besides serving as a medium of exchange. We say it possesses intrinsic value, because it is useful or valuable by itself. Some examples of commodity money are cattle, silk, gold and silver. Convertible paper money is money that is convertible into gold and silver. Gold and Silver certificates are convertible paper money as they can be fully convertible into gold and silver.

Inconvertible money is money that cannot be converted into gold and silver. Notes and coins are inconvertible money. They are inconvertible and are declared by the government money. Such fiat money is a country's legal tender. Today, notes and coins are the currencies used in bank deposits.


A website is a set of webpages that are joined. People look at websites with a computer of some kind, which can sometimes be the computer inside a mobile phone or a television. The websites are kept on computers called web servers.

There is almost always a single homepage which has links to other pages that are part of that website. Sometimes it has links to pages that are part of other websites as well. (Note that net jargon uses the word "site", which also means a physical place in the real world, to mean a web URL). A home page serves as the  page of a website.

Some websites are used to advertise or sell things. Some websites can also be used to talk to other people. Many websites are good for looking up information on the computer. A blog is a website where the location of the material is less relevant than who writes it, and which is more focused on dialogue. Very often the people who use blogs dislike the word "site" since it implies a controlled place.

Users can access any website by using a URL. This is the website address which is shown near the top of the web browser. The homepage and the rest of the site usually have the same words at the start of the URL — for example, pages at the Simple English Wikipedia always start "http://simple.wikipedia.org/..." but are different after that. However, if a person does not buy a domain name, the website could be an IP Address. An example of an IP address is 172.217.13.228.

Web sites are usually shown in HTML (Hyper Text Markup Language) but are not always written or kept that way - some use WAP and others use XML.

Website builder software is usually a collection of software tools that allow the construction of websites without manual code editing. Several hosted website services have website builder software built-in.

There are many different types of website based on their purpose and the type of organisation they are created for.

Websites have different kinds of domain endings, which are the two-or-three letter pieces after the period (".") on the website. Different website owners use different domain endings for different purposes.

Computer software, also called software, is a set of instructions and documentation that tells a computer what to do or how to perform a task. Software includes all different programs on a computer, such as applications and the operating system. Applications are programs that are designed to perform a specific operation, such as a game or a word processor. The operating system (e.g., macOS, Microsoft Windows, Android and various Linux distributions) is a type of software that is used as a platform for running the applications, and controls all user interface tools including display and the keyboard.

The word software was first used in the late 1960s to emphasize on its difference from computer hardware, which can be physically observed by the user. Software is a set of instructions that the computer follows. Before compact discs (CDs) or development of the Internet age, software was used on various computer data storage media tools like paper punch cards, magnetic discs or magnetic tapes.

The word firmware is sometimes used to describe a style of software that is made specifically for a particular type of computer or an electronic device and is usually stored on a Flash memory or ROM chip in the computer. Firmware usually refers to a piece of software that directly controls a piece of hardware. The firmware for a CD drive or the firmware for a modem are examples of firmware .

Today, software has become an important part of our lives. Software is used everywhere. Software engineers are responsible for producing fault-free software, which has become an essential part of our daily lives.  and  are two of the main  of software design. There are also different processing models for designing software including Build and Fix, Waterfall and Agile software processing design methods.

The  different types of software can be put into categories based on common function, type, or field of use. There are three broad classifications:

A television set (also known as a television receiver or televisor or simply a television, TV set, TV receiver or TV) is a machine with a screen or set of lenses. Televisions receive broadcasting signals and change them into pictures and sound. The word "television" comes from the words tele (far away) and vision (sight).

Sometimes a television can look like a box. Older TVs had a large cathode ray tube in a large wooden frame and sat on the floor like furniture. Newer TVs are much lighter and flatter.

A TV can show pictures from many television networks. Computers and mobile devices also can be used for watching television programs.

The television was invented in the 1920s but the equipment was expensive and the pictures were poor. By the 1950s, these problems had been fixed and TVs became widespread.

At first, all televisions used an antenna (or aerial). This would pick up television programmes from broadcasting stations. A TV station could be many miles or kilometers away, and still be received. TVs can also show movies from VCD and DVD players or VCRs. Cable TV and Satellite television can provide more programs at once than broadcast can. Video game consoles connect to most modern TVs. Some computers can also use a TV as a computer monitor.

All TVs have screens where the picture is viewed. Before the 1950s these were usually "black and white", which made everything look grey, but all modern TVs show colors. Most 20th century screens also had rounded corners. That is because television screens were cathode ray tubes. These are like heavy glass jars with one side bulging out to form the screen.

Today flat panel displays are the usual kind. These are usually flat rectangles with straight edges. This long rectangle looks more like the shape of a movie theatre screen. This is called widescreen. If a widescreen set was 30 cm tall, it would be 53 cm wide. For this to work best, TV shows also need to be made in widescreen.  Widescreen sets can still be any size, but they have the same widescreen shape.

The early 21st century is also when digital television transmission became more common than analog television.

A computer program is a list of instructions that tell a computer what to do. Everything a computer does is done by the instructions of a program. The first computers were made with only one built-in program, but today's computers have memory, which can be used to store many different programs. John von Neumann, a mathematician born in Hungary, came up with this idea in the late 1940s.

A computer program is usually stored as a file on the computer's hard drive. The file contains a list of instructions. When the  runs the program, the computer reads the file does what the instructions tell it to do. These instructions can be very simple, like "add these numbers together" or "save these letters". A computer program is written by a programmer, who combines many of these simple instructions to do complicated things, like talking to the computer's screen and telling it to show a video.

The main part of the computer, the processor, is built to understand instructions written in machine code, meaning very long patterns of ones and zeroes. This is hard for humans to understand, so computer programmers write in a programming language, such as BASIC, C, or Java. Once the program is written, the programmer uses a compiler to turn it into machine code so the computer can read it.

There are also bad programs, called malware, written by people who want to do bad things to a computer. Some are spyware, trying to steal information from the computer. Some try to damage the data stored on the hard drive. Some others send users to web sites that offer to sell them things. Some are computer viruses or ransomware.

"Football" is a word which could mean one of several sports. The best-known type of football is association football. This is called "soccer" in the United States, Canada, Australia and Ireland to avoid confusion with American football, Canadian football, Australian rules football and Gaelic football.

The name "football" comes from the two words "" and "". It is named "football", because the players of the game walk and often run (on their feet) while playing, as opposed to (for example) polo and jousting where the players ride horses. Football is played using a ball, also called a football, that is usually shaped like a sphere or an ellipsoid. The ball is often kicked with the foot, but depending on the game, it can also be hit using other parts of the body (in association football) and handling the ball is a part of some other sports known as football. Players can use any part of their body except their arms and hands. Goal keepers can use every part of their body to keep the ball out of the goal.

Some elements of football have been seen in many countries, dating back to the second and third century AD in China. The modern games of rugby union, rugby league and association football comes from 19th-century England.

Kicking a ball, in Europe, was described in Britannia (now western Scottish lowlands), in Germania (now Deutchland) and Gallia (now France and northern-central Italy).  An evolution goes back to the Middle Ages in Paris. Association football (founded in Richmond, London at the end of 1800) spread to many other parts of Europe, and was brought to the rest of the world with colonization. Today, it is the most popular sport in the world and many people watch it on television, especially the FIFA World Cup that happens every four years.

Every year there is a Football Club Competition called as Champions League. All the qualified big teams take part. At the end, we have one winner who takes the prestigious UEFA trophy. All big players play for their own teams. Some big players who take part every year are Mbappe, Ronaldo, Messi, Pablo, Neymar and many more.

A movie or film is a type of visual art that uses images and sounds to tell stories, express ideas, or teach people something. Most people watch movies to entertain themselves or to have fun. Movies can vary significantly in emotional tone both overall as a specific genre type but also within a single work. Some of the most typical approaches are to make people laugh (comedy), make them cry (tragedy or drama), or make them feel afraid (horror). However, there are also movies that combine genres, like horror-comedy.

Most movies are made so that they can be watched at home or on a movie screen at movie theaters. Movies are shown in movie theaters a few weeks or months after or before the movie is released. Movies can be marketed using media. Movies are shown on paid television or cable television or are sold or rented on DVD disks or videocassette tapes so that people can watch the movies at home. Movies can also be downloaded or streamed. Some movies are shown on television broadcasting stations.

Movies are filmed with movie cameras or video cameras. Movie cameras take pictures very quickly, usually 24 or 25 pictures or frames every second. When a movie projector, a computer, or a television shows the pictures at 24 frames a second, it looks like the things shown in the set of pictures are moving. Sound is usually recorded at the same time as the pictures are, but sometimes, they are added later. The sounds in a movie are usually people talking, the soundtrack, and sound effects. In the 20th century, the camera used photographic film.

Most movies start to be made when a screenwriter writes a script, which is the story of the movie with dialogue and words and things that the actors will say and do. A producer hires people to work on the movie and gets the money that will be used to pay for the actors, or actresses, and the equipment. Producers usually get the money by borrowing it from a bank or by asking investors to give money to them. Some producers work for a movie studio, but other producers work by themselves.

Actors, or actresses, and directors read scripts to learn what to say and what to do. The actors learn the words from the script that they will say in the movie and learn the things that the script tells them to do. Then, the director tells the actors what to do and a cameraman takes the film of them saying the words with a film camera.

When the filming is done, an editor makes the film play after each other, which makes a story. Audio engineers and sound engineers record music and singing and  it with the film. When the movie is done, many copies of the movie are made by movie labs and put onto film reels. Then, the reels are sent to movie theaters. A projector shines a very bright light through the film, and people sitting in a dark room see it on a big screen.

A genre means a type of movie. Movies can be  or . Some movies can be two or more genres.

Most movies lose money, but some make up to hundreds of millions or billions of dollars. In the United States, movies have become an enormous part of the economy. The industry has always been led by a few major movie studios like MGM/UA, Warner Bros., Sony Pictures, Paramount, or Disney. The oldest American movie studio is Universal.

There are many large companies that provide all of the services needed to make movies, such as special effects, lighting, and set building companies. Many of these employees belong to trade unions who say how much their members must be paid. A large number of smaller companies also offer services, such as music studios, which record music.

Finally, there are movie distribution companies and advertising companies. Movies with famous stars (actors who are well-known) and large budgets, are designed to have a large appeal (something a person would like about the, so that hopefully, millions of people will pay to see them. The most expensive movies are called blockbusters.

Special effects can add a huge amount to the cost of a movie, especially if the movie uses the newest CGI effects. However, people have come to expect them, and every blockbuster movie tries to outdo the last. Even in 2008, some movies can cost up to $200 million to make.

Very successful movies can make many times that amount in profit, and that's why the studios keep producing them. This kind of movie will have a lot of promotion through television advertising, billboards and internet sites.

In blockbuster movies, there is usually a happy ending, in which all of the problems in the plot (story) are figured out or fixed and almost everyone (except the bad guys) live happily ever after. Some movies have been so successful that the studios keep releasing more and more sequels or movies with the same characters and basic plots.

At the opposite end of the scale to the blockbuster, there is the independent, art, or Indie movie. These are usually made by small movie companies, or even just a small group of people that do not have much money. An example is The Blair Witch Project, which cost only about $60,000, but which has so far taken perhaps $200 million in ticket and DVD sales. Movies like this are very unusual and usually become popular 'underground' (word of mouth advertising), so that they have a cult following, or popular but not mainstream.

Independent movies often tell more creative or unusual (strange) stories or may have sad endings that do not appeal to the big studios because they cannot be sure how the public will react to them. They rarely make a lot of money, but if they are successful, the big studios will quickly try to get the people involved to sign a contract with them, by offering them a lot of money to make another movie.

Some movies receive Oscar nominations, which normally reflect on the qualities of a film's production process. Also, some actors and actresses receive Oscar nominations and wins.

Movies are rated by their age appropriateness. Some examples include G, PG, PG 13, and R.

A bicycle (or bike) is a small, human powered land vehicle with a seat, two wheels, two pedals, and a metal chain connected to cogs on the pedals and rear wheel. A frame gives the bike strength, and the other parts are attached to the frame. The name comes from the prefix bi (meaning two) and the suffix cycle (meaning wheel). It is powered by a person riding on top, who pushes the pedals around with his or her feet.

Riding bicycles, which is also called cycling, is an important way to travel in several parts of the world. The most popular type of cycling is Utility cycling.  It is also a common kind of recreation, a good form of low-impact exercise, and a popular sport. According to one study, road bicycle racing is the eighth most popular spectator sport in the world.

Cycling uses less energy per mile than any other human transport.

In 1817 a German professor, Baron Karl von Drais, created the first two-wheeled bicycle. It was made of wood and had two wheels. The front wheel could be turned using the handlebars in order to steer the bike. However, it did not have pedals, so the rider would have to push their feet on the ground to make it move.

In the 1860s, French inventors added pedals to the front wheel. However, it took a lot of effort to turn the pedals.  Later inventors made bikes out of metal only, and made the front wheel very big, giving higher speed. This design was called the penny-farthing bicycle. However, it was difficult to ride and any fall would be a long, dangerous fall .

Several improvements were made in the 1880s and '90s. In 1885, John Kemp Starley invented the safety bicycle. This had two wheels the same size so that the rider could sit at a lower height. It was called the safety bicycle because it much easier to ride than the penny-farthing. When stopping, the rider can simply put down a foot instead of completely dismounting.  Instead of pedaling and steering with the front wheel, the safety bicycle steers with the front wheel while the pedals turn the back wheel using a chain. Brakes operated by hand levers on some bikes also increased safety.

In 1888, Scottish inventor John Boyd Dunlop re-invented a type of tire which was filled with air. This made safety bicycles more comfortable. Soon, the freewheel was invented. This was a device inside the hub of the back wheel that allowed the wheel to spin even if the rider wasn't pedaling.  However, this meant the rider could no longer stop the bike by backpedaling.  As a result, better hand brakes were invented, and a different type of brake which could stop the bike if the pedals were turned backwards.  Later inventions included better brakes, and gears which made cycling over hills much easier. During this time the bicycle became very popular.

Basic components common to most bikes include a seat, pedals, gearing, handlebar, wheels, and brakes, all mounted on a frame. The majority also have a gear shifter. The cyclist's feet push the pedals to make them go around in circles, which moves the chain, which turns the back wheel of the bike to make the bike move forwards. The front wheel is connected to the handlebar, so turning the handlebar from side to side swivels the front wheel which steers the bike.

Many thousands of people are hurt every year in bicycle accidents, and hundreds die. Careful riding helps prevent accidents. When riding on streets, it is safest to ride on the same side of the street that cars drive (which would mean riding on the right side of the road in countries where people drive on the right side of the road, and riding on the left in countries where people drive on the left). Riders need to obey stop signs and traffic lights. To avoid hitting people, riders must obey signs that say "no bicycling", even if it does not seem to make sense at the time.  Low light makes bicycle lighting important. It may not be safe to ride when it is dark. Riders wear reflective clothing to be safer in low light.  Wearing a helmet makes bicycle riding safer. Wearing a helmet does not mean that somebody cannot be hurt if they crash their bicycle, but it makes being hurt less likely. Some bicycles have bells or horns that the rider can use to warn other people that they are riding by them.

Many places have a bicycle path linking houses with shops, schools and stations.  These make bicycling safer, letting cyclists stay away from busy motor traffic on dangerous roads.

Cricket is a sport. It is an outdoor bat-and-ball game played by two teams of eleven players on a large, grassy field. At the centre of the field is a rectangular pitch with a wooden structure called a wicket sited at each end. As in other sports, there are separate men's and women's games, both played internationally.

In all levels of cricket, the essence of the game is that the wicket is a target being attacked by a bowler using the ball, and defended by a batter using a bat. The bowler is a member of the fielding team; the batter is a member of the batting team. The objective of the batting team is to score as many runs as possible. The objective of the fielding team is to restrict scoring and, by various means, dismiss the batters. If ten batters are dismissed, the batting team is all out and the teams change roles. Generally, the winning team is the one scoring the most runs, although some matches can result in a draw or, occasionally, a tie.

Probably created as a children's game in south-east England, cricket is known to have been played in the mid-16th century. It has expanded to become the national summer sport of several English-speaking countries. Matches range in scale from informal weekend afternoon games played on village greens to top-level international contests played by professionals in modern, all-seater stadiums. Globally, the sport has a high level of player participation and is, apart from football, the world's most popular spectator sport.

Like all other sports, cricket has rules and regulations. These are called The Laws of Cricket, a code which was first written in 1744, and first published in November 1752. There was a significant revision in 1774.

Copyright of The Laws is held by Marylebone Cricket Club (MCC), founded in 1787, which issued a revised version on 30 May 1788. Although MCC still has responsibility for drafting and publishing revisions, it does so in consultation with the sport's governing body, the International Cricket Council (ICC), which has over 100 member countries. Following the 2017 revision, there are now 42 Laws headed by a preamble on the "Spirit of Cricket".

The cricket field is of variable size and shape, though normally round or oval with a diameter of 140 to 160 yards. Professional venues tend to have names including Ground, Oval, Park, or Stadium. There are several famous Ovals, especially The Oval in the Kennington district of south London; Kensington Oval in Bridgetown, Barbados; and the Adelaide Oval. Among the Grounds are the Melbourne Cricket Ground (MCG), and the Sydney Cricket Ground (SCG). Sabina Park is a famous venue in Jamaica. The Narendra Modi Stadium in Ahmedabad seats 132,000 and is the world's largest sports stadium.

The playing field's perimeter is known as the boundary. It is often defined by a rope encircling the outer edge of the playing area, with spectator seating beyond. During play, a shot by the batter which clears the boundary on the full is worth six runs—this is similar to a home run in baseball. A shot which reaches the boundary after the ball has been in contact with the ground is worth four runs, and that is often called "scoring a boundary". One of the most famous books written about cricket is Beyond A Boundary by the radical Trinidadian writer, C. L. R. James.

Most of the action in a match takes place on the pitch, a specially prepared rectangular area of the field on which the wickets are sited and creases are painted as shown in the diagram below.

The pitch is 22 yards long (the length of an agricultural chain) between the wickets and is ten feet wide. It is a flat surface and has very short grass that tends to be worn away as the game progresses. As can be seen in the above photo of Murali bowling to Adam Gilchrist, the pitch is always much paler than the main part of the field.

Pitch conditions have a significant bearing on the match and team tactics are always determined with the state of the pitch, both current and anticipated, as a key factor. Groundsmanship is very important in cricket as considerable care — mowing, watering, and rolling — is necessary to prepare and maintain pitch surfaces. In addition, there are rules about covering the pitch during a match when bad weather occurs.

Sited at each end of the pitch is a small structure called the wicket. Made entirely of wood (usually polished ash), a wicket consists of three upright stumps placed in a straight line and surmounted by two horizontal bails which are placed across the two gaps. The dimensions of a wicket are 28.5 inches high by 9 inches wide.

Creases are painted lines at both ends of the pitch. There are three types of crease, and each has a special purpose. As can be seen in the diagram above, the stumps at each end are aligned in the centre of the bowling crease, which is 8 feet 8 inches long. Parallel with the bowling crease, and four feet forward of it, is the popping crease. This marks the limit of the batter's "safe territory", and is where the batter stands when "taking guard" while the ball is being bowled. The popping crease and the return creases define the area within which the bowler must complete delivery. As the bowler releases the ball, the back foot must land within the two return creases, and the front foot must land on or behind the popping crease.

A match is controlled on-field by two umpires. One of the umpires stands behind the wicket at the bowler's end, and the other stands in a fielding position called "square leg" (see the fielding positions diagram), which is directly in line with the striker's wicket and about fifteen yards from it. The umpires switch positions at the end of each over. In televised matches, particularly those played at international level, there is often a "third umpire" who can make decisions on certain incidents with the aid of video evidence.

Off the field, the match details including runs and dismissals are recorded by two scorers, one from each team.

The key pieces of equipment needed to play a game of cricket are the bat and the ball. At its most basic level, cricket involves a bowler bowling a ball at a target that is defended by a batter, who uses a bat to stop the ball or hit it away. Because cricket is a dangerous game, wearing protective gear is also necessary.

A cricket bat is made of wood (usually willow) and takes the shape of a straight blade topped by a cylindrical handle. The blade must not be more than 4¼ inches wide and the total length of the bat not more than 38 inches.

A cricket ball is a rock-hard leather-seamed spheroid projectile with a circumference limit of nine inches. It can be delivered by the fastest bowlers at speeds of more than 90 mph and so the batters and the wicket-keeper wear protective gear, as do fielders who occupy positions in close proximity to the batter. In Test and first-class cricket, the ball is red; in limited overs matches, it is white.

Batters wear pads (designed to protect the knees and shins), reinforced batting gloves, a safety helmet and a box. Some batters wear additional padding inside their shirts and trousers such as thigh pads, arm pads, rib protectors and shoulder pads.

The wicket-keeper wears pads and specially reinforced gauntlets to protect the legs and hands respectively. Close fielders may wear a helmet but are not allowed to wear gloves.

Each team is led by its captain (aka the "skipper"), who is often the most experienced player. Cricket is an intensely strategic sport and the captain, bearing responsibility for leadership and team tactics, is the most important member of the team, especially when fielding, though other senior players are usually consulted before any tactical decision is made. Among the captain's considerations are the current and expected pitch and weather conditions.

Before play commences, the two team captains meet on the pitch and toss a coin to decide which team shall bat or field first. The toss is regulated by Law 13.4, which states that at least one umpire must be present and that it must be done at least fifteen, but not more than thirty, minutes before play is scheduled to begin. The captain who wins the toss must decide whether to bat or field in the first innings of the match, and immediately announce the decision.

A match is divided into phases known as innings (the same spelling is used for both singular and plural) and, depending on the type of match, there may be two or four innings, as defined in Law 13. In each innings, while one team is batting, the other is fielding, and a key member of the fielding team is bowling. Throughout an innings, all eleven members of the fielding team are on the field, but only two batters. When the batting team's innings has been completed, the teams reverse roles for the next innings, the fielding team becoming the batting team and vice-versa. The match ends when all innings have been completed.

A batter when dismissed is ruled to be "out", and the umpire calls this. When a batter is out, they are replaced by one of their team-mates. The innings ends when ten of the eleven batters are out: i.e., the team is "all out". One batter remains but cannot play alone, and so is "not out". In a first-class match, the innings can end early if the captain of the batting team decides to declare the innings closed for tactical reasons before the batters are all out. In limited overs matches, the innings ends after the prescribed number of six-ball overs have been bowled.

The bowler bowls the ball from one end of the pitch to the batter (the striker) defending the wicket at the other end. Every time a bowler bowls the ball, they are said to have completed a delivery or, more simply, a ball. The bowler must complete the delivery with a straight arm, and must ensure that their feet are within bounds set by the creases, as described above.

When the bowler has completed six successive deliveries, the umpire at that end of the pitch calls "Over!" and each set of six deliveries by one bowler is thus called an over. If the bowler does not concede any runs in the over, that over is termed a maiden and bowlers are credited with these in their career statistics. On completion of an over, the fielding team changes ends, and the two umpires swap roles. The next over begins with a different bowler operating from the other end, and bowling to the batter who was the non-striker at the end of the previous over. A bowler cannot operate from both ends consecutively but will usually bowl every other over from the same end through several overs until completing a "spell" and the captain replaces them with another bowler. It follows that two bowlers are often deployed "in tandem". When a bowler completes an over, they stay on the field and become one of the fielders until they bowl again.

All eleven players on the fielding side take the field together. One of them is the wicket-keeper, a specialist who operates behind the wicket being defended by the batter on strike. Besides the bowler and the wicket-keeper, the other nine fielders are tactically deployed by the team captain in chosen positions around the field, except as stipulated in Law 28.5 that they are not allowed to stand on the pitch.

The fielding positions are not fixed but they are known by specific and sometimes colourful names such as third man, silly mid on, and long leg. The captain determines all the tactics including who should bowl (and how); and is responsible for setting the field, though usually in consultation with the bowler. The fielding team is allowed substitutes in case of injury or other valid reasons for a player's absence, subject to Law 24 which stipulates that a substitute is not allowed for a fielder who leaves for other than "a wholly acceptable reason".

Any of the eleven fielders can bowl but it is extremely rare, though not unknown, for the wicket-keeper to bowl. Generally, the only players in the fielding side who will actually bowl are those recognised for their ability as bowlers, including any all-rounders who are adept at both batting and bowling. Players selected as specialist batters bowl only occasionally.

Bowlers are classified according to their speed or method of delivery. The main types of bowling are fast bowling, swing bowling, seam bowling and spin bowling. The latter is sub-divided into types of spin: off break (off spin), leg break (leg spin) and googly for right-arm spinners; orthodox and unorthodox (unorthodox was historically termed "chinaman" because Ellis Achong, who invented the style, was of Chinese descent) for left-armers. The classifications, as with much cricket terminology, can be very confusing. They are often written in abbreviated form: for example, LF is a left arm fast bowler, RM is a right arm medium paced seam bowler, and LBG is a right arm spinner who bowls deliveries that are called a leg break and a googly.

The bowler reaches his delivery stride by means of a "run-up". A fast bowler needs momentum and takes quite a long run-up, usually running very fast as he does so. Bowlers with a very slow delivery take no more than a couple of steps before bowling. The fastest bowlers can deliver the ball at a speed of over 90 mph and they usually rely on sheer speed to try and defeat the batter, who is forced to react very quickly to a ball that reaches him in an instant. The Australian fast bowler Jeff Thomson, who played in the 1970s, was a classic example of this type of bowler. The generally accepted world record for the fastest recorded delivery of a cricket ball is 100.23 mph by Shoaib Akhtar at Cape Town's Newlands Cricket Ground in February 2003.

Other fast bowlers rely on a mixture of speed and guile. Some make use of the seam of the ball so that it curves or swings in flight and this type of delivery, called swing bowling, can deceive a batter into mistiming his shot so that the ball touches the edge of the bat and can then be caught behind by the wicket-keeper or by a slip fielder. The great England fast bowler Fred Trueman, who played in the 1950s and 1960s, was a brilliant exponent of the "outswinger", which moves away from the batter in flight. Other bowlers use the "inswinger", which deviates towards the batter.

At the other end of the bowling scale is the spinner who bowls at a relatively slow pace and, with the spin he imparts onto the ball, relies entirely on guile to deceive the batter. A spinner will often buy his wicket by "tossing one up" to lure the batter into making an adventurous shot. The batter has to be very wary of such deliveries as they are often flighted or spun so that the ball will not behave quite as he expects, and he could be trapped into getting himself out. Two great spin bowlers have operated in 21st century cricket: Shane Warne of Australia and Muttiah Muralitharan of Sri Lanka. Off spinners and orthodox left armers utilise finger spin in their deliveries; leg spinners and unorthodox left armers utilise wrist spin.

In between the pacemen and the spinners are the medium-paced seam bowlers (or seamers) who rely on persistent accuracy to try and contain the rate of scoring and wear down the batter's concentration. These bowlers are classified by arm as LM or RM.

It is generally held that the greatest bowler of all time was Sydney Barnes, whose versatility was extraordinary. Barnes was ostensibly a right arm medium pace bowler but he varied his pace from slow to fast medium. Always noted for his control of length and direction, he had a mastery of swing. He used both outswing and inswing to great effect, and he could also produce either a leg break or an off break.

While awaiting delivery of the ball, the striker adopts a stance called "taking guard". The striker must quickly decide which shot to play by judging the flight and speed of the ball, taking into account where and how it is expected to hit the pitch, and how it will behave after it has pitched. The striker's partner, the non-striker, stands by the other wicket at the bowler's end of the pitch, as can be seen in the Murali/Gilchrist photo above. The other nine members of the batting team are off the field in the pavilion. If the striker plays a scoring shot and decides to run, the non-striker must be ready to run too.

Depending on the quality of the delivery received, the striker may play defensively without attempting to score a run. If an offensive shot is played to hit the ball away from the pitch and clear of the fielders, then the two batters have the option to run to the other end of the pitch without one of them being run out. Completing a run is the means of scoring in cricket. Each run is added to the team total and to the striker's personal total.

A skilled batter can use a wide array of strokes (also called shots) in both defensive and attacking mode. Cricket is very fond of naming things, as with the field placings, and each shot or stroke in the batter's repertoire has a name too: e.g., "cut", "drive", "hook", "pull", etc. The idea is to hit the ball to best effect with the flat surface of the bat's blade. Batters do not always seek to hit the ball as hard as possible and a good player can score runs just by making a deft stroke with a turn of the wrists or by simply blocking the ball but directing it away from fielders so that there is time to take a run.

A batter does not have to play a shot and can "leave" the ball to go through to the wicket-keeper, providing it will not hit the wicket. Equally, the batters do not have to attempt a run when the ball has been hit with the bat, and some batters will tactically play defensively and without scoring, known as "stonewalling", for long periods of time. The striker can deliberately use a leg to block the ball, and thereby "pad it away", but this is risky because of the leg before wicket (lbw) rule.

If a batter retires (usually due to injury) and cannot return, the retirement does not count as a dismissal because the batter was "not out". In effect, however, it is a dismissal because the innings is over. Substitute batters are not allowed, but the rules do allow a "runner" (a third batter) to come on for running purposes only if one of the batters is injured and, although able to take strike, cannot run. There are special rules concerning the deployment of runners.

The batters do not change ends at the end of an over and so, like the umpires, their roles are interchangeable; the one who was the striker when the previous over ended is now the non-striker, and vice-versa.

One run is commonly called a single. Hits worth one to three runs are common, but the size of the field is such that it is usually difficult to run four or more. To compensate for this, hits that reach the boundary of the field are automatically awarded four runs, if the ball makes contact with the ground en route to the boundary, or six runs if the ball clears the boundary on the full.

Hits for five are unusual and generally rely on the help of an overthrow by a fielder returning the ball to the bowler or wicket-keeper. If an odd number of runs is scored by the striker, the two batters have changed ends and the one who was non-striker is now the striker for the next delivery. Only the striker can score individual runs but all runs are added to the team's total.

If a batter scores a "half-century" of fifty runs, it is considered a good performance that will earn a round of applause. Scoring one hundred runs, referred to as a "century", is a noted achievement. Scores of 200 and 300 are not uncommon and these are called "double-centuries" and "triple-centuries" respectively. Failure to score at all is something no batter wants. A score of zero is called a "duck" and, if it happens in both innings of the same game, the batter is said to have "bagged a pair" (i.e., of spectacles – two zeroes).

While two batters are "in" together, they are sharing a partnership, and match records always note how many runs are scored while a partnership lasts. If, for example, the first four batters are out and it is the fifth and sixth batters in the batting order who are in together, and they add 100 runs to the team total before one of them is out, the record will show that they shared a "century partnership for the fifth wicket".

Additional runs can be gained by the batting team as extras (aka sundries) by courtesy of the fielding side. This is achieved in four ways:

When the bowler has bowled a no ball or a wide, the fielding team team incurs an additional penalty because that delivery has to be bowled again, and hence the batting side has the opportunity to score more runs from this extra ball. The batters have to run, unless the ball goes to the boundary for four, to claim byes and leg byes but these only count towards the team total, and to the extras, not to the striker's individual total for which runs must be scored off the bat. For a leg bye to count, the umpire must be satisfied that the batter was trying to play a shot, or was trying to avoid being struck by the ball.

There are several ways in which a batter can be dismissed and some are so unusual that only a few instances of them exist in the whole history of the game. The most common forms of dismissal are bowled, caught, leg before wicket (lbw), run out, and stumped. These are respectively denoted on scorecards as "b", "c", "lbw", "run out" and "st". Apart from a run out, the dismissal is always credited to the bowler as well as, where appropriate, the fielder or wicket-keeper. The unusual types of dismissal are hit wicket, hit the ball twice, obstructed the field, and timed out.

Before the umpire will award some dismissals and declare the batter to be out, a member of the fielding side (generally the bowler) must appeal. This is invariably done by asking (or shouting) the term "Owzat?" which means, simply enough, "how's that?" If the umpire agrees with the appeal, they will raise a forefinger and say "Out!" Otherwise, they will shake their head and say "Not out".

There have been many cases of umpires not being able to rule a batter out because the fielders did not appeal, even though the umpire was in no doubt about the dismissal. Appeals are particularly loud when the circumstances of the claimed dismissal are unclear, as is always the case with lbw and often with run outs and stumpings. It is usually the striker who is out when a dismissal occurs but the non-striker can be dismissed by being run out.

Care and maintenance of the pitch and turf are very important in cricket, and this is the responsibility of the groundsman whose duties may extend towards the entire ground or stadium, not just the playing area. Assisting the groundsman are the groundstaff who are club employees, mainly junior players.

Originally, cricket was played on whatever surface was available, providing the grass had been cropped short enough by sheep. Pitch preparation was limited to removing stones and stamping on divots. Through the eighteenth and well into the nineteenth century, preparation was rudimentary at best and the pitches were completely exposed to the elements.

Heavy rollers for flattening turf were first used at Lord's in 1870 and it is generally agreed that this was the innovation that began the improvement in pitches. Later still, in 1895, groundsmen began using marl, a sort of limestone clay that binds the soil (it is also used as fertiliser) and ensures more permanence in the surface. As the twentieth century began, the rough tracks of the past began to disappear.

Apart from rollers, one of the most important pieces of equipment used by the groundstaff is the pitch cover which can best be described as a long, low bogie that has a roof-shaped upper section to which drainage hoses are attached. This is wheeled out onto the field whenever rain stops play and is placed over the pitch and surrounded by huge pieces of plastic sheeting which effectively cover the whole of the infield area including the bowlers' run-ups. The field can still become very wet despite all of this protection and it is not unusual to see bowlers pouring sawdust into wet patches where they tread during run-up.

The groundstaff are also responsible for maintaining and positioning the sightscreens, which are hoardings just off the field and directly behind each wicket. They provide a clear background for the batter to sight the ball in the bowler's hand and so see it clearly through delivery. A white sightscreen is used in daytime when a red ball is in use and a black screen in a night match when a white ball is used. Many grounds have practice pitches in their outfields, well away from the playing pitches, and these are enclosed on three sides by nets so that the ball is contained in the practice area unless the batter plays a straight hit past the bowler.

Other features of the cricket ground are the pavilion and the scoreboard. The players' dressing rooms are located inside the pavilion which is the club's headquarters. Some very large pavilions, like the one at Lord's, can serve as grandstands. Scoreboards are erected as an information aid for spectators and frequently form the frontage of a building. The match score is updated after each delivery and the board also provides information about the current batters and bowlers. A basic scoreboard is operated manually but international stadiums often have electronically operated boards.

Now, cricket is played in high-class stadiums. The Narendra Modi Stadium in Ahmedabad seats 132,000 and is the world's largest sports stadium.

According to John Major in More Than A Game, cricket is "a club striking a ball (like) the ancient games of club-ball, stool-ball, trap-ball, stob-ball". As he says, each of these have at times been described as early cricket. It is generally believed that cricket began as a children's game in the south-eastern counties of England sometime before the sixteenth century.

Cricket is a multi-faceted sport. The Laws allow for many variations of contest and competition according to duration, location, timing, playing standards, qualification and other factors. In very broad terms, cricket can be divided into matches in which the teams have two innings apiece and those in which they have a single innings each. The former has a duration of three to five days (in earlier times there were timeless matches too); the best-known form of the latter, known as limited overs cricket (or one-day cricket) because each team bowls a limit of typically 50 overs, has a planned duration of one day only (a match can be extended if necessary due to bad weather, etc.). Historically, a form of cricket known as single wicket was extremely popular and many of these contests in the 18th and 19th centuries qualify as top-class matches. Single wicket has rarely been played since limited overs cricket began.

Test cricket is the highest standard of cricket. A Test match is an international fixture, invariably part of a series of three to five games, between two international teams that have full member status within the International Cricket Council (ICC). The teams have two innings each, and the match lasts for up to five days with a scheduled six hours of play on each day (this varies if there are interruptions due to the weather, or if an agreed number of overs is not completed within the six hours).

Men's Test cricket began with Australia versus England in 1877, although the early Tests were in fact classified as such retrospectively. Women's Test cricket began in 1934, again with Australia Women hosting England Women.

Subsequently, ten other countries have achieved men's Test status: South Africa (1889), West Indies (1928), New Zealand (1929), India (1932), Pakistan (1952), Sri Lanka (1982), Zimbabwe (1992), Bangladesh (2000), Afghanistan (2017), and Ireland (2017). The West Indies is a federation whose team is made up of players from nations including Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica, Trinidad & Tobago, the Leewards and the Windwards. England is actually England and Wales combined (Scotland is separate, although many Scots have played for England); similarly, Ireland is an all-Ireland combination. In women's cricket, the teams that have played Test matches are Australia Women, England Women, India Women, Netherlands Women, New Zealand Women, South Africa Women and West Indies Women.

Test cricket is a form of first-class cricket. This term, which has an official definition, is generally used in reference to the highest level of domestic cricket, especially in the Test-playing nations. National championships, such as the English and Welsh County Championship, are first-class competitions. A first-class match has a duration of three to five days, the teams having two innings each.

The draw is a possible result in first-class matches and this happens if playing time expires while the losing team is still batting (in other words, if the team batting last have not reached their target total and are not all out when time is up). Another feature of first-class matches is the follow-on, whereby the team batting second can be asked by the fielding captain to bat again in the third innings if they have been dismissed for a total that is over 150 less (200 less in a Test) than the first innings score of their opponents. This, in turn, can lead to an innings defeat if the team following on are all out for another low score and the combined totals of their two innings is less than that scored by their opponents in one innings.

A One Day International (ODI), also called a Limited Overs International (LOI), is the highest standard of limited overs cricket. In men's cricket, as well as the countries that play Test matches, this class includes those that have ICC associate member status, although they rarely play against the Test teams. Prominent associate members are Bermuda, Canada, Kenya, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, Scotland, and the United States. The ICC Women's Cricket World Cup was inaugurated in 1973, and the ICC Men's Cricket World Cup in 1975. Women's teams playing in LOIs, in addition to the seven Test countries, are Bangladesh Women, Pakistan Women, and Sri Lanka Women.

Limited overs matches are scheduled for a single day but they can be extended if necessary due to bad weather. Each team has one innings and the overs limit is usually fifty per side. There are various competitions in domestic cricket, beginning in England with the Gillette Cup knockout in 1963. There is no draw result except in the form of a tie, when the scores are level, or a no result due to rain or other factors.

Twenty20 (T20) is a variant of limited overs in which each team has twenty overs. The match lasts two to three hours and so can be fitted into an evening. It was introduced into English cricket in 2003 and has become extremely popular in India where the Indian Premier League (IPL) is contested. The Twenty20 International (T20I) was soon introduced, and there is an ICC Men's World Twenty20 Championship, first held in 2007, and an ICC Women's World Twenty20 Championship, first held in 2009.

These are held in each country and the matches are the main instances of first-class cricket. For example, England and Wales have the County Championship which has tentative origins stretching back to the 1720s, and was formally organised as an official competition in 1890. Since 2000, it involves 18 county teams who are split into two divisions. Each team plays the other eight in its division, both home and away, in double innings fixtures with a duration of up to four days. The championship teams are all run by county clubs, of which the oldest was founded in 1839 to manage the Sussex team. The most successful team is Yorkshire, whose county club was founded in 1863. They have won the title outright on 32 occasions, most recently in 2014 and 2015.

All the other Test countries have a similar setup. Australia's national championship involves the various state sides playing for the Sheffield Shield; in India, the championship is the Ranji Trophy; in South Africa, the CSA 4-Day Series; and so on. Women's national championships take place in a number of countries; for example, the one in England is a 50-over competition involving sixteen county teams.

Below the national championship level in each country there are various leagues, often organised on a state, county or regional basis, that include clubs which are classed as minor although in many cases the playing standards are anything but minor. Again using England as an example, the main minor competition is the Minor Counties Championship which began in 1895, and involves 20 county teams that have not qualified for the County Championship, although it is possible for a minor county to achieve this qualification. The last to do so was Durham in 1992. The most successful minor counties team is Staffordshire, whose most famous player was the world-class bowler Sydney Barnes.

Below the minor counties level are numerous regional leagues which involve town and village clubs whose players are generally local residents. These tend to play at weekends only. Some of the leagues are notable for high standards, especially as professionals have frequently been employed. For example, the great Gary Sobers played for Radcliffe Cricket Club in the Central Lancashire League for several seasons around 1960. Other notable leagues in England are the Lancashire League and the Bradford League.

Schools cricket has always been very important for giving youngsters an introduction to the skills of the sport, and this has always been most effective where good quality coaching has been available.

So far, the only time cricket has been played in the Olympic Games was in 1900 when just two teams, nominally Great Britain and France, took part. Neither was nationally representative but the "British" team won the only match staged. Subsequently, cricket showed no interest in the Olympics until the 2010s when the ICC began a dialogue with the International Olympic Committee.

Details are yet to be finalised but it has been announced that men's and women's Twenty20 competitions will form part of the 2028 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles.

In domestic competitions, limited-overs games of differing lengths are played. There are also numerous informal variations of the sport played throughout the world that include beach cricket, French cricket, Indoor cricket, Kwik cricket, and all sorts of card games and board games that have been inspired by cricket.

A bank is a financial institution where  can save or  money. Banks also invest money to build up their reserve of money. What they do is regulated by laws. Those laws differ in different countries. The people who work at a bank are called bank employees. Certain banks deal directly with the public and are the only ones that a regular person will work with. Other banks deal with investments and international currency trading.

The customer's money may be placed in the bank for safekeeping. Banks may give loans to customers under an agreement to pay the money back to the bank at a later time, with interest. An example is getting a mortgage to buy a house or apartment. Banks also can use the money they have from deposit accounts to invest in businesses to make more money.

In most countries, the rules for banks are made by the government acting through laws. A central bank (such as the Bank of England) changes how much money is issued at a particular time. This is a factor in the economy of a country, and the government makes the big decisions. These "banks of issue" take in, and issue out, coins and banknotes.

The word bank comes from the Italian word banco, meaning a bench, since Italian merchants in the Renaissance made deals to borrow and lend money beside a bench. They placed the money on that bench.

Elementary financial records are known from the beginning of history. Baked clay records were done before the invention of writing.

In the 17th century, merchants started storing their gold with goldsmiths in London. The goldsmiths had their own vaults and charged a fee for storing the merchants' gold. The goldsmiths eventually started loaning money using the gold left to them and also paid interest on the gold.

The Bank of England began issuing banknotes in 1695.  The oldest bank still in existence is Monte dei Paschi di Siena in Siena, Italy, which started in 1472.

A video game is an electronic game played on a video screen (normally a television, computer monitor, or built-in screen when played on a handheld machine).

There are many types, or genres, of video games: role-playing games; shooters, first-person shooters, side-scrollers, and platformers.

Video games usually come on CDs, DVDs or downloaded digitally. Many games used to come inside of a cartridge. A specialized device used to play video games at home is called a console. There have been many types of consoles and home computers used to play video games. Some of the first consoles made were the Atari 2600 in the 1970s and the Sega Master System and Nintendo Entertainment System in the 1980s. The newest line of video game consoles are Microsoft's Xbox Series X or Series S Sony's PlayStation 5 and Nintendo's Nintendo Switch 2. The best-selling video game console to date is the PlayStation 2, made by Sony.

People can also use computers to play games, which are sometimes called PC games.  Older gaming consoles do not get many games after a while, but in recent years newer consoles rarely get the older games. A lot of the time console games which are unplayable or are on older hardware are ported or emulated on PCs (see emulator). This means that new computers can play many old console games along with games made just for new computers. Older games are emulated because of the ease of downloading them as opposed to having to use older hardware. Additionally, emulating games usually provides better performance as opposed to using the older hardware to access the games.

People can play portable video games anywhere. Mobile devices (running operating systems such as iOS or Android) also can download games, making them a popular choice for gaming out and about. Mobile phones have many games, and some games on console are accessible by using a mobile emulator. Not all PC or console games are on mobile or iPad/ iPod/Tablet without an emulator.

Competitions of video game players are called electronic sports, also known as e-sports.

One handheld console that is supported today is the Switch, which looks like a tablet computer but can also be plugged into a TV. It is the first example of a "hybrid console" that can be used as both as a TV-based model and a handheld device. It was released in March 2017.

Sony's PlayStation Portable (PSP) came out in 2004. A new version, the PlayStation Vita, first came out in 2012. Additionally, Sony released the PlayStation Portal in 2023, but it requires an active PS5.

Also, in 2004, Nintendo released the Nintendo DS (Dual Screen), which has two separate screens, where one of which is a touchscreen. New versions came out in later years, such as the Nintendo DSi in 2008 and the Nintendo DSi XL. The Nintendo 3DS, the first handheld console with 3D graphics, came out in 2011. The 2DS followed in 2013. The New 3DS XL, which is similar to the 3DS but with updated graphical capabilities, was released in 2015. The latest entry into the DS lineup is the "New 2DS XL", released on the 28th of July 2017.

Valve released the Steam Deck in Feb 2022 in the North America region. The Steam Deck is a handheld console that can play games made for personal computers.

The first video game is believed to be Tennis for Two, a rudimentary tennis game to be played with two people developed in 1958. Another early example is Spacewar!, developed in 1962.

In the 1950s, when the first computers began creation, three people had some ideas to create the basis of video games. In 1951, Ralph Baer, an American engineer of Loral Electronics, tried to create "the best television", proposing to add a gaming module, but his employer did not like his idea. Even though his idea was never agreed on, he is the first man to have thought about creating video games. Additionally, later on in his life, Ralph made the first video game console, the Odyssey. In 1952, A.S Douglas, from the University of Cambridge in the UK, made a video game on a computer to illustrate one of his speeches. The game, called OXO, was a tic-tac-toe game, with two players (one person vs a computer). In 1953, Willy Higinbotham made a game called Tennis for Two, similar to Pong, to entertain visitors at the Brookhaven National Laboratory. Another early video game was some version of checkers, but this is commonly overlooked.

One of the most famous games of all time is called Space Invaders. Space Invaders Keplerians was made in 1978 as a coin operated arcade game, but a version has been made for most game consoles and home computers available.

Bread is a type of baked food. It is mainly made from dough, which is made mainly from flour and water. Usually, salt and yeast are added. Bread is often baked in an oven. It can be bought all over the world.

Bread can be toasted or used to make sandwiches. Bread can be made into many different foods, like pizza. There are many different kinds of bread.

The color and taste of the bread depending on the kind of flour used and the style of baking. Flour made from the whole grain gives darker bread. Flour made just from the polished wheat grain gives a very white bread. Rye and barley flour give darker types of bread. The type of flour also changes how long the bread can be kept before going bad. Some strains of wheat are resistant to fungus, but may not produce bread as tasty as a weaker strain.

Christianity and Judaism have rules about the use of bread in their religions. Unleavened bread (matzo) is eaten by Jews during the Passover. The Catholic celebration of the Eucharist uses unleavened wafers.

Orthodox churches forbid the use of unleavened bread for the Eucharist (Old Testament) and permit leavened bread only as a symbol of the New. This was one of the three points of contention that brought about the schism between Eastern and Western churches in 1054.

Bread is an important part of life in many countries because so many people eat it. In many cultures, bread is so important that it is part of religious rituals.

Cake is made in a similar way to bread but sugar, fat, and milk are added to the dough and often more ingredients.

Coffee is a caffeinated drink prepared from roasted coffee beans. It's also a plant (Coffea) and the name of the drink that is made from this plant. The coffee plant is a bush or tree that can grow up to ten meters (about 32 feet) high, but is usually cut shorter. Coffee plants originally grew in Ethiopia, and now also grow in South America, Central America, Southeast Asia and Turkey. They are an important crop for the economies of many countries.

The drink is made from the seeds of the coffee plant, called coffee beans. Coffee is usually served hot, and is a popular drink in many countries.

To make a drink from coffee beans, the beans must first be specially prepared by drying the beans and then roasting. The beans are dried a short time after they are picked. This preserves them and makes them ready to be packed or roasted. Before the beans are made into a drink, they must be roasted and ground (crushed into tiny pieces in a coffee mill). When the ground coffee is placed into boiling water, the flavour and dark brown colour of the beans goes into the water. Making coffee is called brewing coffee. There are several different ways that coffee can be brewed.

Coffee contains a number of useful nutrients, including riboflavin, niacin, magnesium, potassium, and various phenolic compounds, or antioxidants.

There are two main types of coffee plants: coffea arabica and coffea robusta. Arabica is the most common. Most of the world's coffee is made from Arabica beans Robusta is easier to grow in places where Arabica will not grow.

Robusta is cheaper and has more caffeine than Arabica and it is used in many commercial coffee products. But Robusta tastes  and , so people only drink it with other things. Better  Robustas are in some espresso blends.

In the past, people gave names to new Arabica coffees from the port they came from. The two oldest Arabica coffees are "Mocha" and "Java". Today, names are more specific. They tell us the country, region, and sometimes even the property where they come from.

The traditional way to plant coffee is to put 20 seeds in a hole at the beginning of the rainy season. However, in this way about 50% of the seeds are wasted. They do not sprout. In Brazil, farmers grow coffee in a better way. They grow seedlings in nurseries. After six to twelve months, they move the young plants outside. Coffee is often grown along with other food crops such as corn, beans, or rice for a few years. This lets farmers get used to what coffee plants need to grow well. Coffee plants grow in the area between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn. This part of the world is called the bean belt or coffee belt.

Single-origin coffee is a term to describe the coffee varieties that are organically grown in a specific geographical area. For this reason, the overall quality of single-origin coffee is attributed to the agroecological factors in the coffee plantations. External agro ecological factors such as altitudes, temperatures, and quality of the soil are the most significant determiners that play a role in flavor note formation for the green coffee beans inside the coffee cherries.

Most of the time, single-origin coffee is the top-notch arabica varieties like Gayo Sumatra, Ethiopian Yirgacheffe, Lintong Sumatra, Kenya AA, and more varieties going on the list. However, premium-grade robusta can be considered single-origin varieties as long as it grows under ideal growing conditions.

Some sorts of coffee taste better if the beans are aged. This means that after they are picked, the beans are dried and then kept from three to eight years. This "aging" gives the coffee a less acidic taste. Coffee that has been aged is often mixed or "blended" with other coffee that is not aged.

Roasting is one of the important stages in making coffee beans into coffee. When a coffee bean is roasted, it grows nearly two times bigger and changes from green to yellow to brown.

The length of time that the coffee beans are roasted makes the coffee taste different. Some types of coffee, such as Mocha and Java, are roasted for a short time. It is easy to tell from the flavour where the coffee is from. When coffee is roasted for a long time, it is harder to tell the different types apart. Green coffee beans can be bought and roasted at home in the oven.

Before the coffee is made into a drink, it is ground in a small grinding machine called a coffee mill. The coffee mill breaks the beans into very small pieces. Coffee is turned into a drink in several different ways. For some ways of making coffee, such as espresso, it is best to have the coffee ground into fine powder. or other types of coffee-making, such as filtered coffee, the coffee is in larger pieces to stop it going through the filter. Finely ground coffee makes a stronger taste.

Coffee is made into a drink by putting the coffee into boiling water. This is called "brewing" coffee. There are many ways to brew coffee.  Four of the most common are:

"Instant coffee" is a very quick way to make a cup of coffee to drink. It is made in a factory and sold in jars or packets. First, strong coffee is made using ground coffee and boiling water. Then, the coffee grounds are filtered out. The coffee liquid is dried out until nothing is left except granules (little crunchy pieces), or fine powder. This is then put into jars or packets. As soon as a spoonful of "instant coffee" is added to boiling water, it dissolves in the water to make coffee to drink.  The taste can be very different from fresh coffee. Part of the reason for the different taste is that Robusta coffee beans are usually used for making instant coffee. Robusta coffee beans do not cost as much as Arabica.

Coffee is also sold, hot or cold, in cans and bottles. It is ready to drink. It is sold in vending machines and convenience stores with other soft drinks.

The United States buys the most coffee; Germany is next. People in Finland drink the most coffee for each person. In Canada, the United States and Europe, some restaurants sell mainly coffee; they are referred to as "cafés" or "coffeehouses". Cafés often sell food, but the type of food is different from one country to another.

In some countries, for example, those in northern Europe, people like having coffee parties. At these parties, people have coffee and cake.

In many countries, people drink coffee at work; in the United States and England, for example, people drink it in the morning. In other countries, such as Mexico, people drink it in the evening to help them stay awake.

Coffee contains the drug caffeine. Caffeine is a mild stimulant which helps to keep people awake.  Caffeine, like many drugs, can be addictive and can cause health problems.

Consuming high amounts of caffeine may increase the risk of anxiety, especially among people with panic disorder or social anxiety disorder. Less commonly, it may trigger mania and psychosis in those who are susceptible.

Some studies have looked at the health risks of coffee. In February 2003, there was a study in Denmark of 18,478 women to find out if coffee had an effect on pregnancy and birth. It was found that if a woman drank between four and seven cups of coffee a day, it did not seem to make a big change to the number of babies that were born dead, (stillborn). But the women in the study who drank eight or more cups of coffee a day had three times as much chance of having a stillborn baby.

For this, and other reasons, some people drink coffee substitutes or decaffeinated coffee instead.

The BMJ quotes a study which concluded  that there are health benefits for drinking up to four coffee cups per day. However, drinking coffee is not recommended for pregnant women and for  women who are in danger of fractured bones. According to the BMJ not everyone agrees with these findings.

Photography is a way of making a picture using a camera. A person who makes pictures using a camera is called a photographer. A picture made using a camera is called a photograph or photo. Photography became popular in the middle 19th century with Daguerreotype. Later wet plate and dry plate methods were invented. Most photography in the 20th century was on photographic film and most in the 21st uses digital cameras.

A camera is, in its simplest form, a box with a hole in its front. There is a special piece of glass in front of the hole called a lens. To take a photograph, the lens makes a small picture of the object inside the camera, which it does by focusing light. A lens in a camera works like a lens in glasses (spectacles) or a magnifying glass. One type of camera called the Pinhole camera has no lens but uses a very small hole to focus light.

To make a photograph with a camera, the shutter release button is pressed. Pressing the button opens the shutter. The shutter is like a door. It covers the hole in the camera box. The shutter is behind the lens. When the shutter is closed no light can enter the camera box. When the shutter is open light can enter the camera. When the button is pressed the shutter opens and then closes. This happens very fast. The amount of time the shutter stays open for is called the shutter speed. The shutter speed can change between 1/1000th of a second (0.001 s) to a few seconds. Normally the time taken for the shutter to open and close is far less than 1 second.

Some cameras have an aperture ring.  It controls how much light enters the camera box.

Photography is the art and practice of creating images by recording light on a photosensitive surface, such as photographic  film or a digital sensor. The word “shooting” comes from the Greek words “photo’s,” meaning light, and “graphs,” meaning drawing or writing. It essentially means “drawing with light.”

The photograph in a camera may be made on film or, if it is a digital camera, on an electronic sensor.

The picture the lens makes is recorded on photographic film. Film is placed inside the camera box. Light coming through the lens, aperture and open shutter shines on the film. Photographic film is coated with chemicals that react when light shines on it. Letting light shine on the film is called exposing the film.

There are many different types of photographic film.  There are films for taking colour photographs and films for taking black and white photographs.  There are different sizes of film.  The most common size is 35 mm. It is called 35 mm because the width of the film is 35 millimetres.

Another difference between films is how sensitive they are to light. Films have a number, called an ISO number, which tells how fast a film reacts when light shines on it.

Once the film has been exposed it is processed. Processing has to be done in total darkness or the film will be exposed too much and the picture will be lost. Processing stops the film reacting to light any more. After the film has been processed the picture can be seen on the film.

A photographic print is a photograph made on paper. A light sensitive paper is used. The picture on the film is placed in an enlarger. An enlarger is a machine that shines light through the film and makes a bigger picture on the light sensitive paper. A chemical reaction happens in the paper, which turns the areas hit with light black when the paper is 'developed'. (The more light, the darker the area.) Developing makes the picture appear on the paper – now it is a photograph. Then the paper is put into other chemicals that make it not sensitive to light any more. This is called "fixing". Last, the paper is washed so that there are no more chemicals on it and then dried. Then it is finished.

Digital photography uses a digital camera. Sometimes it is called digital imaging. Like other cameras a digital camera has a lens, aperture, and shutter. The picture the lens makes is recorded by a light-sensitive electronic sensor. A digital camera does not use photographic film to record a picture. Digital photographs are stored in storage devices such as SD cards. They can later be transferred to a computer. Paper prints can also be made from digital pictures. Digital cameras are also not expensive to use, as there is no film to buy.

One of the most important things when taking a photograph is focusing the lens. If the lens is not focused well, the photograph will be blurry. Autofocus cameras focus automatically when the shutter release is pressed. There are also manual focus cameras (usually older ones).

Three other things are important when taking a photograph. These control how bright or dark the photograph will be. The brighter you have it the more transparent the picture comes out, if you have it to bright the whole screen can turn out to be all white, if the camera settings are set to be to dark, well, then the picture will come out to dark. So it really depends on how you want the picture, some cameras automatically come in with the setting at 50%, this is most recommended if you want to take a normal picture, but if you want to adjust the settings, it is recommended to keep it between 45% and 75%.

A slower shutter speed, a bigger aperture, and faster film/higher ISO sensor all make a brighter picture. A faster shutter speed, a smaller aperture, and a slower film/lower ISO sensor all make a darker picture. A good picture is not too bright and not too dark. When it is too bright it would be called "overexposed". An automatic camera changes these things by itself when the shutter release is pressed.

Though there are many types of cameras, all include five indispensable components:

The Olympic Games () is an important international event featuring summer and winter sports. Summer Olympic Games and Winter Olympic Games are held every four years. Originally, the ancient Olympic Games were held in Ancient Greece at Olympia. The first games were in 776 BC. They were held every four years until the 6th century AC. The first "modern" Olympics took place in 1896 in Athens, Greece. Athletes participate in the Olympics Games to represent their countries.

Over time the Olympics have become bigger. In old times, women were not allowed, but now there are women's events. The Winter Games were created for ice and snow sports. The Paralympic Games were created for athletes with physical disabilities. As well, the Olympics became bigger with the addition of the Youth Olympic Games for teenage athletes. World War I and World War II led to the cancellation of the 1916, 1940, and 1944 Games. As the decision-making body, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is responsible for choosing the host city for each Olympic Games. The IOC is also responsible for choosing what sports are in the games. The creator of modern Olympics is Baron Pierre de Coubertin.

The celebration of the Games includes many rituals and symbols, such as Olympic flag and torch, as well as the opening and closing ceremonies. The first, second, and third-place finishers in each event receive, respectively, gold, silver, and bronze medals.

The Olympics of Ancient Greece featured mainly athletic but also combat and chariot racing events. During the Olympic Games all struggles among the participating city-states were postponed until the games were finished. The origin of these Olympics is shrouded in mystery and legend According to legend, it was Heracles who first called the Games "Olympic" and established the custom of holding them every four years. The most widely accepted date for the beginning of the Ancient Olympics is 776BC; based on inscriptions of the winners of a footrace held every four years starting then. The Ancient Games featured running events, a pentathlon (consisting of a jumping event, discus and javelin throws, a foot race and wrestling), boxing, wrestling, and equestrian events.

There is no agreement on when the Games officially ended, but many historians think it is 393 AD, when the Christian Roman emperor Theodosius I declared that all Pagan religious practices should end. Another date might be 426 AD, when the next emperor Theodosius II ordered the destruction of all Greek temples. After the Olympics stopped, they were not held again until the late 19th century.

An attempt to copy the ancient Olympic Games was the L'Olympiade de la République annually from 1796 to 1798 in Revolutionary France. The competition had several sports from the ancient Greek Olympics.

Greek interest in bringing back the Olympic Games began with the Greek War of Independence from the Ottoman Empire in 1821. It was first proposed by poet and newspaper editor Panagiotis Soutsos in his poem "Dialogue of the Dead", published in 1833. Evangelis Zappas, a wealthy Greek-Romanian philanthropist, first wrote to King Otto of Greece, in 1856, offering to fund a permanent revival of the Olympic Games. Zappas sponsored the first Olympic Games in 1859, which was held in Athens. Athletes from Greece and the Ottoman Empire participated. Zappas funded the restoration of the ancient Panathenaic stadium so that it could host all future Olympic Games.

Between 1862 and 1867, Liverpool held an annual Grand Olympic Festival. It was created by John Hulley and Charles Melly, with support from Dr. Brookes. These games were unfair in nature since only Men could compete. In 1865 Hulley, Dr. Brookes and E.G. Ravenstein founded the National Olympian Association in Liverpool, a forerunner of the British Olympic Association. Its articles of foundation provided the framework for the International Olympic Charter.

Dr. Brookes copied the sports which were in the Olympics held in Athens in 1859 in future Wenlock Olympian Games (Brookes created this first as a class in 1850 and then as an event in 1856.). In 1866, a national Olympic Games in Great Britain was organized by Dr. Brookes at London's Crystal Palace.

The Panathinaiko Stadium hosted Olympics in 1870 and 1875. Thirty thousand spectators attended that Games in 1870, although no official attendance records are available for the 1875 Games. In 1890, after attending the Olympian Games of the Wenlock Olympian Society, Baron Pierre de Coubertin created the International Olympic Committee. Coubertin built on the ideas and work of Brookes and Zappas with the aim of creating an Olympic Games that would occur every four years in a different country. He presented these ideas during the first meeting of the newly created International Olympic Committee (IOC). This meeting was held from June 16 to June 23, 1894, at the Sorbonne University in Paris. On the last day of the meeting, it was decided that the first Olympic Games, to be controlled by the IOC, would take place two years later in Athens. The IOC elected the Greek writer Demetrius Vikelas as its first president.

The first Games held under the IOC was hosted in the Panathenaic stadium in Athens in 1896. These Games brought 14 nations and 241 athletes who competed in 43 events. Zappas and his cousin Konstantinos Zappas had left the Greek government money to fund future Olympic Games. This money was used to pay for the 1896 Games. George Averoff paid for the refurbishment of the stadium in preparation for the Games. The Greek government also provided money, which was paid back through the sale of tickets. Money was also paid back through the sale of the first Olympic commemorative stamp set.

The Greek officials and public were excited about hosting these Games. This feeling was shared by many of the athletes, who even demanded that Athens be the host of the Olympic Games on a permanent basis. The IOC did not approve this request. The IOC stated that each games would be held in a different country.

Following the success of the 1896 Games, the Olympics entered a period of stagnation that threatened their survival. The Olympic Games held at the Paris Exposition in 1900 and the World's Fair at St. Louis in 1904 were side-shows. The Games at Paris did not have a stadium, however this was the first time women took part in the games. The St. Louis Games hosted 650 athletes, but 580 were from the United States. The homogeneous nature of these celebrations was a low point for the Olympic Movement. The Games rebounded when the Intercalated Games (so-called because they were the second Games held within an Olympiad, a period of time lasting four years) were held in Athens. These Games are not officially recognized by the IOC and no Intercalated Games have been held since. These Games were hosted at the Panathenaic stadium in Athens. The games attracted an international field of participants and generated great public interest.

Between 1912 and 1948 art competitions were a part of the Olympics. Medals were awarded for works of art inspired by sport, divided into five categories: architecture, literature, music, painting, and sculpture. The juried art competitions were abandoned in 1954 because artists were considered to be professionals, while Olympic athletes were required to be amateurs. The competitions were part of the original intention of the Olympic Movement.

The Winter Olympics were created for snow and ice sports that were not part of the Summer Games. Figure skating (in 1908 and 1920) and ice hockey (in 1920) were Olympic events at the Summer Olympics. At the 1921 Olympic Congress, in Lausanne, it was decided to hold a winter version of the Olympic Games. A winter sports week (actually 11 days) was held in 1924 in Chamonix, France. The IOC ruled that the Winter Olympic Games be celebrated every four years on the same year as the summer games. This pattern continued until the 1992 Games in Albertville, France. After this, beginning with the 1994 Games, the Winter Olympics were held on the third year of each Olympiad.

Starting in 2010, Youth Games help to develop young athletes for the Olympic Games. Athletes between the ages of 14 and 18 compete. The Youth Olympic Games were created by IOC president Jacques Rogge in 2001 and approved during the 119th meeting of the IOC. The first Summer Youth Games were held in Singapore from 14 to 26 August 2010. The first Winter Games was hosted in Innsbruck, Austria, in 2012. These Games are shorter than the Olympic Games. The summer version will last twelve days and the winter version will last nine days. The IOC will allow 3,500 athletes and 875 officials to take part at the Summer Youth Games. 970 athletes and 580 officials will take part at the Winter Youth Games. The sports to be played will be the same as at the Olympic Games.

The Olympic Movement includes a large number of national and international sporting organizations and federations. As the group in charge of the Olympic Movement, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) is responsible for selecting the host city. Overseeing the planning of the Olympic Games. Changing the sports involved. Agreeing sponsorship and broadcasting rights.

French and English are the official languages of the Olympic Movement. The other language used at each Olympic Games is the language of the host country.

In 1998, it was uncovered that several IOC members had taken bribes from members of the Salt Lake City bid committee for the hosting of the 2002 Winter Olympics. This was done to make sure that Salt Lake City won. The IOC investigated and four members resigned and six people were sacked.

A BBC documentary entitled Panorama: Buying the Games, aired in August 2004, investigated the taking of bribes in the bidding process for the 2012 Summer Olympics. The documentary claimed it was possible to bribe IOC members into voting for a particular candidate city. After being narrowly defeated in their bid for the 2012 Summer Games, Parisian Mayor Bertrand Delanoë accused the British Prime Minister Tony Blair and the London Bid Committee of breaking the bid rules.

The Turin bid for the 2006 Winter Olympics was also shrouded in controversy. A prominent IOC member, Marc Hodler, strongly connected with the rival bid of Sion, Switzerland, alleged bribery of IOC officials by members of the Turin Organizing Committee. These accusations led to a wide-ranging investigation. The allegations also served to sour many IOC members against Sion's bid and potentially helped Turin to capture the host city nomination.

The Olympic logo also known as the Olympic rings, consists of five intertwined rings and represents the unity of the five inhabited continents (America, Africa, Asia, Australia, Europe). The colored version of the rings—blue, yellow, black, green, and red—over a white field forms the Olympic flag. The flag was adopted in 1914 but flown for the first time at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp, Belgium. The flag has since been flown during every Games. The Olympic motto is Citius, Altius, Fortius, a Latin expression meaning "Faster, Higher, Stronger".

Before each Games, the Olympic flame is lit in Olympia in a ceremony that reflects ancient Greek rituals. A female performer, acting as a priestess, lights a torch with the use of the sun. The woman then lights the torch of the first relay bearer. Starting the Olympic torch relay that will carry the flame to the host city's Olympic stadium. The flame has been an Olympic symbol since 1928 and the torch relay was introduced at the 1936 Summer Games.

The Olympic mascot was introduced in 1968. The mascot is either an animal or human figure representing the cultural heritage of the host country.

As mandated by the Olympic Charter, various elements frame the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games. Most of these rituals were established at the 1920 Summer Olympics in Antwerp. The ceremony typically starts with the hoisting of the host country's flag and a performance of its national anthem. The host nation then presents artistic displays of music, singing, dance, and theater representative of its culture.

After the artistic portion of the ceremony, the athletes parade into the stadium grouped by nation. Greece is traditionally the first nation to enter in order to honor the origins of the Olympics. Nations then enter the stadium alphabetically according to the host country's chosen language. The host country's athletes are always the last to enter. During the 2004 Summer Olympics, which was hosted in Athens, Greece. The Greek flag entered the stadium first and last. When it came in to the stadium for the second time it was followed by the athletes. Speeches are then given formally opening the Games. Finally the athletes oath said. Following this the Olympic torch is brought into the stadium and passed on until it reaches the final torch carrier who lights the cauldron.

The closing ceremony of the Olympic Games takes place after all sporting events have concluded. Flag-bearers from each participating country enter the stadium. They are followed by the athletes who enter together without any national distinction.

Three national flags are hoisted while the corresponding national anthems are played. The flag of Greece to honor the birthplace of the Olympic Games. The flag of the current host country. The flag of the country hosting the next Summer or Winter Olympic Games is also flown.

The president of the organizing committee and the IOC president make their closing speeches. The Games are officially closed and the Olympic flame is put out.

In what is known as the Antwerp Ceremony (as this tradition was started in Antwerp), the mayor of the city that organized the Games transfers a special Olympic flag to the president of the IOC. The president then passes it on to the mayor of the city hosting the next Olympic Games.

After these compulsory elements, the next host nation briefly introduces itself with artistic displays of dance and theater representative of its culture.

A medal ceremony is held after each Olympic event is concluded. The winner, second and third-place competitors or teams stand on top of a three-tiered rostrum to be awarded their respective medals. After the medals are given out by an IOC member, the national flags of the three medalists are raised while the national anthem of the gold medalist's country plays.

The Olympic Games program consists of 26 sports, 30 disciplines and nearly 300 events. For example, wrestling is a Summer Olympic sport, comprising two disciplines: Greco-Roman and Freestyle. It is broken down into fourteen events for men and four events for women. Each event represents a different weight class. The Summer Olympics program includes 26 sports, while the Winter Olympics program features 15 sports.

Olympic sports are governed by international sports federations (IFs) recognized by the IOC as the global supervisors of those sports. There are 35 federations represented at the IOC. Changes can happen to the list of sports in the Olympics. Sports can be added or removed from the list on the basis of a two-thirds majority vote of the members of the IOC.

The 114th IOC meeting, in 2002, limited the Summer Games program to a maximum of 28 sports, 301 events, and 10,500 athletes. Three years later, at the 117th IOC Session, the first major change to the list was performed. This resulted in the removal of baseball and softball from the list of sports for the 2012 London Games. Since there was no agreement in the promotion of two other sports, the 2012 program will feature just 26 sports. The 2016 and 2020 Games will return to the maximum of 28 sports given the addition of rugby and golf.

The exclusion of professionals caused several controversies throughout the history of the modern Olympics. The 1912 Olympic pentathlon and decathlon champion Jim Thorpe was stripped of his medals when it was discovered that he had played semi-professional baseball before the Olympics. His medals were restored by the IOC in 1983 on compassionate grounds. As class structure evolved through the 20th century, the definition of the amateur athlete as an aristocratic gentleman became outdated. The advent of the state-sponsored "full-time amateur athlete" of the Eastern Bloc countries further eroded the ideology of the pure amateur, as it put the self-financed amateurs of the Western countries at a disadvantage. Nevertheless, the IOC held to the traditional rules regarding amateurism.

Beginning in the 1970s, amateurism requirements were gradually phased out of the Olympic Charter. After the 1988 Games, the IOC decided to make all professional athletes eligible for the Olympics, subject to the approval of the IFs.

As of 2004, the only sport in which no professionals compete is boxing, although even this requires a definition of amateurism based on fight rules rather than on payment, as some boxers receive cash prizes from their National Olympic Committees. In men's football (soccer), only three professional players over the age of 23 are eligible to participate per team in the Olympic tournament.

There have been many countries deliberately missing the Olympics in order to make political statements. The most famous examples of countries missing the Olympics happened in 1980 and 1984. The Cold War opponents missed each other's Games. 65 nations refused to compete at the Moscow Olympics in 1980 because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Soviet Union and 14 of its Eastern Bloc partners (except Romania) countered by missing the Los Angeles Olympics of 1984. The countries stated that they could not guarantee the safety of their athletes. Soviet officials defended their decision to withdraw from the Games by saying that "chauvinistic sentiments and an anti-Soviet hysteria are being whipped up in the United States".

The Olympic Games have been used as a platform to promote political ideologies almost from its inception. Nazi Germany wished to portray the Nationalist Socialist Party as benevolent and peace-loving when they hosted the 1936 Games. The Games were also intended to show the superiority of the Aryan (white) race. This goal was not met due in part to the achievements of athletes such as Jesse Owens, who won four gold medals at this Olympics.

Individual athletes have also used the Olympic stage to promote their own political agenda. At the 1968 Summer Olympics, in Mexico City, two American track and field athletes, Tommie Smith and John Carlos, who finished first and third in the 200meter sprint race, performed the Black Power salute on the podium. The runner up Peter Norman wore an Olympic Project for Human Rights badge in support of Smith and Carlos. IOC President Avery Brundage then told the United States, to either send the two athletes home or withdraw the track and field team. The United States chose to send the pair home.

In the early 20th century, many Olympic athletes began using drugs to improve their athletic abilities. For example, the winner of the marathon at the 1904 Games, Thomas J. Hicks, was given strychnine and brandy by his coach. The only Olympic death linked to doping happened at the Rome Games of 1960. During the cycling road race, Danish cyclist Knud Enemark Jensen fell from his bicycle and later died. A coroner's inquiry found that he was under the influence of amphetamines. By the mid-1960s, sports federations were starting to ban the use of performance-enhancing drugs. The IOC did likewise in 1967. The IOC created the World Anti-Doping Agency in 1999. The IOC-established drug testing regimen (now known as the Olympic Standard) has set the worldwide benchmark that other sporting federations around the world attempt to emulate. The first Olympic athlete to test positive for the use of performance-enhancing drugs was Hans-Gunnar Liljenwall, a Swedish pentathlete at the 1968 Summer Olympics, who lost his bronze medal for alcohol use.

The Olympics have not brought lasting peace to the world, even during the Games. Three Olympic Games were not held due to war. The 1916 Games were cancelled because of World War I, and the summer and winter games of 1940 and 1944 were cancelled because of World War II. Terrorism has also threatened the Olympic Games. In 1972, when the Summer Games were held in Munich, West Germany, eleven members of the Israeli Olympic team were taken hostage by the terrorist group Black September. This event is now known as the Munich massacre. The terrorists killed two of the athletes soon after they had taken them hostage and killed the other nine during a failed rescue attempt. A German police officer and 5 terrorists also died. During the Summer Olympics in 1996 in Atlanta, a bomb was detonated at the Centennial Olympic Park, which killed 2 and injured 111 others. Eric Robert Rudolph is currently serving a life sentence for the bombing.

The host city for an Olympic Games is chosen seven years ahead of the event. The process of selection is carried out in two phases that span a two-year period. The process starts when a city wanting to host the games applies to its country's Olympic group. If more than one city from the same country gives a proposal to its NOC, the national group chooses which city will run for host. The first step once the deadline passes (To tell the IOC that you want to hold the Games), is to ask the cities to complete a questionnaire which covers many key points in the organization of the Olympic Games. The evaluation of the filled questionnaires by a group provides the IOC with an idea of each cities project and their potential to host the Games. On the basis of this evaluation, the IOC chooses the applicants that will proceed to the candidature stage.

Once the candidate cities are chosen, they must give to the IOC a bigger presentation of their project as part of a candidature file. Each city is analyzed by an evaluation group. This group will also visit the cities. The group give a report on its findings one month prior to the IOC's final decision. During the interview process the candidate city must also guarantee that it can fund the Games. The IOC members gathered in the meeting have the final vote on the host city.

By 2016, the Olympic Games will have been hosted by 44 cities in 23 countries. The United States has hosted four Summer and four Winter Olympics, more than any other nation. Among Summer Olympics host nations, the United Kingdom has been the host of three Games, and hosted its third Olympics in 2012 in London. Germany, Australia, France, and Greece are the other nations to have hosted the Summer Olympics twice. Among host cities, only Los Angeles, Paris, Athens and London have played host to the Olympic Games more than once, with each holding that honor twice. With the 2012 Games that took place in London, the British capital holds the distinction of hosting the modern Olympics Games three times, more than any other city. Paris will be the second city to host the modern Olympics Games three times in 2024, while Los Angeles will be the third city in 2028.

In the Winter Olympics, France has hosted three Games, while Switzerland, Austria, Norway, Japan, and Italy have hosted twice. The most recent Games were held in Pyeongchang, South Korea's first Winter Olympics and second overall. The next Winter Games will be in Beijing, China in 2022, which will be the first time this nation has hosted.

Rice (Oryza sativa) is a type of cereal and food. In origin, it is a swamp grass. It is eaten as staple food in many parts of Asia. It is grown in warm parts of the world, mainly India, Africa, Iran, northern Italy, and the west coast of North America.

Rice accounts for 80% of the calories eaten in Asia, or one-fifth of the calories eaten worldwide by humans. It is the agricultural commodity with the third-highest worldwide production (rice, 741.5 million tonnes in 2014), after sugarcane (1.9 billion tonnes) and maize (1.0 billion tonnes). However, judged by value, the world trade in wheat is greater than all other crops combined. All these cereals are grasses.

Rice used to be the main diet in many countries. Various kinds of food processing prepare rice for eating. It is usually cooked. In some areas, such as Spain, rice is first fried in olive oil or butter, then cooked with water or soup. In other areas, such as India, rice is eaten with sauce, curry, or soup. Rice can also be used to make alcohol, such as Japanese sake rice wine.

Rice is believed to have been first grown in ancient southern China and India around 2500 BC. Rice-growing was brought to Japan possibly in the 1st century BC, and became popular during the 2nd century and the 3rd century. From India, rice spread to southern Europe and Africa.

Iran is also a producer of rice in Asia with a production of 2.4 MMT. The food consumption pattern of people in Iran shows that Iranians consume an average of 100 g of rice per day. Rice is the second most popular and favorite food in Iran after bread.

Rice is usually planted in a flat field filled with water. Before cropping, the water is drained from the field. Before farmers developed a good farming system and fertilizers, they used to let lands rest for 1 to 2 years while farming in other lands.

In some hot areas, close to the equator, farmers do double-cropping which means raising two crops in one year.

Rice contains a lot of carbohydrates. There are different ways of milling rice. Brown rice has only had the outer layer removed. It contains more fibre than the completely milled white rice.

There are several grains called "rice": they have been cultivated for thousands of years. There are a huge number of varieties.

Asian rice (Oryza sativa) is most widely known and most widely grown, with two major subspecies and over 40,000 varieties. Also notable are varieties of African rice (Oryza glaberrima) and wild rice (genus Zizania). Rice may vary in genetics, grain length, color, thickness, stickiness, aroma, growing method, and other characteristics.

Rice can be divided into different categories on the basis of each of its major characteristics. The two subspecies of Asian rice, indica and japonica have different length and stickiness. Indica rice is long-grained and unsticky, while japonica is short-grained and sticky.

For instance, over nine major varieties of rice exist for the purpose of making sake alone.

A naturally occurring strain of rice, IR8, is believed to have saved many lives.

The new strain, part of the Green Revolution, had defects. It lacked taste, and the team spent 20 years improving its quality, and its resistance to fungi and pests. The team's later work was to reduce its bad effect on diabetes type 2 and on its vitamin A content.

Artificial intelligence (AI or A.I.) is a computer program or a machine that is able to learn and mimic human thinking. Sometimes the word AI is used to talk about neural networks or deep learning.

Artificial intelligence is a system's ability to understand external data, to learn from that data, and to use what it has learned to achieve specific goals or tasks through adaptation.

Artificial intelligence is widely applied in speech recognition, image recognition, robotics, autonomous systems, natural language processing, machine translation, predictive analytics, medical diagnostics, fraud detection, and the control of physical processes.

John McCarthy came up with the name, "artificial intelligence" in 1956. Intelligence allows an organism to act in a meaningful way in its environment. It includes the ability to get sensory inputs, and to react to these.

The European Union made a law (2024's second quarter) about artificial intelligence. It is the world's first law that regulates AI.

Connecticut and Colorado tried to pass laws (in 2024) regarding use of AI.

AI research started with a conference at Dartmouth College in 1956. It was a month-long brainstorming session many people who like AI came to. At the conference, they wrote programs which were able to beat humans at checkers or solving word problems. The Department of Defense started giving a lot of money to AI research, and labs were created all over the world.

In a paper on AI, mathematician James Lighthill wrote "no aspect of the discipline has so far seen discoveries generated the huge influence that was previously anticipated. In no part of the field have the discoveries made so far produced the major impact that was then promised.".  The governments of the US and UK decided to spend money on other projects which caused little new research to be done. This was known as an "AI winter."

In the 90s and early 2000s, AI became important again in data mining and medical diagnosis. This was possible because of faster computers and focusing on solving more specific problems.  In 1997, the chess computer Deep Blue became the first computer program to beat chess world champion Garry Kasparov. In 2011, IBM Watson beat the top two Jeopardy! players Brad Rutter and Ken Jennings. In 2016, Google's AlphaGo beat top Go player Lee Sedol 4 out of 5 times.

The idea is perhaps much older. Julien Offray de La Mettrie (1709-1751) was a materialist thinker of the Enlightenment. In his work of 1748, L'Homme Machine, he had the idea that both matter and life organized themselves. He is seen as one of the precursors of Darwin's theory of evolution. Today, one field of artificial intelligence, called strong artificial intelligence wants to build a machine that can think like a person. However, weak artificial intelligence is about building a system that can support a human. One of the key problems is to make systems that can model ity. Most of the time, this is done with probability theory and statistics.

Someday, AI researchers hope to create computer programs that can learn, solve problems, and think logically. A great intelligent machine is flexible and perceives what is around it. It would use what it learns to make its chance of success at some goal better. Researchers hope to make a “Artificial general intelligence” which can solve many problems instead of focusing on just one. Researchers are also trying to make creative and emotional AI which could create art.

Artificial intelligence is used in many different areas today.

Some software has become well-known, such as ChatGPT (a chatbot and virtual assistant).

Faster computers, deep learning, and more data have made AI popular throughout the world. AI has been successful with decoding human speech, playing games (like chess and Go), self-driving cars, and understanding complex data. AI and machine learning technology is used in applications including: search engines, recommendation systems, virtual assistants, autonomous vehicles, automatic language translation, facial recognition, image labeling, advertising, and driving internet traffic.

Researchers Kaplan and Haenlein say there are three types of AI system: analytical, human-inspired, and humanized artificial intelligence.

In 2025, a municipality in Norway made a report in regard to permanently closing down (some) schools; The report used ghost source (or fictitious sources); Those sources were claimed to be the works of two (named) professors; The municipality admitted that the report was made [partly] by A.I.; The process of closing down schools, has stopped (as of March). An official that was involved, resigned (or left her job) one month later. (See Hallucination, artificial intelligence)

Agentic A.I. "is an autonomous AI system that can act independently to [finish or] achieve pre-determined goals", according to media. A.I. agents "are small, specialised pieces of [computer programs or] software that can make decisions and

[work or] operate cooperatively or independently" to [... reach goals that are called] system objectives", according to media. (A decision, in a decision problem within computer science, "[is supposed to give or] requires a yes or no answer", according to media.)

Researchers didn’t know how difficult several issues were. They still couldn’t offer computers things like emotions or common sense. So far, most AI programs only do what computers can do well like searching databases or doing calculations. AI is not able to sense and understand what is happening around itself because of problems with what computers can do. Computers can do some things like learning and problem solving, but not in the same way as people do.

A programming language is a type of written language that tells computers what to do. Languages are often of two types, compiled or interpreted. Examples of compiled languages are: C, C++, Rust, Swift, and V (Vlang). Examples of interpreted languages are: AutoHotkey, C#, Java, JavaScript, Python, and Ruby. Programming languages are used to write computer programs and computer software. A programming language is like a set of commands that tell the computer how to do things.

Usually, the programming language uses real words for some commands (e.g., "if… then… else…", "and", "or"), so that the language is easier for a human to understand. Like any normal language, many programming languages use punctuation. To make a program, a programmer writes commands in their chosen programming language and saves the commands to a text file. This text file is called source code. Some programming languages, such as Python and JavaScript, can be read by the computer right away. If not, the source code has to be compiled, which means that the computer translates the source code into another language (such as assembly language or machine language) that a computer can read, but which is much harder for a person to read.

Computer programs must be written very carefully. If a programmer makes mistakes, then the program might then stop working, which is called "crashing". When a program has a problem because of how the code was written, this is called a "bug". A very small mistake can cause very serious bugs.

There are many types of programming languages. Most programming languages do not follow one type alone, so it is difficult to assign a type for each language. The examples of each type are given in each section below because they are the best, well-known examples of that type.

High-level programming languages require less knowledge about the hardware compared to low-level programming languages. This is because high-level programming languages abstract away the hardware the program is running on. Many high-level languages require an interpreter to run the source code on the hardware in real time. On the other hand, low-level languages usually convert the whole source code to machine code before running, because the source code is so close to the hardware that it is easy to do so.

Declarative programming languages describe a "problem" but they usually do not say how the problem should be solved. The problem description uses logic, and "solving" the problem often looks like automatically proving a system of logical axioms. Examples for such programming languages are Prolog, XSLT, LISP and SQL.

Imperative programming languages describe a system of state changes. At the start, the program is in a certain state, and the computer is given steps to follow, in order to perform an action. Following the steps causes the program to "change state".

In general, declarative programming languages are safer and shorter. Imperative programming languages are more common, because they are easier to use.

Functional programming looks at programming like a function in mathematics. The program receives input, together with some information, and uses this information to create output. It will not have a state in between, and it will also not change things that are not related to the computation.

Procedural programs specify or describe sets of steps or state changes.

Stack-based languages look at some of the program's memory like a stack of cards. There are very few things that can be done with a stack. A data item can be put on the top of the stack. This operation is generally called "push". A data item can be removed from the top of the stack.  This is called a "pop".  You can look at the item at the top of the stack without removing it.  This is called a "peek".

If a program is written as "push 5; push 3; add; pop;" it will put 5 on the top of the stack, put 3 on top of the 5, add the top two values (3 + 5 = 8), replace the 3 and 5 with the 8, and print the top (8). Examples for programming languages that are stack-based are the languages Postscript and Forth.

Object-oriented programming languages place data and functions that change data into a single unit. This unit is called an "object". Objects can interact with each other and change another object's data. This is usually called encapsulation or information hiding. Most modern programming languages are object-oriented, or at least allow this style of programming. Examples of this are Java, Python, Ruby, C++, C# and other C languages.

Flow-oriented programming sees programming as connecting different components. These components send messages back and forth. A single component can be part of different "programs", without the need to be changed internally.

Some languages above can be used for scientific computing. For example, C++ and Python are also used in this way. On the other hand, there are some languages that have scientific computing as their main purpose. The following are some examples:

LaTeX and SATySFi are programming languages which helps document creation.

Every programming language has rules about what it can and can not do. These include:

Most languages have official standards that define the rules of how to write the source code. Some programming languages have two or more standards. This can happen when a new standard replaces an old one. For example, the Perl 5 standard replaced Perl 4 in 1993. It can happen because two people made two standards at the same time. For example, there are several standards for APL.

Object-Oriented Programming (sometimes shortened to OOP) is a form of programming where all parts of the program are objects. Objects are pieces of memory with the same structure that can be used again and again. A bank account, bitmap, or hero from a video game could all be objects within a program. Objects are made up of properties (pieces of information the object stores) and methods, which are things the object can do. A Dog object might have properties like height and hairColor. Its methods might include bark() and wagTail().

All objects are created from templates called classes. You can think of a class as a mold from which objects are made. The class defines all the properties and methods that its objects will have. Objects created from a class are called instances of the class. A class can extend another class, which means that it takes all the properties and methods of the class but can add its own.

Here is an example of what a class might look like in a programming language:

Notice that the Dog class extends the Mammal class, so all dogs will have the properties of a mammal, like hairLength, and methods, like eat() or sleep().

Object-oriented programming is used in many of today's most popular programming languages, such as Java, C#, Objective-C, C++, Python, Ruby, Javascript, and ActionScript.

Here is a simple program written in Visual Basic (a language made by Microsoft):

This program asks the user their age and responds based on what the user typed. If the user typed something that is not a number, the program says so. If the user typed a number less than zero, the program says so. If the user says they are older than 100 years old, the program says "That's old!". If the user typed a correct age, the program says back to the user how old they are.

Here is a program that does the same thing as the program above, but in Python:

Tea is a caffeinated drink made from steeping the leaves of the Camellia sinensis plant. Tea can have other herbs, spices, or fruit flavors in it, like lemon.

Sometimes, tea is used for other drinks that have been made by soaking fruit or herbs in hot water, like "rosehip tea" or "chamomile tea". These are called "herbal teas". After water, tea is the most widely consumed drink in the world.

There are three main types of tea: black tea, oolong, and green tea.

To make black tea, leaves are dried with hot air until they turn brown or black. Next, they are broken into pieces and put into a room where they absorb oxygen, or oxidize. Chemical reactions change the taste and style of the tea.

Most black tea comes from Sri Lanka, Indonesia and eastern Africa. Another name used for black tea, especially in China, is red tea.  That is because when black tea leaves are brewed in boiling water, the tea made from them looks deep dark red.

Oolong tea is a traditional semi-oxidized Chinese tea. It is produced by withering the leaves under strong sun.

Green tea is made by steaming freshly picked leaves. This keeps them green. Then they are crushed and dried in ovens. India is the biggest maker and user of green tea.

Tea is mainly grown in China, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Japan, Nepal, Australia, Argentina and Kenya.

Green tea is usually steeped for 2–3 minutes in water at , while black tea is steeped for 3–5 minutes in boiling water.

Baseball is a bat-and-ball sport played on a  by two teams against each other. In baseball, a player on one team throws a small round ball at a player on the other team, who tries to hit it with a bat. Then the player who hits the ball has to run around the field. Players get runs by running in a full circle around three points on the ground called bases, back to where they started, which is called home plate. They have to do this without getting caught by the players on the other team.

Baseball started in the United States in the 1700s and 1800s. Many people in North America, South America, and East Asia play baseball, but the sport is most known in the United States and Japan. In the U.S., baseball is called the national pastime, because so many people in the United States used to spend a lot of time playing or watching baseball games. Today, though, most Americans follow football more than baseball, especially when it comes time for the Super Bowl.

A game of baseball is played by two teams on a baseball field. Each team has 9 players. There are also 4 umpires. Umpires watch everything carefully to decide what happened, make calls about a play, and make sure everyone follows the rules.

On a baseball field, there are four bases. The bases form a diamond that goes around the field to the right from the starting base. The starting base is called home plate. Home plate is a pentagon, which is a shape that has five sides. First base is on the right side of the field, second base is at the top of the infield, third base is on the left side of the field, and home plate is at the back of the field, where the catcher plays.

The game is played in innings. Professional baseball games have 9 . In an inning, each team has one turn to bat and try to score runs, adding one point. When one team hits the ball, the other team defends and tries to get three players on the other team out. The team that is playing defense always has the ball. This is different from other team sports. When the team on defense gets three players out, it is their turn to try and score runs. Then the team that was batting starts playing defense, and the team that was playing defense starts batting. After nine innings, the team that has the most runs is the winner. If the teams have the same number of runs, they play more innings until one team wins. At the start of the game, the home team pitches, while players on the visiting team bat. Only one player can bat at a time.

The baseball field, or diamond, has two main parts, the infield and the outfield. The infield is where the four bases are. The outfield is beyond the bases, from the view of home plate. The lines from home plate to first base and home plate to third base are the foul lines, and the ground outside of these lines is called foul territory. A ball that is hit with a bat and flies between the foul lines is a fair ball, and the batter and runners can try and run around the bases and score. A ball that is outside the foul lines is a foul ball. If the ball hits the ground in  the foul area  rather than being caught in the air, the batter continues to bat, and any runners must return to the base that they were on before the ball was hit. If the batter has fewer than two strikes, a foul ball counts as a strike. If the batter already has two strikes, and the foul ball is not caught in the air, then the batter continues to hit. If a ball is caught by a fielder in fair or foul ground, the batter is out.

The most important part of the game is between the pitcher and the batter. The pitcher throws, or pitches, the ball towards home plate. The pitcher normally throws the ball close enough for the batter to hit it. If the pitcher throws the ball in the strike zone, which is the area  over home plate and between the hitter's knee and chest, the pitch is a "strike", unless the batter hits the ball. If the batter swings the bat and misses the ball, the pitch is always a strike regardless of where it is, so the batter must have good aim with the bat. Three strikes are a "strikeout", and this is one way to make an "out". A pitch that the batter does not swing at, and which is not called a strike, is a "ball." On the fourth "ball" thrown by a pitcher, the batter "walks" to first base, so it is important to pitch well.

The catcher for the pitcher's team waits behind the batter, and catches any ball that the batter does not hit. The catcher uses signals to tell the pitcher where to throw the ball. If the pitcher does not like what the catcher says, he will shake his head, which signals "no". If he agrees with what the catcher has signaled, he will nod his head, which signals "yes".

There are many ways to get batters out, and runners can also be gotten out. Some common ways to get batters out are catching a batted ball before it touches the ground (whether in fair or foul territory), throwing the ball to the defensive player at first base (an out if it gets there before the batter), and a strikeout. A runner can be put out by tagging the runner while the runner is not on a base, and by "forcing him out" (when a base is touched before a player can get there, with no base for the runner to go back to). When the fielding team has put out three of the batting team's players, the half-inning is over and the team in the field and the team at bat switch places.

The batting team wants to get runs. In order to get a run, a player must bat, then become a base runner, touch all the bases in order, and then touch home plate without being called out. So first, the batter wants to make other players get to home plate, or to run the bases himself. Runners can not pass each other while running the bases.

A base runner who touches home plate after touching all previous bases in order, and without getting out, scores a run. If the batter hits the ball over the fence (between the foul lines) without touching the ground, it is a home run. The batter, and any base-runners, are allowed to advance to the home plate and score a run. The fielding team can do nothing to stop them.

The team on the field tries not to let the team who's batting get any runs. The fielding team has a pitcher and a catcher. The remaining seven fielders can stand anywhere in the field. However, there are usually four people that stand around the infield close to the bases and three outfielders who stand around the outfield.

The four infielders are the first baseman, second baseman, shortstop, and third baseman. The first baseman and third baseman stand close to first base and third base. The second baseman and the shortstop stand on either side of second base.

The first baseman's job is to make force plays at first base. In a force play, another infielder catches a ball that has touched the ground, and throws it to the first baseman. The first baseman must then touch the batter or the base with the ball before the batter can touch first base. Then the batter is out. First basemen need to have quick feet, stretch well, be quick and know how to catch wild throws. First base is one of the most important positions as a significant number of plays happen there.

The second baseman's job is to cover the area to the right of second base and to back the first baseman up. The shortstop's job is to cover the area between second and third bases. This is where right-handed batters usually hit ground balls. The shortstop also covers second or third base and the near part of left field. The shortstop is usually the best fielder on the team. The third baseman needs to have a strong throwing arm. This is because many times the batter will hit a ball toward third base. The third baseman must throw the ball very quickly to the first baseman, to get the runner out. Because the balls that go to third base are usually hit very hard, the third baseman must also be very quick.

The three outfielders are called the left fielder, the center fielder, and the right fielder, because they stand in left field, center field and right field. Left field and right field are on the left and right sides, if you look out from home plate. Center field is straight ahead from home plate. Center field is very big, so the center fielder is usually the fastest.

The team can decide where to put the infielders and outfielders. Players often stand at slightly different places on the field between some plays. These changes are called "shifts". The fielders may shift at any time. Players can shift for many reasons. One of the more popular ones is the defensive shift, where players move in the infield. They do this because they know that some batters can only hit a ball a certain direction. It can also be easier to make a double play when fielders are moved a certain way.

Teams can change pitchers during a game. Teams change their pitchers often because it is hard for a pitcher to throw a full game of nine innings. A pitcher can sometimes throw a no-hitter where no one on the opposite team gets an earned hit. A team can use as many pitchers as it wants to, but it is rare to use more than eight in a game. The ways that a pitcher throws the ball are called pitches. Many professional pitchers use two or more different pitches. Pitchers change which pitch they throw so that the batter will not know what pitch to expect. This makes it more difficult for the batter to hit the ball. Pitchers can make the ball move differently: faster or slower, closer or farther from the batter, higher or lower. There are also many types of pitches, such as the curveball, slider, splitter, sinker, screwball, cutter, knuckleball, knuckle-curve, changeup, circle changeup, palm ball, and others, including some made from mixing others together .

When throwing the ball, the pitcher stand on top of the pitcher's mound with both feet. The pitcher's rubber is on top of the mound. The pitcher cannot take more than one step forward when he throws the ball. That makes the pitcher throw the ball slower. Some major-league pitchers can throw the ball faster than 100 miles per hour (145 km/h). Throwing a baseball that fast can be bad for the body, and they can be injured often. Doctors often will perform Tommy John surgery on a pitcher with an elbow injury. The operation is named after Tommy John, the first pitcher to have the surgery. Today, pitchers are able to recover from their injuries much faster and better than before Tommy John surgery.

The batting team wants to get runs. The batting team sends its players up to home plate in a special order. This order is called the lineup. Each team chooses its lineup at the start of the game. After the game starts, the team cannot change the order. But the team can use a player who was not on the lineup. The new player has to change with an original player. The new player's name is written in the lineup where the original player's name was. After the ninth player has batted, the first player in the lineup starts again. If a runner comes to home plate, he scores a run. Then he is not a base runner. After scoring a run, the player must leave the field until it is his turn again. So a player can only score one run for each time he bats.

Since people began to have more free time, baseball has become the national pastime of America. About 12 million people play baseball in the United States.

Basketball is a team sport where two teams (usually consisting of five players) play against each other on a rectangular court. The objective is to get the ball through a hoop mounted high on a backboard on the opponent's side of the court, while preventing the opponent from shooting it into your team's hoop. It is a very popular sport worldwide, played with a round and usually orange (orange-brown) ball that bounces. Basketball players mainly use skills such as dribbling, playing defense, running, passing, shooting, and jumping. Each made basket is worth two points, while a basket made from beyond the three-point line is worth three points. If a player gets into too much physical contact, they may be given free-throws which are worth one point each. The game typically lasts for four quarters and the team with the most points at the end of the four quarters win the game. If the score is tied at the end of the game, there will be additional play time, called overtime, to allow one team to win the match.

The game is played between men's teams and between women's teams. Basketball has been played in the Summer Olympic Games since 1936. The shot clock rule started in 1954 for professional basketball. The first basketball game took place in 1892, where the court was half the size of what it is today. In 1891, the game was invented by James Naismith.

In early December 1891, James Naismith (1861–1939), a Canadian physical education teacher at Springfield College in Springfield, Massachusetts, invented an indoor game called basketball. He invented the sport to keep his students from becoming bored during the winter. Naismith wrote the basic rules and then nailed a peach basket onto a 20-foot tall pole. Unlike modern basketball hoops, the bottom of the peach-basket was still there, so after a point was scored, somebody had to get the ball out of the basket with a long stick. Over time, people made a hole at the bottom of the basket so the ball could go through more easily. The first game of basketball was played at the International Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA) in Springfield, Massachusetts. The score of the first game of basketball ever played was 1-0. There is a sculpture in Springfield, outside where the first game was held. The Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame is also in Springfield.

For that first game of basketball in 1891, Naismith used two half-bushel peach baskets as goals, which gave the sport its name. The students were enthusiastic. After much running and shooting, William R. Chase made a midcourt shot, which was the only score in that historic contest. Word spread about the newly invented game, and numerous associations wrote Naismith for a copy of the rules, which were published in the January 15, 1892, issue of the Triangle, the YMCA Training School's campus paper.

Since the rules had not been formally written, there was no maximum number of players then, unlike today. This also meant that there were no set rules to the game; Naismith only observed how it was played and changed the rules accordingly.

The aim of basketball is to score more points than the other team, by making the ball in the basket. Players on one team try to stop players on the other team from scoring. Baskets can be worth 1, 2, or 3 points. Each normal score is worth two points; however, if a player throws the ball into the hoop from behind the large arched line on the court, called the "3-point line," the score is worth three points. You get points by "shooting" (throwing or dropping) the ball into the opponents' basket. The team with the most points at the end of the game wins.

The ball is moved forward by shooting, passing (throwing or handing off) or dribbling it. The ball may not be carried by a player who is walking or running without dribbling it. If this rule is violated, it is called a travel.

The court, where the game is played, is a rectangle, and at both end lines there is a goal called a "hoop" in the shape of a circle basket with the bottom cut out.

Basketball is played with two teams, with 5 players from each team on the court at one time. The maximum number of players on the bench differs by the league. In international play, a maximum of 7 players is allowed on the bench, resulting in a roster of 12 players. The NBA has 13-player rosters; college and high school teams have 15-player rosters. When a player wants to substitute for another player on the court, they let the score bench know. The referees will signal for the player waiting to come into the court. The player that was in the game comes off the court and the player that was sitting on the bench goes inside the game. This is called a substitution. In regional matches, in some areas, a minimum of 3 players are required to be on the bench. In India, there might be leeway in the number depending on the category of the tournament you're playing in.

A game of basketball is made up of four different quarters, each ten (or in the National Basketball Association, 12) minutes long. In the NCAA, or National Collegiate Athletic Association, there are 2 20 minute halves. At the start of every game the referee throws the basketball up in the air, and one player from each team tries to hit it to their teammates, that is called a "jump ball".

At the start of each quarter the team who has the possession arrow pointing towards their hoop gets the ball. Then the arrow is switched, and the next team gets the ball next quarter.

After four-quarters, the team who scores the most points wins. If the two teams score the same number of points, there is a five-minute "overtime" to see who can score more points. "Overtime" can be played over and over until one team finally scores more points.

If a player does something illegal in the game, it is called a "foul." If a player fouls someone on the other team who is shooting the basketball, the player who was fouled gets to shoot "free throws" from the "foul line." A free throw is a shot that no one is allowed to try to block. A free throw is shot from the straight line in front of the hoop. Each successful free throw is worth one point.

If a player fouls an opponent who is not shooting, the other team gets the ball, and can throw it in bounds from the sideline. Players can do three things with the ball: "dribble" (bounce) the ball, "pass" the ball to a teammate, or "shoot" the ball at the hoop. The player with the ball tries to keep the ball and not let the other team get it.

The ball can't be kicked or hit with the fist. If this is violated, the other team gets possession of the ball and gets to throw it in from the nearest out of bounds area.

Once a player commits five fouls, he is no longer allowed to play in the game, and a player on the bench must go in the game immediately. If a team commits four fouls, the opposing team gets to shoot a free throw on any next foul that doesn't involve shooting. (Depending on the league).

In a game of basketball, there are a number of officials who are not from either team, who are there to help. Officials are important to the game, and help it run efficiently. Here is a list of some of these people:

Fans and media in North America will often use "referee" to describe all on-court officials, whether their formal titles are "referee", "umpire", or "crew chief".

There are some basketball terms that players have to understand when playing the game. Here are some terms:

In professional basketball teams, each player has a position. A position is a job or role that a player has to take part in to play the game. If everyone is doing their job correctly, the team is usually successful.

Other positions, more usual in professional basketball teams, are used in basketball.

There are many types of basketball. Some are for people with disabilities, others are played more by a specific group, some are played using only half the court, and some are for when there are fewer players.

This is the most popular "pick up game" variation of basketball. Pick up games are when teams are chosen on the court instead of having official teams. Due to there being no referee, this more casual game has more relaxed rules than official games. Instead of 5 players, there are only three players on each team, hence the name.

While the exact rules vary from place to place, there are several common rules typically found in most games, including:

There are officially sponsored 3 on 3 tournaments, though the game is mostly played without an official league.

Variations with 2 player and 4 player teams often follow this same format.

Twenty-one (21) is a variation of basketball that does not include teams. It is often played with odd-numbers of players or when there are too few players for 3 on 3 games.

The objective of twenty-one is to score exactly 21 points. Players keep track of their own scores and call out their points after making a basket. All players play defense against all other players and compete for the rebound on a miss.

When a player makes a shot, he or she scores 2 points and is then awarded a chance to score an additional 3 points by attempting a series of free-throws. If a player makes a free-throw, he or she is awarded an additional point and an additional free-throw. If a player makes three straight free-throws they are then given the ball back on top of the key and the other players may then defend.

One special rule is that if a player gets 20 points and then misses a free-throw, or scores 17 points and then makes all three free-throws, their score is set back to 15. This is because their next basket would put them over 21 points, and the object of the game is to get exactly 21.

Due to there being no teams, there are a number of special rules to 21:

The game H-O-R-S-E, (pronounced horse) is played by two or more players. The player in control of the ball tries to make a shot however they want. The other player has to repeat their shot. If they miss, they get an H added, until they get enough letters to finish the word horse and they lose. If the player who has the ball missed their shot, no letter is added and control moves to the next player.

In this variation, the players are all seated in a wheelchair. This is often played by people who cannot walk or are unable to play normal basketball. The rules are altered slightly, but the game follows the same general concepts.

Radio is a way to send electromagnetic signals over a long distance. It is mainly used to deliver information from one place to another.  A machine that sends radio waves is called a transmitter, while a machine that "picks up" the signals is called a receiver or antenna. A machine that does both jobs is a "transceiver". When radio signals are sent out to many receivers at the same time, it is called a broadcast.

Television also uses radio signals to send pictures and sound.

Airplanes and other things may be used under radio control.  Radio signals can be used to lock and unlock the doors in a car from a distance.

Sound can be sent by radio, sometimes through Frequency Modulation (FM) or Amplitude Modulation (AM).

Many people worked to make radio possible. After James Clerk Maxwell predicted them, Heinrich Rudolf Hertz in Germany first showed that radio waves exist. Guglielmo Marconi in Italy made radio into a practical tool of telegraphy, used mainly by ships at sea. He is sometimes said to have invented radio. Later inventors learned to transmit voices, which led to broadcasting of news, music and entertainment.

Radio was first used as a way to send telegraph messages between two people without wires. Voice transmission followed, which developed into broadcasting. Two-way voice radio also came into use, including walkie-talkies and eventually mobile phones.

Radio waves are still used to send messages between people. Talking to someone with a radio is different than "talk radio". Citizens band radio and amateur radio use specific radios to talk back and forth. Policemen, firemen and other people who help in emergency use a radio emergency communication system to communicate (talk to each other). It is like a mobile phone, (which also uses radio signals) but the distance they reach is shorter and both people must use the same kind of radio.

The word "radio" is sometimes used to mean only voiceband broadcasting. Most voiceband broadcasting uses lower frequency and longer wavelength than most television broadcasting. Voiceband broadcasting sends music, news and entertainers including "talk radio". Radio programs were used before there were TV programs. In the 1930s, the US president started sending a message about the country every week to the American people. Companies that make and send radio programming are called radio stations. These are sometimes run by governments, and sometimes by private companies, who make money by sending advertisements. Other radio stations are supported by local communities. These are called community radio stations. In the early days, manufacturing companies would pay to broadcast complete stories on the radio. These were often plays or dramas. Because companies who made soap often paid for them, these were called "soap operas".

Microwaves have even higher frequency; shorter wavelength. They also are used to transmit television and radio programs, and for other purposes. Communications satellites relay microwaves around the world.

A radio receiver does not need to be directly in view of the transmitter to receive programme signals. Low frequency radio waves can bend around hills by diffraction, although repeater stations are often used to improve the quality of the signals.

Shortwave radio frequencies are also reflected from an electrically charged layer of the upper atmosphere, called the Ionosphere. The waves can bounce between the ionosphere and the earth to reach receivers that are not in the line of sight because of the curvature of the Earth's surface.  They can reach very far, sometimes around the world.

Radio telescopes receive radio waves from the sky to study astronomical objects. Satellite navigation uses radio to determine location, and radar uses it to find and track things.

Chocolate is a food made from cacao beans. It is used in many desserts like pudding, cakes, candy, ice cream, and Easter eggs. It can be in a solid form like a candy bar or it can be in a liquid form like hot chocolate. Commercial chocolate has sugar and sometimes milk added. It has a melting point of about .

Dark chocolate has less sugar, and a more bitter taste.  It was originally used to make drinking chocolate. Chocolate has been around the world since the time of the Olmec, Mayan, and Aztecs.

The cacao tree was first found to be useful for its seeds about two thousand years ago. Early Mayan people of Central America and Mexico used the seeds from the cacao tree to make a drink that tasted bitter, not sweet.  Only important people could drink it.  The word for "chocolate" in almost every language comes from its name in the Nahuatl language of Mexico, chocolatl.

A vessel found at an Olmec archaeological site on the Gulf Coast of Veracruz, Mexico, dates chocolate by pre-Olmec peoples as early as 1750 BC. On the Pacific coast of Chiapas, Mexico, a Mokaya archaeological site shows evidence of cocoa beverages from 1900 BC. The residues and the kind of vessel in which they were found suggest the initial use of cocoa was not simply as a beverage, but as a source of fermentable sugars for an alcoholic drink.

Later on, this drink was made sweeter and made into what is known today as hot chocolate. It was made popular by Spanish explorers who brought it from North America to Spain. When chocolate was sweetened and made into candy, it became a very popular treat for many Europeans. At first, only the rich could afford chocolate. In France at that time, only nobles could buy it.  Now, many people can afford it.  Most cocoa today is made in Africa in countries like the Ivory Coast (Côte d'Ivoire) and Nigeria.

Until the 16th century, the cacao tree was unknown to the Europeans. From time to time, they served Montezuma in cups of gold that held a certain drink made from cacao. After the Spanish conquest of the Aztecs, chocolate was imported to Europe.

There are three main types of chocolate: white chocolate, milk chocolate, and dark chocolate. White chocolate tastes much sweeter than the other two types, because it has more of the sweeter ingredients in it.

Milk chocolate is sweet, but not as sweet as white chocolate. Milk chocolate has lots of cocoa.

Dark chocolate is the least sweet. It has the strongest chocolate flavor.

Chocolate is safe to eat unless it is eaten in large amounts. Some animals, like dogs and cats, become sick even if they eat only a little chocolate. People with diabetes can also get sick from eating chocolate. Dark chocolate contains ingredients that lower blood pressure and fight diseases. Small amounts of dark chocolate have been found to lower the risk of heart disease because of polyphenol in chocolate. It is necessary to moderate the amount of chocolate you eat.

Making chocolate is a process that has many steps. First, the cocoa beans are collected and put in piles or containers to make them ferment. Fermentation makes the sugar in the beans turn into alcohol. Then the beans are dried and cleaned. Chocolate makers must cook the beans, and then crush them to make the cocoa butter and the chocolate liquor come out of them. Then the chocolate maker mixes different ingredients together to make the different kinds of chocolate. Dark or bittersweet chocolate is made from sugar, cocoa butter, and chocolate liquor. Milk chocolate uses all of those ingredients plus milk and vanilla. White chocolate does not contain chocolate liquor, but only cocoa butter, along with sugar, milk and vanilla. After these ingredients are put together, the chocolate maker is still not finished. One of the last things to be done is something called conching. Conching means crushing the chocolate very finely and keeping it warm so that it is liquid. Before chocolate is conched, it feels very rough in the mouth instead of smooth. Conches use heavy rollers that plow back and forth through the chocolate paste under regulated speeds and temperatures. Conching for several hours to several days makes good chocolate. The last step in making chocolate is called tempering. The chocolate is heated, and then shaken, and then cooled a few times.

There are a number of ingredients in chocolate. The most notable of these are theobromine and caffeine. These two chemicals are closely related and are found in all cocoa beans. In any bean, the amount of each chemical varies depending on the genetics of the tree and the stresses placed on the tree during the growing season.

A motorcycle (or motorbike) is a vehicle used to transport people from one place to another. It does not have 4 wheels like a car. It has 2 wheels like a bicycle, and it has a motor like a car. A motorcycle is usually driven by one person. A passenger can also ride on the back of the motorcycle. Some motorcycles have a sidecar that can carry another passenger, However, a motorcycle is generally faster than a bicycle and can be faster than a car, especially in terms of acceleration and in certain driving conditions. Motorcycles have a better power-to-weight ratio, allowing for quicker acceleration, and their smaller size can make them faster in heavy traffic where lane splitting or filtering is legal. Bicycles, without engines, are the slowest of the three by a significant margin.

On-road bikes (ones that are allowed on public roads) require the rider to have a special type of driver's license to be ridden legally. Off-road bikes are not allowed to be driven on public roads.

Speed and stunts are the main goals for off-road bike sports. Many on-road bikes are much faster than off-road bikes and can be used in sports such as motorbike racing.

Motocross is a form of motorcycle racing.  It is on an off-road circuit. The sport came from motorcycle trials competitions held in the United Kingdom. Since motorcycles are lighter than almost all cars, they can accelerate more quickly. But it also makes them not as safe as cars, because they do not have a protecting chassis around them like cars. Very often motorcycle riders are injured heavily in accidents. Motorcycle riders should wear a helmet and other protective clothing like shoes and gloves, of which some have armor. This special clothing may reduce the rider's injuries in an accident. Motorcycles also do not protect riders against wind and rain. That makes it difficult to drive in winter or during bad weather.

In poor countries, motorcycles are used by many as a cheap method of transportation. Many people who do not have the money to buy a car can afford a small motorcycle. In rich countries, large powerful motorcycles are used more as a hobby or sport.

Pizza is an Italian food that was created in the Naples area, Southern Italy. It is made with different toppings. Some of the most common toppings are mozzarella (a kind of cheese), sausages, pepperoni, vegetables, tomatoes, spices, herbs, and basil. These toppings are added over a piece of bread covered with sauce. The sauce is most often tomato-based, but butter-based sauces are used, too. The piece of bread is usually called a "pizza crust". Almost any kind of topping can be put over a pizza. The toppings used are different in different parts of the world. Pizza comes from Italy, from Neapolitan cuisine. However, it has become popular in many parts of the world.

The origin of the word Pizza is uncertain. The food was invented in Naples about 200 years ago. It is the name for a special type of flatbread, made with special dough. The pizza enjoyed a second birth as it was taken to the United States in the late 19th century.

Flatbreads, like the focaccia from Liguria, have been known for a very long time. Pizzas need to be baked at temperatures of 200250 °C. Hardly any household oven could reach such temperatures at the time. Because of this, the pizza was made at home, and then given to the town bakery to bake. In June 1889, the Neapolitan chef Raffaele Esposito created the "Margherita" in honour of Queen Margherita, and was the first pizza to include cheese.

Pizza was brought to the United States with Italian immigrants in the late nineteenth century; and first appeared in areas where Italian immigrants concentrated. The country's first pizzeria (place that focuses in pizza), Lombardi's, opened in 1905.  Veterans returning from World War II's Italian Campaign were a ready market for pizza. Since then, pizza consumption has increased in the U.S. Pizza chains such as Round Table, Sbarro, Domino's, Pizza Hut, and Papa John's, have outlets all over the nation. Thirteen percent of the U.S. population eats pizza on any given day.

In the 20th century, pizza has become an international food. The toppings may be quite different depending on the local tastes. These pizzas consist of the same basic design. They also include many types of ingredients such as anchovies, egg, pineapple, banana, coconut, sauerkraut, eggplant, kimchi, lamb, couscous, chicken, fish, and shellfish. Sometimes, meats prepared in styles such as  Greek lamb, gyros or chicken tikka masala, and non-traditional spices such as curry and Thai sweet chili are added too. Pizzas can also be made without meat for vegetarians, and without cheese, for vegans.

Neapolitan pizza (pizza Napoletana). Authentic Neapolitan pizzas are made with local ingredients like San Marzano tomatoes, which grow on the volcanic plains to the south of Mount Vesuvius and Mozzarella di Bufala Campana, made with the milk from water buffalo raised in the marshlands of Campania and Lazio in a semi-wild state (this mozzarella is protected by its own European law).

The genuine Neapolitan pizza dough consists of Italian flour, natural Neapolitan yeast or brewer's yeast, salt and water.The dough must be kneaded by hand or with a low-speed mixer. After the rising process, the dough must be formed by hand without the help of a rolling pin or other mechanical device, and may be no more than 3 mm (1/8 in) thick.

Pizza is cooked in an oven. When cooked, it should be crispy, tender and fragrant. Neapolitan pizza has gained the status of "guaranteed traditional specialty" in Italy. This admits only three official variants: Pizza marinara, which is made with tomato, garlic, oregano and extra virgin olive oil (although most Neapolitan pizzerias also add basil to the marinara), Pizza Margherita, made with tomato, mozzarella, basil and extra virgin olive oil, and Pizza Margherita DOC made with tomato, buffalo mozzarella from Campania in fillets, basil and extra virgin olive oil.

Lazio style: Pizza in Lazio (Rome), as well as in many other parts of Italy is available in 2 different "flavors": 1) In take-away shops so-called "Pizza Rustica" or "Pizza a Taglio". Pizza is cooked in long, rectangular baking pans and relatively thick (1–2 cm). The crust similar to that of an English muffin and mostly cooked in an electric oven. When purchased, it is usually cut with scissors or knife and priced by weight. 2) In Pizza Restaurants (Pizzerias) it is served in a dish in its traditional round shape.

Sicilian-style pizza has its toppings baked directly into the crust.

White pizza (pizza bianca) uses no tomato sauce, often substituting pesto or dairy products such as sour cream. Most commonly, especially on the East Coast of the United States, the toppings consist only of mozzarella and ricotta cheese drizzled with olive oil and basil and garlic. In Rome, the term pizza bianca refers to a type of bread topped only with olive oil. Some white pizzas use Alfredo sauce as the pizza sauce for a better flavor.

Pizza al taglio or pizza al trancio was invented in Rome. It is usually rectangular, and sold by weight. The name translates to pizza by the slice. Stands selling pizza al taglio are common in Italy. It is also common in other areas of the world where there are many Italian immigrants.

Antica Pizzeria Port'Alba, the first pizzeria in Italy, started making pizzas in 1738 and still serves pizza today.

Some global pizza franchises are Pizza Hut, Sbarro, California Pizza Kitchen,  Domino's Pizza, Cici's Pizza, Papa John's and Little Caesars.

Frozen pizza is pizza that has been prepared beforehand, and is then deep-frozen, to be distributed in supermarkets. It is among the most successful and popular types of convenience food. It is prepared slightly differently: First the dough with the tomato sauce is pre-cooked, then the toppings are added. The dough of frozen pizza is different. Its dough also contains modified starch and leavening agents. This makes it possible to cook the pizza directly, without first defrosting it. One main frozen pizza brand is Digiorno.

A camera is a device that takes pictures (photographs). It uses film or electronics to make a picture of something. It is a tool of photography. A lens makes the image that the film or electronics "sees".

A camera that takes one picture at a time is sometimes called a still camera. A camera that can take pictures that seem to move is called a movie camera. If it can take videos it is called a video camera or a camcorder. The majority of cameras are on mobile phones.

All cameras are basically a box that light can not get into until a photo is taken. There is a hole on one side of the camera where the light can get in through the lens, and this is called the aperture. On the other side is a special material that can record the image that comes through the aperture. This material is the film in a film camera or electronic sensor in a digital camera. Finally, there is also the shutter, which stops light from getting in until a photo is taken.

When a photo is taken, the shutter moves out of the way. This lets light come in through the aperture and make a picture on the film or electronic sensor. In many cameras, the size of the aperture can be changed to let in more light or less light. The amount of time that the shutter lets light through can be changed as well. This also lets in more light or less light. Most of the time, electronics inside the camera control these, but in some cameras the person taking the picture can change them as well.

A ciné camera or movie camera takes a rapid sequence of photographs on image sensor or strips of photographic film. Unlike a still camera, the ciné camera takes a series of images, each one is called a "frame". The frames are later played back in a ciné projector at a specific speed, called the "frame rate" (number of frames per second). While viewing, the human visual system merges the separate pictures to create the illusion of motion. The first ciné camera was built around 1888. By 1890 several types were being made. The standard film size for ciné cameras was quickly established as 35mm film. This remained in use until the transition to digital cinematography.

A professional video camera (often called a television camera) is a high-end device for creating electronic moving images. Their use includes music videos, movies, corporate and educational videos.

Electronic mail (or e-mail or email) is an Internet service that allows people who have an e-mail address (accounts) to send and receive electronic letters. Those are much like postal letters, except that they are delivered much faster than snail mail when sending over long distances, and are usually free.

Like with regular mail, users may get a lot of unwanted mail. With e-mail, this is called spam. Some programs used for sending and receiving mail can detect spam and filter it out nearly completely.

To send or receive an email in the traditional way, one needs a device (computer, phone etc.) connected to the Internet and an e-mail program (simply called mailer). Several formats exist for email addresses. The most common, called , looks like . E-mail messages are sent mostly by text, and sometimes by HTML style.

Some companies let people send and receive emails for free from a remote website. Gmail, Hotmail and Yahoo! are among the many that do this kind of "web mail".  Webmail does not follow the pattern below exactly because the webpage is a web application and takes care of many details by itself.  The traditional way uses a mailer, as is usual with smartphones.

Microsoft invented its own "communication protocol" (or set of rules) for sending and receiving mail, called "Exchange". Exchange protocol works entirely differently from the traditional method and is not explained here.

This diagram gives an example of what happens when email is sent from one person to another using the traditional method. In this example, Alice is sending email to Bob.

Tennis is a sport played with a felt-covered rubber ball, a tennis racket, and a court. It is quite popular, and many people enjoy watching it.

In the early 11th century, players in France first played with their hands a similar sport, which was called “jeu de paume”. In the 15th century, the players played with rackets. The sporty is now is called “tennis” and became popular in England and France. King Henry III of France was a big fan of the sport, which is now known as real tennis ("real" here meaning "royal"). The sport of "lawn tennis", played on grass courts, was invented in mid 19th-century England and later spread into many other countries.

There are many different kinds of courts, like grass, clay, or hard court. The goal of tennis is to hit the ball over the net into the other player’s court. When the other player cannot return the ball, a point is won. The game is played with two or four people  When it is played with two people, it is called "singles", and when it is played with four people, it is called "doubles". The court has "alleys" on each side, which are "fair" territory during doubles.

A tennis game has a number of sets. Each set has a number of games, and each game has points. The points are counted love (0, after the French l'oeuf), fifteen (15), thirty (30), and forty (40). If both players get to forty, the score is deuce from which two more points are needed to win the game. When one player reaches six games, one set is finished.

During a three-set match, the player who wins two sets is the winner. If the game count reaches 5–5, the set must be won with two more games than the other player, like 7–5 or 8–6. If the game count gets to 6–6, a "tiebreaker" is played. During a tiebreak, players have to get at least seven points and to get two more points than the other player to win the set. During tiebreakers, points are called "one", "two", etc.

Soft tennis is different from regulation tennis. For example, it has very different racket, ball, and rules.

Soft tennis is popular in Japan, where thousands of people play it.

There are many different "shots" and "strokes", ways to hit the ball, in tennis. A stroke is how the body moves to hit the ball. A shot is how the ball is hit. They include the following:

Tennis is now a sport that is played at the Olympics. There are also have big tournaments like the U.S. Open, Australian Open, French Open and Wimbledon. The four events  are known together as Grand Slams.

Winning all four Grand Slams in the same year is called a Calendar Slam.

They are the most important tennis tournaments of each season (year) because of the world-ranking points, tradition, prize-money, and public attention.

JavaScript is a high-level programming language that follows the ECMAScript standard. It was originally designed as a scripting language for websites but became widely adopted as a general-purpose programming language, and is currently the most popular programming language in use. JavaScript is usually found running in a web browser as interactive or automated content, ranging from popup messages and live clocks to large web applications. JavaScript is also commonly used in server-side programming through platforms like Node.js, or "embedded" in non-JavaScript applications where the base programming language lacks the high-level functionality that JavaScript offers.

Despite the similarities in name and syntax, JavaScript is not related to the programming language Java. Though the names of both languages are trademarks of Oracle Corporation, the two languages follow different design principles, and are actively developed by unrelated organizations.

JavaScript is typically inserted into HTML when used on the web, either directly in the file in an HTML tag, or linked to a separate file containing the script.

JavaScript, as a full featured scripting language, can be used to provide functionality to a website. Examples include:

A majority of websites use what is known as a framework. Frameworks may allow programming to be easier as more predefined procedures are defined within it. Such a library is jQuery.

JavaScript can be used to create and run video games in the browser. The modern web has quickly become a viable platform for creating and distributing high-quality games. With modern web technologies and a recent browser, it’s entirely possible to make stunning, top-notch games for the web. JavaScript is blazing fast in modern browsers and getting faster all the time. You can use its power to write the code for your game or look at using technologies like Emscripten or Asm.js to easily port your existing games.

There are also many widely adopted game engines that you can use to develop games with JavaScript and HTML5. Some popular ones include Three.js, Pixi.js, Phaser, Babylon.js, Matter.js, and PlayCanvas. These game engines provide a range of features and tools to help you create sophisticated 2D and 3D graphics without relying on third-party plugins.

JavaScript is also used outside of web browsers. As a scripting language, JavaScript can be used to define the behaviour of applications such as extensions in GNOME Shell.

In addition, there are runtime environments for running JavaScript as a server side programming language. Such an environment is Node.js.

Electron is a framework which allows graphical applications to be made with web technologies, by running on the Chromium browser and Node.js.

A JavaScript program is made of a collection of instructions called "statements". A semicolon marks the end of a statement, and allows multiple statements to be placed on the same line. However, it is typical to write each statement on its own line to keep a program file readable.

Variables can be defined in several ways. In an older version named "ES5", variables are defined using the  keyword. In the newer versions after ES5, variables can be defined using  for constant variables and  for local variables. The value of constant variables cannot be re-declared or reassigned. Variables assigned using  or  are contained within blocks, while variables assigned using  are contained within functions.

The script below prints "Example" on the screen. The lines that start with  are comments, which are used to describe the actions of the program.

If you want to put JavaScript in your HTML, you put it between an opening  and closing  tag. These tags mean that whatever is between them is a script and not text to be put onto the web page. The script below inserts the numbers 1 through 10 at the bottom of a webpage:

The  loop makes whatever code is between the  and the  happen more than one time. In this case, it keeps looping until  is equal to 10, then it stops. This means it equals ten. It's a bit confusing at first, but it works.

A mobile phone (also known as a hand phone, cell phone, or cellular telephone) is a small portable radio telephone.

The mobile phone can be used to communicate over long distances without wires. It works by radio wave connection to a nearby base station (also called a "mobile tower"), which links the phone to the main telecommunications network. When moving, if the mobile phone gets too far away from the cell it is connected to, that cell sends a message to another cell to tell the new cell to take over the call. This is called a "hand off," and the call continues with the new cell. The hand-off is done so smoothly that the user will usually not know that the call was transferred to another cell.

As mobile phones became more popular, they began to cost less money, and more people could afford them. Mobile service providers started offering monthly plans for as low as US$30 or US$40. Cell phones have become so cheap to own that they have mostly replaced pay phones and phone booths except for urban areas with many people.

In the 21st century, a new type of mobile phone, called smartphones, have become popular. Since the 2010s, smartphones have become more widely used  than traditional feature phones.

Mobile phones in the 1950s through 1970s were large and heavy, and most were built into cars. In the late 20th century technology improved so people could carry their phones with ease.

Although Dr. Martin Cooper from Motorola made the first call using a mobile phone in 1973 (using a handset weighing  2 kilograms), it did not use the type of cellular mobile phone network that we use today.

The first cellular mobile phone networks were created in 1979 in Japan. Now almost all urban areas, and many country areas, are covered by mobile phone networks.

A cell phone combines technologies, mainly telephone, radio, and computer. Most also have a digital camera inside.

Cell phones work as two-way radios. They send electromagnetic microwaves from base station to base station. The waves are sent through antennas. This is called wireless communication.

Early cell telephones used analog networks. They became rare late in the 20th century. Modern phones use digital networks.

The first digital networks are also known as second generation, or 2G, technologies. The most used digital network is GSM (Global System for Mobile communication). It is used mainly in Europe and Asia, while CDMA (Code-Division Multiple Access) networks are mainly used in North America. The difference is in communication protocol. Other countries like Japan have different 2G protocols. A few 2G and 3G networks are still used. 4G are more common, and many places have 5G.

The radio waves that the mobile phone networks use are split into different frequencies. The frequency is measured in Hz. Lower frequencies can send the signal farther. Higher frequencies provide better connections and the voice communications are generally clearer. Four main frequency bands are used around the world: 850, 900, 1800 and 1900 MHz. Europe uses 900 and 1800 MHz and North America uses 850 and 1900 MHz.

Today there are mobile phones that work on two, three or four frequency bands. The most advanced phones  work on all frequencies. They are called 'world' phones and can be used everywhere.

There are different kinds of phones. A flip phone has a clamshell design that flips open. A bar phone is shaped like a candy bar, and the keys and screen are on one face. A slate phone is a phone that has almost no buttons, and uses a touchscreen. Most smartphones are slates. A slider phone slides on rails. It can slide out number keys or a mini keyboard, and some do both. A swivel spins on an axle.

When a mobile phone is switched on, its radio receiver finds a nearby mobile phone network base station, and its transmitter sends a request for service. Computers in the base station check if the phone is allowed to use the network. The base station covers an area called a cell. A phone can move between different cells, but will only communicate with one cell at a time. This is why mobile communications are sometimes called cellular communications.

Once connected to a station, the mobile phone can make calls.  Because the network knows that the phone is connected to that particular cell, it can also route calls to the mobile phone.  Sometimes the radio connection to the cell is lost, for example when you go underground.  The phone cannot make or receive calls until the connection is made again.

The network is the company that provides the phone service. In most areas there will be more than one mobile network. Customers choose networks based on how well the different networks work in their area, or by price.

Mobile phones use different technical standards. GSM phones use a separate microchip, called a Subscriber Identity Module or SIM card, to work. The SIM has information like the phone number and payment account and this is needed to make or receive calls. The SIM may be supplied by the same company as the phone, or a different one. In unlocked phones you can change the network by using a SIM from another network, but some companies do not want this to happen and they lock the phone so that you have to use their SIM.

Locked phones only makes phone calls when the phone is activated.  When someone buys a contract, the network gives them a code, that if they enter it into the phone, the phone will then make calls.  It is usually impossible to switch to a different network's code on this type of phone.  The majority of these CDMA phones are used in the United States and nearby countries.

A majority of new mobile phones from the 21st century are smartphones. These phones are basically  small computers. Besides calling, they can be used for email, browsing the internet, showing local maps, playing music and games, and many other functions that computers can perform.

Most smartphones run a common mobile operating system. This allows developers to make mobile apps that work on many different phones without needing to change the code. Examples of smartphones include Apple's iPhone (which uses iOS software) and Samsung's Galaxy series, one of many phones that use the Android platform made by Google.

Cases are designed to attach to, support, or otherwise hold a smartphone.  They are popular accessories.  Some have a keyboard (computer) built in.  Case measures are based on the display inches (e.g. 5 inch display).  There are different types:

are commonly used alone for devices.  They have rubberized padding, and/or are made of plastic and without exposed rigid corners.  Heavy duty cases are designed to protect from drops and scratches.

Wikipedia is a free content online encyclopedia website in 363 languages of the world in which 347 languages are currently active and 16 are closed. It is written and maintained by a  community of volunteers, known as Wikipedians.

Users can freely use, share and change it, without having to pay. It is also one of the biggest wiki organizations. People can choose to give money to the Wikimedia Foundation to fund Wikipedia and its sister projects. It is an open content website. This means anyone can copy or edit it and make changes to it as long as they follow the  for copying or editing.

Wikipedia is owned by an United States organization, the Wikimedia Foundation, which is in San Francisco.

Wikipedia's name is a combination of two words, wiki and encyclopedia.

Wikipedia was started on January 9, 2001, by Jimmy Wales and Larry Sanger as part of an earlier online encyclopedia named Nupedia. On January 15, 2001, Wikipedia became a separate website of its own. It is a wiki that uses the software MediaWiki (like all other Wikimedia Foundation projects).

Anyone who wishes to can change the pages on Wikipedia, or even make new ones. Wikipedia has a standard page layout for all pages in the encyclopedia.

As of September 2011, Wikipedia had about 18 million pages in about 300 languages and more than 3.50 billion words across all Wikipedias. The regular English Wikipedia is the largest Wikipedia edition.

Wikipedia began as a related project for Nupedia. Nupedia was a free English-language online encyclopedia project. Nupedia's articles were written and owned by Bomis, Inc which was a web portal company. The important people of the company were Jimmy Wales, the person in charge of Bomis, and Larry Sanger, the editor-in-chief of Nupedia. Nupedia was first licensed under the Nupedia Open Content License which was changed to the GNU Free Documentation License before Wikipedia was founded and made their first article when Richard Stallman requested them.

Larry Sanger and Jimmy Wales are the ones who started Wikipedia. Wales is credited with defining the goals of the project. Sanger created the  of using a wiki to reach Wales' goal. On January 10, 2001, Larry Sanger proposed on the Nupedia mailing list to create a wiki as a "feeder" project for Nupedia. Wikipedia was launched on January 15, 2001. It was launched as an English-language edition at www.wikipedia.com, and announced by Sanger on the Nupedia mailing list. Wikipedia's policy of "neutral point-of-view" was enforced in its initial months and was similar to Nupedia's earlier "nonbiased" policy. Otherwise, there weren't very many rules initially, and Wikipedia operated independently of Nupedia.

Wikipedia gained early contributors from Nupedia, Slashdot, and from people who looked it up. It grew to about 20,000 articles and 18 languages by the end of 2001. By late 2002 it had 26 languages, 46 by the end of 2003, and 161 by the end of 2004. Nupedia and Wikipedia both existed until Nupedia's servers were stopped in 2003. After this, its text was incorporated into Wikipedia. The English Wikipedia reached 2 million articles on September 9, 2007, making it the largest encyclopedia ever. It is even larger than the Yongle Encyclopedia (1407), which had held the record for exactly 600 years.

The English Wikipedia reached 3 million articles in August 2009. The number of articles and contributors appeared to be growing less quickly around the spring of 2007.

In October 2014, the Wikipedia Monument was unveiled to the public in Poland to honor all the contributors of Wikipedia.

According to the TechCrunch website, on 23 January 2020, Wikipedia reached more than 6 million articles on the English Wikipedia.

On 13 January 2021, the English Wikipedia reached one billion edits, where the billionth edit was made by Steven Pruitt.

MIT Press published an open access book of essays Wikipedia @ 20: Stories of an Unfinished Revolution, edited by Joseph Reagle and Jackie Koerner with contributions from prominent Wikipedians, Wikimedians, researchers, journalists, librarians and other experts reflecting on particular histories and themes.

By November 2021, Wikipedia had fallen to the thirteenth-placed website in the world for global internet engagement.

A robot is a machine that can move and do certain tasks and work.

Robots are controlled by a computer program or electronic circuitry. They may be directly controlled by humans. They may be designed to look like humans, in which case their behaviour may suggest intelligence or thought but they do not have feelings. Most robots do a specific job, and they do not always look like humans. They can come in many forms.

In fiction, however, robots usually look like people, and seem to have a life of their own. There are many books, movies, and video games with robots in them. Isaac Asimov's I, Robot is perhaps the most famous.

People have been interested in building machines that do work for us for a long time. But it takes time and money to build just one machine, so early ideas were not built.

Leonardo da Vinci designed a man-shaped machine to look like a knight in 1464. It would be controlled with ropes and wheels.

Other engineers and dreamers drew mechanical men. In 1920, Karel Čapek wrote a story about them, and he used a word from Czech that is connected with 'work': robot.

The most successful robot designs in the 20th century were not made to look like people. They were designed for use. George Devol made the first of these, the Unimate, in 1954, with one arm and one hand. General Motors bought it in 1960. The next year, it started work in a factory in New Jersey, lifting and stacking pieces of metal that were too hot for people to touch. The engineers could program it, and reprogram it if they had to.

Robots have many uses. Many factories use robots to do hard work quickly and without many mistakes. They do not look like people, because they are made to do things. These are 'industrial' robots. Some robots find and get rid of bombs, as in demining. If someone makes a mistake, the robot is damaged or destroyed, which is better than a person being killed. There are also robots that help at home, to vacuum or run a lawn mower, for example. Such robots must learn about the area of work.

A few robots do surgery in places inside the body where a human hand is too big.

Planet rovers are robots for exploring distant planets. Because it takes a long time to send a radio signal from Earth to another planet, the robots do much of their work alone, without commands from Earth.

People still think of robots as having a shape like a person—two legs, two arms, and a head. ASIMO is one robot that is helping scientists learn how to design and program robots. It can walk, which is not easy to program.

Roughly half of all the robots in the world are in Asia, 32% in Europe, and 16% in North America, 1% in Australasia and 1% in Africa. 30% of all the robots in the world are in Japan. Japan has the most robots of any country in the world, and is the leader in the world robotics industry. Japan is actually said to be the robotic capital of the world.

In Japan and South Korea, ideas of future robots have been mainly positive. The positive reception of robots there may be partly because of the famous cartoon robot, 'Astroboy'. China expressed views on robotics that are similar to those of Japan and South Korea, but China is behind both America and Europe in robotic development. The East Asian view is that robots should be roughly equal to humans. They feel robots could care for old people, teach children, or serve as assistants. The popular opinion of East Asia is that it would be good for robots to become more popular and more advanced. This view is opposite to the popular Western view.

"This is the opening of an era in which human beings and robots can co-exist," says Japanese firm Mitsubishi about one of the many human-like robots in Japan. The South Korean Ministry of Information and Communication has  predicted that every South Korean household will have a robot by between 2015 and 2020.

Western societies are more likely to be against, or even fear the development of robots. Science fiction movies and other stories often show them as dangerous rebels against humanity.

The West regards robots as a 'threat' to the future of humans, which is much due to religious influence of the Abrahamic religions, in which creating machines that can think for themselves would almost be playing God. Obviously, these boundaries are not clear, but there is a significant difference between the two ideologies.

The writer Isaac Asimov told many stories about robots who had the three laws of robotics to keep humans safe from them.

These were not used in real life when he invented them. However, in today's world robots are more complicated, and one day real laws may be needed, much like Isaac Asimov's original three laws.

South Korea was the first country in the world to have laws about robots.

Python is an open-source programming language. It was made as a language that is both easy to work on and understand. It was made by a Dutch programmer named Guido van Rossum in 1991, who named it after the television program Monty Python's Flying Circus.

Python is an interpreted language. This means it does not need to be compiled before running. A program called an interpreter runs Python code on almost any computer. This makes Python slower than compiled languages like C, because it is not changed into machine code before running. But this also allows the programmer to change the code and quickly see what happens.

Python is a general-purpose programming language. It can be used for many purposes. Python is often used for making websites, automating common tasks, and making charts and graphs. Since it's simple to learn, people who are not computer experts, like bookkeepers and researchers, often learn Python.

Python's standard library is made up of many functions that come with Python when it is installed. On the Internet, there are many other libraries which do tasks in varied areas like Machine Learning (ML), Deep Learning, etc.

When speed is important, a Python programmer can write some of the program in a different language, like C, or use PyPy, a different kind of Python that uses a just-in-time compiler.

Keeping Python fun to use is an important goal of Python’s developers. It reflects in the language's name, a tribute to the British comedy group Monty Python. Tutorials often take a playful approach, such as referring to spam and eggs instead of the standard foo and bar.

Python uses whitespace to separate code: spaces or tabs are used to organize code into groups. This is different from C.  In C, there is a semicolon at the end of each line and curly braces ({}) are used to group code.

In Python, the statement  means that the variable  is set to the integer 42. The type of  is not needed: Python dynamically adapts its type to the given value. For example, replace 42 with the string 'spam'. The statement  would work, but it wouldn't in another language like C or C++.

Python's expressions include some operators that are similar to other programming languages and others that are not:

The following Python program shows "Hello World!" on the screen:

In Python variables do not have types that can not be changed. This code will display the number 42 then the string , using the same variable.

In another language like C, a programmer would have to declare whether  is a number or a string before modify it. An error will occur if one changes a number to a string.

The C language requires the type of the function. In Python, the function does not need a type after .

When called with the parameter  as "World!", this function returns the string .

A laptop is a computer which is easy to carry around. A modern laptop is self-contained, with a screen, keyboard, and pointing device (like a touchpad or pointing stick), plus usually, speakers, a microphone and a camera (webcam). This is all powered by a built-in rechargeable battery, however, the user can also plug the laptop in to use it while recharging the battery. Also, most other external devices such as a monitor and keyboard can be attached if required. The laptop screen folds down over the keyboard, along a hinge, for carrying.

Like computers themselves, portable microcomputers were not invented at any one time by one person. They developed gradually.

The Portal, from the French company R2E Micral CCMC, appeared in September 1980 at the SICOB show in Paris. Its keyboard had 58 alphanumeric keys and 11 numeric keys (separate blocks), a 32-character LED screen, a floppy disk drive, a printer and a 220V power supply. It weighed 12 kg (26 pounds) and its dimensions were 45 cm × 45 cm × 15 cm (18 in x 18 in x 6 in). It had no hinge and its operating system was Prolog.

Some historians, however, count as the first "true" portable to be the Osborne 1. It was created in 1981 by Adam Osborne, who was also a former book publisher. He was the founder of Osborne Computer. His portable computer weighed 11 kg (24 pounds) and had a five-inch (13 cm) screen, a serial port and two floppy disk drives. Several programs were included with the Osborne 1. Customers could also buy a 1-hour battery pack.

The first "laptop-sized notebook computer" was the Epson HX-20, released in July 1982. It had a four-line, liquid crystal display (LCD) screen, a rechargeable battery, and a receipt-size printer, in a 1.6 kg (3.5 lb) body, the size of an A4 notebook. It was described as a "laptop" and "notebook" computer in its patent.

The first computer to use the  "clamshell" design, which is used in almost all modern laptop designs, was the GRiD Systems Corporation's GriD Compass, released in April 1982. This computer was one fifth the weight of any other computer used at that time, however, it required mains power, because it had no battery. Despite this, they were very popular with the Military of the United States and NASA, who used the laptop in its Space Shuttle program, in the 1980s.

Also in 1982, two computer designers from Microsoft, Kazuhiko Nishi and Bill Gates, worked on a new portable computer. The prototype was presented to Radio Shack, who agreed to start making it. It was launched in 1983, as the TRS-80 Model 100, which had an eight-line LCD screen. In 1986, the improved version, called TRS Model 200, was released, which had a much larger, fold-down LCD screen, and looked pretty much like the laptops that we know today.

The next few years saw the appearance of a laptop PC from Compaq Computers and the first notebook-style laptop from NEC called NEC UltraLite. The year 1989 was quite successful for laptop producers. First, Apple Computer developed the Macintosh Portable, the evolution of which turned it into the PowerBook. Then, a company named Zenith Data Systems introduced the Zenith MinisPort, a portable computer weighing 6 pounds (2.72 kg). Finally, there was Compaq Computers, who released the Compaq LTE.

The development of laptops is continuing, with various upgrades and additional functions added, including screens with new screen technologies like in-plane switching panels and touch screens, all while the devices continue to get smaller and lighter, and more powerful. Around 2007, netbook computers became popular. Netbooks are small, cheap laptops with screens of about 10 inches (25 cm) or less, but replaced the usual Hard disk at the time with a solid-state drive (SSD). Now, SSDs are more common in laptops, and netbooks are no longer made. Despite these advances, after 2010, people bought fewer laptops because of the popularity of tablet computers, which are even more portable. Today, laptops continue to be used for areas like education, video editing and gaming.

In 2005, an organization called One Laptop Per Child started trying to improve education for students in less rich countries using their own laptop, the XO-1. However, their plan failed, and OLPC now hands out Chromebooks instead.

A gaming laptop is a laptop that is built to play video games. Gaming laptops are more powerful than regular laptops, and are made with stronger parts, a separate graphic card (GPU), large and bright screens with fast frame rates, colorful keyboards that light up, and more fans and vents. However, they are more expensive than regular laptops. The most common program people use to play games on these laptops is Steam.

YouTube is a free video sharing website that lets people upload, view, and share contents. Contents can be rated with a like or dislike, most contents can be commented on if logged in to an account, and the number of times a video has been watched (known as "views") is put on the site. Users who have accounts can also subscribe to channels. At the moment, Google (a search engine company) owns and operates YouTube. Many different types of videos can be put onto the website, such as educational content, animations, and funny stuff. YouTube was founded on February 14, 2005 by six or seven former workers of PayPal.

All logged-in users of YouTube can upload 15-minute long videos. Users who have used the site for enough time and follow the rules can upload videos that are up to 12 hours long. A user needs to verify the account to do this, however. Everyone could upload long videos when YouTube started, but in March 2006 a ten-minute video limit was put in. The limit was changed to 15 minutes in July 2010. Most video formats can be uploaded to YouTube, and videos can also be uploaded from mobile phones.

When YouTube first started, viewers needed the Adobe Flash Player plug-in to play videos. By January 2010, web browsers were feature-rich enough that this was no longer necessary, and YouTube turned to a web browser-native model to watch videos.

YouTube is blocked in many schools because it allows children to search for videos online that would otherwise distract them from their lessons, much like how other social networking sites and game sites are blocked for the same purpose. But at a higher level than schools (and in workplaces), even some governments have blocked YouTube access to their country's public, but their reasons can vary.

On December 3, 2006, the government of Iran blocked YouTube and several other sites in an attempt to stop films and music from other countries from being seen.

Turkey blocked YouTube on March 6 2007 for letting videos that were insulting or discriminating to Turks and Atatürk, who is the founder of modern Turkey, to be shown, because of a "virtual war" between Greeks, Armenians, Kurds and Turks on YouTube, with people from each side posting videos to hurt the other. The video that caused banning alleged Turks and Atatürk to be 'gay'. The video was first mentioned on Turkish CNN and the Istanbul public prosecutor sued YouTube for being mean to Turkishness. The court suspended access to YouTube while waiting for the removal of the video. The ban was strongly criticized. YouTube lawyers sent documentary of removal to court and users could access the website again on March 9 2007.

During the week of March 8, YouTube was blocked in Thailand. Many bloggers (people who have a "diary" online) believed the reason YouTube was blocked was because of a video of the former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra's speech on CNN. However, the government did not confirm or give reasons for the ban. YouTube was accessible from March 10.

On the night of April 3, YouTube was again blocked in Thailand. The government said it was because of a video on the site that it said was "insulting" to King Bhumibol Adulyadej. The Ministry of Information and Communication Technology claimed that it would unblock YouTube in a few days, after websites containing references to this video are blocked instead of the entire website.  Communications Minister Sitthichai Pookaiyaudom said, "When they decide to withdraw the clip, we will withdraw the ban." Soon after this incident the internet technology blog Mashable was banned from Thailand over the reporting of the YouTube clips in question.

YouTube is being sued by Brazilian model and MTV VJ Daniela Cicarelli (better known as Ronaldo's ex-fiancée) on the grounds that the site is making available a video footage made by a paparazzi, in which she and her boyfriend are having sex on a Spanish beach. The lawsuit says that YouTube has to be blocked in Brazil until all copies of the video are removed. On Saturday, January 6, 2007, a legal injunction ordered that filters be put in place to prevent users in Brazil from going to the website.

The effectiveness of the measure has been questioned, since the video is not available only on YouTube, but rather has become an Internet phenomenon.  On Tuesday, January 9, 2007, the same court overturned their earlier decision, ordering the filters to be taken down, even though the footage was still forbidden, but without technical support for its blockage.

On May 25, 2007 the state-owned company Maroc Telecom blocked all access to YouTube. There were no reasons given why YouTube was blocked. But the guesses are that it might have something to do with some pro-separatist group Polisario clips (Polisario is the Western Sahara independence movement) or because of some videos that criticized King Mohammed VI. This block did not concern the other two private internet-providers, Wana and Meditel. YouTube became accessible again on May 30th, 2007 after Maroc Telecom unofficially announced that the denied access to the website was only a "technical glitch".

In Australia, some schools, including all secondary schools in Victoria, have YouTube blocked from student access, after fights have been posted on YouTube.

Currently in China the government has blocked YouTube. For several years it has been unblocked but since the past five years it has been blocked.

According the site's terms of service, users may upload videos only if they have the permission of the copyright holder and of the people in the video. Pornography, defamation, harassment, commercials and videos that encourage criminal conduct may not be uploaded. The uploader gives YouTube permission to give out and change the uploaded video for any purpose, and they do not have permission anymore when the uploader deletes the video from the site. Users may view videos on the site but are not allowed to save them on their computers.

On June 19, 2007, Google CEO Eric Schmidt was in Paris to launch the new localization system. The interface of the website is available with localized versions in 90 countries, and a worldwide version.

The interface of the YouTube website is available in 76 language versions including, Albanian, Amharic, Armenian, Bengali, Burmese, Khmer, Kyrgyz, Laotian, Mongolian, Persian and Uzbek, which do have local channel versions.

Credit card is a type of card that allows purchase of items without cash. Credit cards tend to be small plastic cards with a unique number attached to a bank account. Most are magnetic stripe cards. Many have an EMV chip for use by card readers. Paying with a credit card means borrowing the money in an unsecured loan which must be repaid in a specified time.

If the bill is left unpaid for some time, the customer will have to pay interest for the amount that is left unpaid.Users failing to repay in time may have to pay much more. Payment using a credit card is one of the most common methods of electronic payment. A debit card similarly allows paying without cash, but it pays with money in the user's bank account.

Each card has a unique number. Using this number, plus other details on the card, such as the validity date, or a code, the client can buy goods or services. The issuer of the card automatically transfers the money to the seller. The person using the card gets a credit. The customer has a certain amount of time to pay the credit card bill.

Additional features of credit cards may include rewards points, cashback, travel rewards, and purchase protection. Many credit cards also offer fraud protection and the ability to dispute charges. Modern credit cards can be used for contactless payments using NFC technology. Some cards allow users to manage their spending and make payments via mobile apps.

Credit cards typically charge interest on unpaid balances. Interest is calculated based on the annual percentage rate (APR), which varies by issuer and user credit history. Late payments, exceeding the credit limit, or cash advances may result in additional fees. Some credit cards offer a grace period during which no interest is charged if the balance is paid in full each month.

Each credit card has a credit limit, which is the maximum amount that can be borrowed at one time. The limit is determined by factors such as income, credit history, and spending patterns. Exceeding the credit limit can result in fees and may negatively affect the user's credit score.

Credit cards are widely accepted worldwide, both in physical stores and online. They provide convenience and security for transactions. Responsible use of a credit card can help build a positive credit score, which is important for obtaining loans, mortgages, and other forms of credit.

Credit card holders can estimate the interest they will pay on unpaid balances and determine minimum monthly payments using online calculators. These tools generally require information such as the outstanding balance, annual percentage rate (APR), and desired monthly payment. By entering these values, users can see how long it will take to pay off their balance and how much interest will accrue over time. Such calculators can help in planning payments and avoiding excessive interest charges.

An airplane, also known as an aeroplane or just plane, is a fixed-wing aircraft. It moves by thrust from a jet engine, propeller, or rocket engine.  Airplanes come in many shapes and sizes.  The use of aircraft is called aviation.  Airplanes are used for many things including recreation, transportation of goods and people, military, and research.

They can move much faster than road (such as cars, buses, motorcycles, off-road vehicles, light trucks, medium trucks and heavy trucks), rail (such as trains or trams) or sea transport (such as boats, ships, and submarines), and so they are often the choice for long distances. Many long distance airplanes are bigger than others because they need to carry more fuel.

Commercial aviation transports more than four billion passengers annually on airliners. Cargo aircraft carry more than 200 billion ton kilometres of cargo every year, which is less than 1% of the world's cargo movement.  Most airplanes are flown by a pilot on board the aircraft, but some are airplanes made to be remotely or computer-controlled such as drones.

Airplanes fly between many cities all over the world, carrying people and cargo. Big cities usually have an international airport, where large airplanes can land and take off safely. Some large cities like New York City and London have more than one airport. Two major makers of airplanes are Airbus and Boeing.

Statistics show that riding in a plane is safer than driving in a car.

People make jokes about airline food, because they say it tastes bad. While travelling on an airliner at a high altitude, it can cause dryness. Because of the low pressure, a person's taste buds are around 30% less sensitive to sweet and salty foods.

The wings of a fixed-wing aircraft are static planes extending either side of the aircraft. When the aircraft travels forwards, air flows over the wings, which are shaped to create lift. This shape is called an airfoil and is shaped like a bird's wing.

Fixed-wing aircraft have long been used as airliners for moving passengers from place to place.  Cargo aircraft carry cargo across seas and long distances, and passenger aircraft also carry some cargo.

The first aircraft for war bombing was used in Libya in 1911 by Italy against the Ottoman Empire (ItaloTurkish War).  Some fixed-wing aircraft are used by air forces to defend countries.  These may be fighter aircraft, using guns or missiles for combat with other aircraft.  They may be bombers, dropping bombs on ground targets.

Fixed-wing aircraft allow people to travel longer distances, and faster than ships or trains. Aircraft can fly from New York to London in about 7 hours. It would take one week or more on a ship. Militaries use airplanes to carry their soldiers quickly from place to place.

Airplanes are also used by the military to see many things on the ground easily. This is called surveillance or reconnaissance.  Often, fixed-wing aircraft will take photographs as well, which can be used for military planning later. This role is now being taken over by drones, which are automatic planes.

Fossil fuel-powered aircraft release soot and other pollutants into the atmosphere. They burn fossil fuel which releases CO2 emissions, and has warming non-CO2 effects due to nitrogen oxides (NOx), vapor trails and cloud formation.

A computer keyboard is an input device that allows a person to enter letters, numbers, and other symbols (together, called characters) into a computer. It is one of the most used input devices for computers. Using a keyboard is often called typing.

A keyboard contains many mechanical switches or push-buttons called "keys". When one of these is pushed, an electrical circuit is closed, and the keyboard sends a signal to the computer that tells it what letter, number, or symbol it would like to be shown on the screen. The computer then shows the character on the screen, usually at the place where the flashing text cursor is.

Besides entering characters, computer keyboards also have special keys that change the symbol (such as shift or caps lock or give the computer special commands (such as the arrow keys, CTRL and ALT). Different computer operating system use different special keys or use them differently. Special commands can also be activated through combinations of keys, called keyboard shortcuts. Some of the most common shortcuts on Windows programs are: Ctrl + C, to copy some text or a picture; Ctrl + V, to paste what was copied; and Ctrl + F, to find a certain word on a document or web page.

A keyboard can be joined to a computer using a wire, but can also be wireless (like those that use Bluetooth). Most wired 21st-century keyboards connect to a USB socket on the computer, but older ones use a round, purple DIN connector.

There are different types of keyboards. They can be based on the way the keys work; for example, laptops have keys that do not move a lot, because the keyboard has to be very thin in order to fit inside the laptop. On the other hand, video game players often like keyboards with keys that move a lot, such as mechanical keyboards, so that they feel the key working. Gaming keyboards also need fast reaction times. In between these two types, an ergonomic keyboard is made to be easier for people to type for long periods of time, without hurting their hands or arms.

There are also different ways the keys on a keyboard are arranged, usually to deal with different regions and languages of the world.  Most computer keyboards have the keys in six rows, but some laptops use only five or even four rows to save space. The most popular layout is called QWERTY, which is based on the first six letters on them. The QWERTY design was made so that the most common letters would not make the moving parts of a mechanical typewriter "jam", or stop working. Now, even though most people do not use typewriters anymore, the design stayed because people were used to it. Other layouts have been developed, for example the Dvorak keyboard, which puts the most common letters in the places that are easiest to reach.

Keystroke logging is making a record of each key that is pressed.  Keystroke logging can be used to measure employee activity.  Hackers can also use keystroke logging to get private information, such as passwords.  This can be done by putting a piece of hardware in the keyboard or on the cable, or by installing malware in the computer.  A wireless keyboard makes it especially easy for the hacker to detect the wireless signals.

The use of any keyboard may cause repetitive strain injury to the hands, wrists, arms, neck or back.  The risks of injuries can be reduced by taking frequent, short breaks to get up and walk around, a couple of times every hour. Users should also vary tasks throughout the day, to avoid overuse of the hands and wrists. When using a keyboard, a person should keep the shoulders relaxed with the elbows at the side, with the keyboard and mouse positioned so that they are comfortable to use. The chair height and keyboard should be adjusted so that the wrists are straight, and not resting on sharp edges of tables or the computers themselves. Some technology ranging from special keyboards to pen-tablet interfaces or speech recognition software can reduce the risk of injury. Pause software reminds the user to pause frequently.

Researchers are studying if keyboards can spread diseases.  Some keyboards were found to contain five times more germs than a toilet seat.

A social network is a website or service where people talk to or connect with other people. A Social Network Service can connect people with the same interests (like football, schools, dogs) and friends.

Social Networking was first proposed in the early development of the World Wide Web.

The most popular websites like Facebook and Twitter are helping to speed up the process of communication. Phone and mail services are slowly becoming less popular thanks to a quick and easy way of sharing messages through such networks.

A social network is used for people to get to know each other more and create new friends/connections.

Many social networks are available on phones and smartphones.

A 2011 survey found that 47% of American adults use a social networking service. Hispanics and African Americans are more likely to use social media.

Nigerians are more likely to spend more time on social media.

African Americans often use social media more than any other ethnicity or racial group.

Facebook (sometimes shortened to FB) is a social networking service and website started on February 4, 2004. It was built by Mark Zuckerberg. It is owned by Meta, Inc. , Facebook has over one billion active users. Users may make a personal profile, add other users as friends, and send messages. Facebook users must register before using the site. The name of the service comes from the name for the book given to students at the start of the school year by some universities in the United States. These books help students get to know each other better. Facebook allows any users who are at least 13 years old to become users of the website.

Facebook was started by Mark Zuckerberg with his college roommates and fellow computer science students Eduardo Saverin, Dustin Moskovitz and Chris Hughes. The website's membership was only for Harvard students at first. Later it included other colleges in the Boston area, the Ivy League, and Stanford University. It eventually opened for students at other universities. After that, it opened to high school students, and, finally, to anyone aged 13 and over. Based on ConsumersReports.org in May 2011, there are 7.5 million children under 13 with accounts. This breaks the website's rules.

A January 2009 Compete.com study ranked Facebook as the most used social networking service by worldwide monthly active users. Entertainment Weekly put the site on its end-of-the-decade "best-of" list. It said, "How on earth did we stalk our exes, remember our co-workers birthdays, bug our friends, and play a rousing game of Scrabulous before Facebook?" Quantcast estimates Facebook had 138.9 million monthly different U.S. visitors in May 2011. According to Social Media Today, in April 2010 about 41.6% of the U.S. population had a Facebook account. Facebook's growth started to slow down in some areas. The site lost 7 million active users in the United States and Canada in May 2011 relative to previous statistics.

Facebook has been involved in many controversies over . Some of these controversies have been about people being able to see personal information that other people post, and others are about companies and advertisers being able to see users' personal information. Facebook has sent ads to people based on the person's gender, age, income, national origin and sexual orientation.

Research published in the journal PLOS ONE has shown that Facebook may be responsible for spreading unhappiness through society as well as keeping people connected. Scientists found that the more time people spent on Facebook over a two-week period, the worse they subsequently felt. "On the surface, Facebook provides an invaluable resource for fulfilling the basic human need for social connection. Rather than enhancing well-being, however, these findings suggest that Facebook may undermine it."

Facebook launched Facebook Gaming officially on June 1, 2018, with a pool of gaming streamers including Darkness429, Stonemountain64, ThePoolshark, and Alodia Gosiengfiao.

Facebook Gaming or fb.gg is Facebook's take on gaming livestreams where gamers and fans interact. Facebook launched it as a tab on the Facebook app and a standalone app. It also has an In-stream Rewards feature where viewers are gifted in-game rewards while watching streams with Mobile Legends: Bang Bang being a part of pioneering the feature as mentioned by Jack Li, a Facebook Gaming representative, on Moonton Epicon held last July 18, 2019.

In 2019, Jeremy "DisguisedToast" Wang was signed to Facebook Gaming in a surprise move from Twitch. Soon after, Facebook signed Super Smash Bros. star streamer Gonzalo "ZerO" Barrios.

On February 18, 2020, Ronda Rousey performed her first live stream on Facebook Gaming, announcing that she will stream once per week. The details of her contract were not disclosed.

On April 20, 2020, Facebook launched its gaming app in Google Play Store, named as Facebook Gaming. This app was actually planned to release in June 2020, but Facebook advanced the release upon witnessing the community demand.

An electric vehicle is a vehicle that uses electricity to move. Its wheels are driven by electric motors.

Electric vehicles were one of the first kinds that did not use horse or human power. Electric trains and cars were built in the 1830s, and in the early 1900s there were more electric cars than gasoline-powered cars. But cars powered by gasoline or diesel fuel become the most common kind of car for most of the last 100 years.

Electric vehicles have long been used in some special cases, such as forklifts used inside a building, golf carts, trolley bus or certain vehicles used around airplanes at an airport. Early in the 21st century people are using more electric and hybrid vehicles again as a way to reduce pollution and use less gasoline.

It is unclear who the first inventor was, but Ányos Jedlik of Hungary built a small model of a working electric car in 1828.  In the 1830's Robert Anderson of Scotland, Professor Stratingh of Holland and Thomas Davenport, a blacksmith from Vermont all built electric vehicles. Davenport is said to be the inventor of the DC electric motor.  In 1865, Gaston Plante of France made a better battery. In 1886, the inventor Frank Sprague of Connecticut made important changes to the electric motor.

Great Britain and France were early leaders in making better electric cars. Interest in the electric car in the United States grew after 1891 when A. L. Ryker built a three-wheeled electric car, and William Morrison built a six-passenger wagon.

The years 1899 and 1900 were the best years for electric cars in America, as they outsold all other types of cars (steam, gasoline and diesel). One example was the 1902 Phaeton built by the Woods Motor Vehicle Company of Chicago, which had a range of 18 miles, a top speed of 14 mph and cost $2,000. (At that time, there were few good roads between towns, so most driving was for short distances). Electric cars could go as far as steam-powered cars and did not take 30 to 40 minutes to get started. Gasoline engines were smelly and noisy.

But then the internal combustion engine (that used gasoline and diesel) were greatly improved, and cars that used those engines could go much farther and faster than other cars.

Some people would make electric cars in their garages by taking out the engine and putting in an electric motor and batteries, but for a long time, no big car company made an electric car. Only in the late 1990's did big car companies start making electric cars again. The most famous was GM`s EV-1 Now interest in alternative fuel vehicles is growing.

These types of cars do not have any kind of internal combustion engine, but are driven entirely using electric motors, which gets its power in different ways other than an engine.

A hybrid is a combination of two things. In this case, it is an electric motor, and another type of power, such as an engine. Because of this, hybrid vehicles are not true electric vehicles.

There are many other types of electric vehicles. A trolley bus (also called a trackless trolley) uses overhead electric lines to power it. Many trains use a railway electrification system to supply power. A few high-speed rail lines use powered magnets in the track to move the train, in a system called 'mag-lev' (magnetic levitation).  There are electric bicycles and motorcycles and some tricycles (trikes) like the Corbin Motors Sparrow, which was also seen in the Austin Powers movie Goldmember.

Most freight trains are diesel-electric. The locomotive has a diesel engine which provides electricity, and an electric motor which makes the wheels turn. In recent years, however, there are buses and trains that store their power in a battery or use some other source like fuel cells. These kinds of vehicles do not need wires.

These vehicles use an electric motor, so they are very quiet, no smell and no pollution from exhaust gases. That is why UK is considering stopping sale of diesel, petrol and hybrid vehicles by 2035. They can even be used indoors, in tunnels and mines. Petroleum for vehicles is a limited resource - it will not last forever and is becoming more expensive. If the electricity for a battery-electric vehicle comes from a renewable energy source, like a windmill, solar cells, geothermal or hydroelectric, then it will not produce as many global warming gases.

Electric vehicles save on operating costs.  An electric vehicle can be fully charged for max $20 where full tank of fuel will cost $50-60.  Maintenance is also cheaper (E.g. No Oil Change, No Check Engine Light).

Electric bicycles also have benefits and advantages.  If you have a short daily commute to work or store, it is suggested to get an electric bicycle instead of a car. They are much cheaper to buy and run.  They often get discounts and coupons.  Many retailers offer discounts to attract customers and to stand out from the rival retailors.  This competition is to the advantage of customers.

Batteries have limitations such as a relatively low energy storage capacity and heavy weight.  Advancements in technology are continually being made to improve these factors.  While charging times can be longer than refueling with gasoline, charging infrastructure is rapidly expanding, making it more convenient for drivers to recharge their vehicles.  While batteries are currently expensive, they are expected to become cheaper as demand for electric vehicles increases.  Additionally, electricity can be produced from renewable sources such as wind and solar, which reduces greenhouse gas emissions and helps combat climate change.

A train (or rail train) is a set of railway cars (also called vehicles)  that are tied together with or without a locomotive. Trains are used to carry people, and also things like raw material, finished goods, cargo, and waste. The vehicles that carry freight are called cars (in the United States) or wagons (in the United Kingdom). The ones that carry passengers are often called coaches or carriages. A place where a train stops to let people get on and off is called a train station or railway station.

Trains have their roots in wagonways, which used railway tracks and were powered by horses or pulled by cables. Following the invention of the steam locomotive in the United Kingdom in 1804, trains rapidly spread around the world, allowing freight and passengers to move over land faster and cheaper than ever possible before. Rapid transit and trams were first built in the late 19th century to transport large numbers of people in and around cities. Beginning in the 1920s, and accelerating following World War II, diesel and electric locomotives replaced steam as the means of motive power. Following the development of cars, trucks, and extensive networks of highways which offered greater mobility, as well as faster airplanes, trains declined in importance and market share, and many rail lines were abandoned. The spread of buses led to the closure of many rapid transit and tram systems during this time as well.

Before steam trains there were wagonways where horses and people pulled cars over tracks made of stone and wood.

A steam train made its first journey on 21 February 1804 at the Penydarren Iron Works in Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, UK.  The  locomotive Coalbrookdale was built by Richard Trevithick helped by the owner of the ironworks Samual Homfray.

The Stockton and Darlington Railway in 1825 showed how a train could be run. The Liverpool and Manchester Railway in 1830 was the first to run passenger trains and freight trains in the way that trains run on most railways today. The use of trains were then to go from country to country over the world, and it was more easy for people and things to get from one place to another place.

Soon after 1830, nearly all trains were pulled by steam locomotives. The steam engine was the main way to run trains until the 1960s, when many countries stopped using them. For example: the United States of America had 38,853 steam engines in 1945; but by 1961, it had only 110.

As the internal combustion engines that used petroleum oil or diesel oil got better, people tried to use those, but they were not very successful at first. The year 1913 in Sweden was when the first successful run in the world, and it was able to keep going until 1939.  The 1920s saw the diesel trains getting better, and by the 1930s, the diesel trains were going very fast, including a German train going from Berlin to Hamburg at over , and a train going from Denver to Chicago,  without stopping at an end-to-end speed of .

While the first small railway run by electricity was in 1835, it was about after the 1890s when more electric railways and trains started across the world.

After World War 1, there were improvements in road cars and buses, and people began to use them more than trains.  The same was true for how things were moved.  From the 1950s the aeroplane became a better way for people to go to some places that were further away.  Trains and railways had to get better to stop losing people and things to cars and airplanes, but many have had to close.

Freight trains have freight cars (US) or goods' wagons (UK) to carry goods from one place to another than a light-duty truck, medium-duty truck, heavy-duty truck, or cargo plane. Some are boxcars (closed and roofed cars for cargo); others are special so they can carry special cargo. There are hopper cars for sand, coal, ore and other granulous (sand-like) materials, flatbed cars for vehicles and machinery, tank cars for liquids, container cars for containers and even bottle cars for molten iron. Almost anything which is not too large to fit under tunnels and bridges can be transported on special freight cars.

Passenger trains have passenger cars (US) or coaches (UK), made so people can ride them from one train station to another than a car, bus, or passenger jet. Passenger trains are usually a very comfortable way of traveling.  Many trains have electrical outlets and Wi-Fi hotspots for computers and mobile devices.

Most passenger cars are single-deckers: there are also double-decker passenger cars, such as the Finnish Inter-City cars.

The world's longest passenger train was  long and had 100 cars.  It was a special train that ran in October 2022 in Switzerland.

To get to a city and to move around it trains may need to carry many people and they can get very busy. There are many names for this type of train including rapid transit.  The railway for these trains may go underground or be above the road.  Trains which go along city roads are called Trams. A new word for trams that also use tracks used by other trains outside the city is tram-trains.

There are few long-distance passenger trains in the United States, but more in Europe and Asia.

They may have a special car where you can eat. Sometimes there are also sleeping cars (passenger cars with beds) for long overnight voyages.

High-speed rail uses special, fast passenger trains on special tracks. A few of the fast ones are maglev trains, using magnets to hover slightly off the tracks to have less friction.

Most trains are pulled by locomotives. Before 1900, almost all were steam locomotives. As this kind of steam engine uses very much fuel for the work it does, steam began to give way to diesel locomotives and electric locomotives during the 1930s. Today, most locomotives are diesel-electric locomotives.

Sometimes a train has no separate locomotive, but the prime mover (diesel engine or electric motor) is located on the first car of the train itself, and the car has engineer's cabin. The car is called a "motor unit". Some trains have motors in many or all of the cars. This is called a diesel multiple unit or electric multiple unit. Usually, both ends of the train have engineer's cabins. These trains are especially popular in commuter traffic in large towns and cities. Electric trains get their power from a third rail or from overhead wires.

The fastest train in the world is a special type of train using maglev propulsion, and it can reach .

A bus is a large wheeled vehicle meant to carry many passengers along with the bus driver. It is larger than a car or van, but smaller than the average rail transport. They are most often used for public transport, but they are also in use for charters, and some are privately owned. Although the average bus carries between 30 and 100 passengers, some buses can carry up to 300 passengers. The most common type is the single-deck rigid bus, with double-decker and articulated buses carrying more passengers, and midibuses and minibuses carrying less passengers. Coaches are used for long-distance services. Many types of buses, such as public transport buses, charge a fare. Other types, such as school buses or shuttle buses within a college or university campus, are free. In many jurisdictions, bus drivers require a special large vehicle licence above and beyond a regular driving license. There are many types of bus around the world, Buses primarily replaced horse-drawn omnibuses and stagecoaches in cities during the early to mid-20th century. They offered a more flexible, lower-cost alternative to rail, allowing for flexible routing and avoiding expensive track maintenance, marking a transition from fixed-track urban transit to rubber-tired transport.

Buses are an important part of public transport in places all over the world. Many people who do not have cars, especially in developing countries, use buses to get around. Buses make it easy for them to get to where they want to go. Buses have many uses, including transport inside towns or cities, transport between towns and cities, transport to schools and tourism. Some privately owned buses are used in political campaigns or to transport musicians.

The name "bus" is shorthand for Latin language omnibus, "for everyone". The first omnibuses were horse-drawn coaches, and the name "omnibus" dates to 1823 in France, as a nickname for a service started by mill and spa owner Stanislas Baudry. Steam buses were used for a short time in the 1830s. The first motor-powered buses were made in 1895 in Germany, invented by Karl Benz.

There are many types of bus. For example: a single decker bus or a double decker bus.

A place where people wait for a local bus is called a bus stop. A building where people wait for a long-distance bus or where many buses meet is called a bus station.

A car, or an automobile, is a motor vehicle with wheels. Most definitions of cars state that they run primarily on roads, seat 1-8 people, have four wheels, and mainly transport people rather than cargo but are relatively smaller than a truck/lorry (to carry goods) or a bus (to carry people). There are around 1.644 billion cars in use worldwide as of January 2025.

The word "automobile" comes from the Greek prefix "αυτό" (self) and the Latin word "mobili" (moving). This name means "self-moving", as cars run on their own power and do not need horses or other power from outside to move.

Automobiles are made in different shapes and sizes, for people with different needs. Here are some common types of automobiles.

To make an automobile move, it must have energy to turn the wheels. This energy might be chemical energy in gasoline or electrical energy in a battery. How quickly the engine or motor can send the energy to the wheels, and how much energy is sent, is called the power of the motor. The power of an automobile is usually measured in kilowatts or horsepower. Horsepower is how fast the engine can produce power, and torque is the power the engine can produce.

As of 2019, most automobiles burn a fuel to make an internal combustion engine (sometimes called a "motor") run. The power from the engine then goes to the wheels through a transmission, which has a set of gears that can make the automobile go faster or slower. The most common fuel is petrol, which is called "gasoline" or "gas" in American English.

Gasoline is a fossil fuel because it comes from ferns and other plants which lived millions of years ago. Over the millions of years, they turned into oil. This was drilled up from inside the Earth, and turned into fuel by chemical changes. Old gasoline-powered automobiles are noisy and their exhaust makes city air dirty-- usually by putting unsafe materials like carbon monoxide into the air-- which can make people ill. Automobiles made after the mid-2010s are generally cleaner, although modification can reduce the abilities of modern pollution control machines.

Burning gasoline, like any kind of fossil fuel, makes carbon dioxide, which adds to climate change. Since 2017, fewer gasoline powered automobiles are being made. Some places will not allow gasoline-powered automobiles in the future, like Amsterdam in 2030.

The cleanest automobiles are electric vehicles. They are usually plugged into a power outlet or a charging station and store electricity in a battery at the bottom of the automobile. The electricity then drives an electric motor, which turns the wheels. Some electric automobiles have 2 motors: one at the front, and one at the back. A few have 4 motors (one for each wheel).

Some automobiles burn diesel fuel, which is used in big trucks and buses, and a few use wood gas. In some countries, such as Brazil and Sweden, a mixture of ethanol and gasoline, called "gasohol" in Brazil and "E85" in Sweden, is used as automobile fuel. Other fuels include propane, natural gas, compressed air, and ethanol (which comes from plants). There are automobiles designed to run on more than one type of fuel — these are called "flex-fuel" and are rare.

A few automobiles generate electricity from hydrogen fuel cells (like the Honda Clarity). As of 2019, most of the hydrogen that people use comes from burning fossil fuels, but scientists and engineers are trying to make hydrogen from renewable energy a lot cheaper and easier to use.Some automobiles even use solar cells for their electricity, but they are not very practical. There is a competition every year where people try to design a automobile that can last the longest and go the farthest on solar energy alone.

There is also a type of automobile that uses both an engine and an electric motor. This is called a hybrid electric vehicle; an example is the Toyota Prius.

All automobiles have brakes which work by friction to stop the automobile quickly in an emergency or stop it rolling when parked. Electric automobiles also have regenerative brakes, which slow the automobile by turning the energy in its movement back into electricity, like an electric motor working the opposite way. So regenerative means the electricity is generated again. In some cases, the effect of these regenerative brakes are powerful enough to warrant brake lights, which do not necessarily always turn on when appropriate.

The earliest recorded automobiles were actually steam engines attached to wagons in the late 18th century. The steam engines were heavy, making these wagons slow and hard to control. Better and faster steam automobiles became common late in the 19th century.

Some automobiles in the early 20th century were powered by electricity. They were slow and heavy and went out of use until the idea came back later in the century.

The internal combustion engine changed the way many automobiles were powered. The engine used either gasoline, diesel, or kerosene to work. When the fuel is exploded in a cylinder it pushes the piston down and turns the wheels.

Although many people tried to make a good automobile that would work and sell well, people say that Karl Benz invented the modern automobile. He used a four-stroke type of internal combustion engine to power his Benz Patent-Motorwagen in 1886. He began to make many automobiles in a factory and sell them in Germany in 1888.

In North America, the first modern automobile was made by brothers Charles and J. Frank Duryea in Springfield, Massachusetts. The Duryea brothers' automobile also won the first-ever car race in 1895, competing against automobiles made by Benz. The race was in Chicago, Illinois, and 53 miles long. The Duryeas then began making the first automobiles for everyday use in 1896. That year, they made 13 automobiles by hand in Springfield, Massachusetts.

Benz may have invented the first modern automobile, and the Duryeas the first automobile to be sold, but Henry Ford sold the most automobiles to the most people. In 1910 he began making and selling his Model T, which was a huge success. Many people could afford this automobile, not just the rich, because Ford used mass production. This meant he made many Model Ts in a short time in a factory. People say that the Model T is the automobile that "put America on wheels". The Model T was the most popular automobile of the time because it was cheap but it was still a good quality automobile that ordinary people could own.

Since then, many different kinds of automobiles have been designed and built, from minivans to sports cars. In the 1950s, the United States made and used more automobiles than all the rest of the world. Fifty years later, China became the largest maker and user of automobiles.

Automobiles are faster than walking or riding a bike when going a long way. They can carry more than one person and a large amount of luggage. Depending on local public transport quality, they can also be faster and far more convenient than using buses, bicycles or trains, and can often go where public transport cannot. 4-wheel drive "off road" vehicles are particularly good at reaching places difficult for other wheeled transport due to bad roads or harsh terrain. However, they cost more and burn more fuel, and there are many places even they cannot go. There are passenger cars (cars, buses), cargo, special (fire, sanitary, mobile crane, autoclave, refrigerator, infantry fighting vehicles, etc) and sports (buggies, racing, e.g. Formula 1 cars, rally cars). Passable cars are divided into road, off-road (including quarry), increased cross-country ability and high cross-country ability. Cars with bodies of a special design, intended for the carriage of certain goods, are called specialized; there are timber carrier truck, farm truck, cement carrier truck, gasoline truck, etc.

The car equips an engine, transmission, chassis, bodywork, control system, electrical equipment, service devices. The engine can be gasoline (carburetor internal combustion), diesel, gas (balloon gas), electric, gas turbine. Transmission is a set of devices that transmit the torque from the engine to the driving wheels (caterpillars).

Cars are produced in many countries. Most of all in Japan, USA, France, Republic of Korea, Spain, Great Britain, Brazil, Italy. For 100 years of existence, the car has become the most common vehicle. Annually 5 - 59 million various cars are produced in the world; also including 25% of trucks and buses. Most of the oil produced in different countries is processed for gasoline and diesel fuel to meet the needs of road transport.

Most automobiles enclose people and cargo in a closed compartment with a roof, doors and windows, thus giving protection from weather. Modern automobiles give further protection in case of collisions, as they have added safety features such as seat belts, airbags, crumple zones and side-impact protection that would be expensive or impossible on two-wheeled or light 3-wheeled vehicles, or most buses.

With regular check ups and service, automobiles can last a very long time. In some countries like Australia, people have to get their automobile checked by authorized mechanics regularly by law to confirm that their automobile is safe to drive. They can go to an automobile mechanic to get their automobile checked or have a mobile mechanic come to them to repair their automobile.

Buying and running a automobile needs a lot of money, especially for newer good-quality automobiles. There are things to pay for — the automobile itself, fuel, parts (for example, tyres), , repairs, insurance to cover the cost of crashes or theft, parking charges, and toll roads and any taxes or licensing  charged by the government.

When automobiles crash, they can become damaged and hurt people, and the life of a person is more important than keeping a automobile from damage. When too many automobiles try to go the same way, traffic congestion slows them all. Automobiles powered by fossil fuels cause air pollution, especially if too many are used in a small area like a city. Pollution from the use of automobiles is a big contributor to climate change. Many places where people live close together have public transportation such as buses, passenger trains, trams and subways. These can help people go more quickly and cheaply than by automobile when traffic jams are a problem. Some of these problems can be made smaller, for example by carpooling, which is putting many people together in one automobile. This can help to reduce the number of vehicles on the road, which uses less fuel and reduces the number of possible car accidents.

Traffic congestion and accidents can be dangerous to other road users, for example people riding bicycles or walking, especially in an old town built when there were fewer automobiles. Some 20th century towns are designed for automobiles as the main transport. This can cause other problems, such as even more pollution and traffic, as few, if any, people walk. Communities are divided and separated by big roads. Pedestrians are put in danger where there are too few accommodations built into car-centric infrastructure, such as foot bridges, small road bridges or other special crossings.

In 2005, 63 million cars and light-duty trucks were produced worldwide. The world's biggest car producer (including light-duty trucks) is the European Union with 29% of the world's production. In non-EU Eastern Europe another 4% are produced. The second largest manufacturer is NAFTA with 25.8%, followed by Japan with 16.7%, China with 8.1%, MERCOSUR with 3.9%, India with 2.4% and the rest of the world with 10.1%.

Large free trade areas like EU, NAFTA and MERCOSUR attract manufacturers worldwide to produce their products within them and without currency risks or customs, additionally to being close to customers. Thus the production figures do not show the technological ability or business skill of the areas. In fact much if not most of the Third World car production is used western technology and car models (and sometimes even complete obsolete western factories shipped to the country), which is reflected in the patent statistic as well as the locations of the r&d centers.

The automobile industry is dominated by relatively few large corporations (not to be confused with the much more numerous brands), the biggest of which (by numbers of produced cars) are currently General Motors, Toyota and Ford Motor Company. It is expected, that Toyota will reach the No.1 position in 2006. The most profitable per-unit car-maker of recent years has been Porsche due to its premium price tag.

The automotive industry at large still suffers from high under-utilization of its manufacturing potential.

A typical family car costs about 25€ in raw materials in production. Higher line cars tend to cost 100€ up!

A smartphone is a mobile device. It works as a computer but is small and portable like a mobile phone or a E-reader. It uses a system on a chip or a minimal instruction set computer so it can be small.

Another way to think of smartphones is that they are PDAs that can make voice calls like any other mobile phone. Older phones also used computer technology, but lacked many of the parts of a computer that were too big to fit into a phone. Modern phone makers have been able to use smaller parts. Most smartphones are also GPS receivers and digital cameras.

Because smartphones are small computers, they run an operating system that is often common between devices to ensure compatibility. The majority of smartphones run on Apple iOS or Google Android. Most can do multitasking, running  more than one program which helps the user do things quicker and easier. Users can get more programs, called mobile apps, from the manufacturer's app store, such as the Apple App Store and Google Play which can help them complete special tasks.

Data communication has become faster. Smartphones can send and receive data much faster than older phones. The industry uses different standards to label the data transmission rates. 2G was introduced in 1991. 2G means 2nd Generation. 2G phones transmit data at about the same speed as a 56 kbit/s (kilobits per second) dial-up modem would get.

3G was introduced in the early 2000s. Depending on where they are, 3G phones vary in speed between about 200 kbit/s to 14 Mbit/s (megabits per second). This is comparable to a DSL or low end cable modem speed. Most smart phones use 3G technology to make them fast enough to practically use internet and other data features. Faster 4G networks operate in many places, with speeds estimated as fast as 100 Mbit/s to 1 Gbit/s (gigabit per second). This is as fast as some computer networks that use Ethernet. Many smartphones introduced after 2010 use 4G technology including LTE, as later, even faster version. 5G was introduced in a few places in 2019.

Smartphones are powered by rechargeable batteries. The amount of energy they can store is reduced over time, and they become weaker. With less power, a smartphone may not be able to perform as well as or for as long as when it was new. Until 2010, most smartphones were made so that the user could replace or remove a weakened battery. Most newer smartphones do not give users this ability.

Many smartphones today have cameras built into them. They are usually not as capable as dedicated cameras.  Some phones have sophisticated camera software allowing such features as independent setting of bit rate, framerate and resolution.  Such controls have only been adapted starting in the mid-2010s.  As of early 2021, mobile phone chipsets may be capable of 2160p 4K video capture at 120 frames per second.

Machine learning gives computers the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed (Arthur Samuel, 1959). It is a subfield of computer science.

The idea came from work in artificial intelligence. Machine learning explores the study and construction of algorithms which can learn and make predictions on data. Such algorithms follow programmed instructions, but can also make predictions or decisions based on data. They build a model from sample inputs.

Machine learning is done where designing and programming explicit algorithms cannot be done. Examples include spam filtering, detection of artificial neural network intruders or malicious insiders working towards a data breach, optical character recognition (OCR), search engines and computer vision.

Using machine learning has risks. Some algorithms create a final model which is a black box. Models have been criticized for biases in hiring, criminal justice, and recognizing faces.

Learning algorithms try to predict what will happen in the future with patterns from the past. These predictions can be obvious: for example, if the sun rose for the past 10,000 days, it will probably rise again. These predictions can also be more complex. An example of a complex prediction is facial recognition (knowing who someone is by looking at face).

Machine learning programs can do things that it hasn't been told to do by a programmer. Machine learning programs will be shown some patterns. These patterns will be an input (such as a question) and an output (the answer to the question). Then, the machine learning program will predict the output based on the input. Machine learning isn't always necessary. Computers can do simple tasks by being told instructions. However, sometimes there are a lot of things that control the output. Then, it is hard for a human to tell the computer all of the instructions. It is sometimes easier to tell the computer how to teach itself.

There are a lot of different ways to tell the computer to teach itself. When a problem has a lot of answers, different answers can be marked as valid. This is used to form data that the computer is trained with. One example of training data is the MNIST data. The MNIST data has images of handwritten numbers. The computer can learn to identify handwritten numbers using the MNIST data.

Health is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Physical health is about the body. Mental health is about how people think and feel. Social health talks about how people live with other people. It is about family, work, school, and friends.

Physical fitness refers to good body health. It is dependent on genetic determinators and also on social, economic and ecological factors. That means, one's genes are partly responsible for one's physical health, but also other circumstances: where you live, how clean or polluted your water and the air around you is and also how good your social and medical system is. It is also the result of regular exercise, proper diet and nutrition, and proper rest for physical . A person who is physically fit will be able to walk or run without getting breathless and they will be able to carry out the activities of everyday living and not need help. How much each person can do will depend on their age and whether they are a man or woman.

A physically fit person usually has a normal weight for their height. The relation between their height and weight is called their Body Mass Index. A taller person can be heavier and still be fit. If a person is too heavy or too thin for their height it may affect their health. Better health is central to human happiness and well-being. It also makes an important contribution to economic progress, as healthy populations live longer, are more productive, and save more. Many factors influence health status and a country's ability to provide quality health services for its people.

Mental health refers to a person's emotional and psychological well-being. "A state of emotional and psychological well-being in which an individual is able to use his or her thinking and emotional (feeling) abilities,  in society, and meet the  demands of everyday life."

One way to think about mental health is by looking at how well a person functions. Feeling  and ; being able to handle normal levels of stress, have good friends and family, and lead an  life; and being able to "bounce back," or  from hardships, are all signs of mental health. It’s normal for all of us to feel worried, sad, upset, or have difficult emotions from time to time. For most people though, these feelings are only temporary and are resolved without causing any long-term problems. However, for some people, these negative feelings can become worse over time and lead to a mental health problem such as depression, anxiety, stress or obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).

Public health refers to trying to stop a disease that is unhealthy to the community, and does not help in living a long life or promote your health. This is fixed by organized efforts and choices of society, public and private clubs, communities and individuals.

It is about the health of many people, or everybody, rather than one person. Public health stops instead of encouraging a disease through surveillance of cases. To prevent being sick, it is good to act according to some simple advice:  Hand washing, regular check-ups,  vaccination programmes, drinking clean water, and using condoms. When infectious diseases break out, washing hands for about 30 seconds may be especially important. Sometimes it is necessary to avoid masses of people or wear a surgical mask to protect yourself and to stop the spreading of the disease. Teaching people how to live healthily and educate them, especially about sex and childbirth, is also very important.

A plastic is a synthetic material that can change its shape easily. Many things are made of plastics, usually because making them to the right shape is easy.

Some plastics have other materials added to them, like glass, because they make the plastic stronger and stiffer.

Plastics are used to make many products, such as nylon or polyester clothing; toys; electronics; food containers; pipes; bags; parachutes; ropes; car parts; medical supplies; bulletproof glass; and body armor.

There are many types of plastic. Some can be shaped only when they are freshly made; then they become hard.  Others are thermoplastic and can be softened by heating them. These plastics can be used for 3D printing, because the plastic will become soft enough to form into different shapes, and then become hard again when it cools down.

For many years, people experimented with plastics based on natural polymers like cellulose. In 1855 Alexander Parkes (1813-1890), an English inventor, created an early form of plastic called "Parkesine." It was hard but flexible and transparent.

In 1869, John Wesley Hyatt invented the first synthetic (man-made) polymer as a substitute for ivory. Billiards were becoming popular, and billiard balls were made of ivory. The only way to get natural ivory is by slaughtering wild elephants, and there were not enough elephants to meet the demand for ivory. Wesley found a man-made material that could be used for many purposes.

According to the Science History Institute: [Wesley's] discovery was revolutionary. For the first time, human manufacturing was not  by the limits of nature. Nature only supplied so much wood, metal, stone, bone, tusk, and horn. But now humans could create new materials. This development helped not only people but also the environment. Advertisements praised celluloid as the savior of the elephant and the tortoise. Plastics could protect the natural world from the destructive forces of human need. The creation of new materials also helped free people from the social and economic constraints imposed by the scarcity of natural resources. Inexpensive celluloid made material wealth more widespread and obtainable. And the plastics revolution was only getting started.

Most plastics are man-made; they do not occur in nature. The process of making plastics is usually complicated.

Most of the materials that are called plastic are polymers. Polymers are long chains of atoms bonded to each other. In most plastics, the long chain is made of carbon atoms with other atoms attached to them. The different atoms and the shape and length of the chains change how the plastic looks and works.

Plastics are mostly petrochemicals, made from natural gas or from petroleum, a type of oil. Chemical engineers refine the petroleum which goes through a heating process. It develops ethylene and propylene, which are the chemical building blocks for many plastics. These chemicals are then combined with other chemicals to produce a polymer.

Today, some of these plastics are also being made without oil.  Instead, other sources like plants and bacteria are used to make the plastic.  These plastics are called bioplastics. Some of them are biodegradable.

Old plastics are usually thrown away and put in landfills. Because plastic lasts so long, plastic pollution is a major problem. The Great Pacific Garbage Patch and other marine trash vortexes are made mostly of microplastics.

Some plastics can be recycled so they do not become waste. However, recycling plastic requires heating, and some plastics release toxic fumes when heated. Some activist organizations argue that recycling is not a solution for plastic pollution.

According to activist Judith Enck: When it comes to plastics, recycling has been an abysmal failure, and only 5% to 6% of plastics actually gets recycled in the United States ... The plastics industry has spent millions of dollars lying to the public and letting people think that plastics are recyclable when over 90% of them are not and they know that better than anyone.

A university is a higher learning institution. The word university comes from the Latin universitas magistrorum et scholarium, roughly meaning "community of teachers and scholars".  Students can go to university to get an academic degree. Unlike the schooling they have done before, the courses at university are specialised. A person studying biology at university has many courses about biology and fewer courses in other fields such as languages or history. To get a higher degree, people must do some research.

Not all subjects are offered at universities. Mainly, universities offer courses which are about knowledge. They usually do not offer courses in practical trades. In some cases such as law, where there are both knowledge and practical issues, the university does mainly the theoretical side of the subject. Practical qualifications are done elsewhere.

The universities were born in Europe during the Middle Ages. The first institution of this type was the University of Bologna, which later became a model for other centres of education.

At first, the universities had formed themselves according to the model of the professional groups and like almost everything in the Middle Ages, they remained tied to the Catholic Church. At the beginning, they had worked to teach the so-called "seven liberal arts" (the trivium and the quadrivium):

That earliest division caused the present divisions between literary and scientific fields. From one point of view, the world's oldest university is Qarawiyyin university. However, teaching religion is not the definition used by most people. A university should in theory teach every subject.

The university is generally regarded as a formal institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian tradition. European higher education took place for hundreds of years in cathedral schools or monastic schools (scholae monasticae). There, monks and nuns taught classes: evidence of these dates back to the 6th century.

The Universities of Paris and Oxford were founded by members of the church. Later universities were founded by kings.

In the early medieval period, most new universities were founded from pre-existing schools, usually when these schools became mainly sites of higher education. Pope Gregory VII promoted the concept of modern university as his 1079 Papal Decree. He ordered the establishment of cathedral schools, which eventually turned into the first European universities.

A university can include several campuses or different places where classes are taught by professors. In each campus there are several faculties and university schools (mainly for teaching), and also laboratories, departments and institutes of research. Many campuses also have housing for students in buildings called dormitories and structures like libraries, study rooms and gymnasiums for students that live there. Each school offers many courses that students take to earn a degree. The person with the highest right to control and to command in a university is the rector, who governs the university with the help of the party of vice-rectors and of other organs such as the social council and the governing body.

There is a group of notable universities called the Ivy League. They are:

There are also institutions of technology who provide course offerings  primarily in scientific and technological studies. Some examples are:

A family is a group of people who, in most cases, live together. They share their money and food and are supposed to take care of one another. Its members are either genetically related (like brother and sister) or legally bound to each other, for example by marriage. In many cultures, the members of a family have the same or a similar surname.

The family in accordance to the Catholic doctrine is treated in many articles of the Catechism of the Catholic Church starting from the article 2201.

A family is said to be society's smallest unit, its nucleus. Family life is more private and intimate than public life. But in most countries there are laws for it. For example, there are restrictions for marrying within the family and bans for having a sexual relationship with relatives, especially with children.

are: nuclear family, single-parent family and extended family.

Both the "nuclear family" and the "single-parent family" are also called the "immediate family".

Foster families are families where a child lives with and is cared for by people who are not his or her biological parents.

Advertising is how a company encourages people to buy their products, use their services, or adopt their ideas and stuff. Advertising is one element of marketing, which also includes design, research, and data mining.

An advertisement (or an "ad" for short) is usually designed by an advertising agency for a sponsor or brand and made public by various media. Ads appear on television, radio, newspapers, magazines, and billboards in streets and cities. Advertisers use methods that attract attention.

Advertisers influence our emotions by techniques that include stereotyping and targeting the audience: who we are. Emotions are influenced by our occupation, beliefs, personality, self-esteem, lifestyle, relationships, friends, how we look, and what we wear.

Commercial messages and political campaign displays have been found in the ruins of Pompeii and ancient Arabia. Lost and found advertising on papyrus was common in Ancient Greece and Rome. Wall or rock painting for commercial advertising is  present to this day in many parts of Asia, Africa, and South America. The tradition of wall painting can be traced back to Indian rock art paintings that date back to 4000 BC.

Londoner Thomas J. Barratt  (1841–1914) has been called "the father of modern advertising". He worked for the Pears Soap company, eventually becoming its chairman. Barratt created an advertising campaign for the company products. It used targeted slogans, images, and phrases. One of his slogans, "Good morning. Have you used Pears' soap?" was famous in its day and into the 20th century.

Barratt introduced many of the crucial ideas that lie behind successful advertising, and these were widely circulated in his day. He constantly stressed the importance of a strong and exclusive brand image for Pears and of emphasizing the product's availability through saturation campaigns. He also understood the importance of constantly reevaluating the market for changing tastes and  mores, stating in 1907 that "tastes change, fashions change, and the advertiser  has to change with them. An idea that was effective a generation ago would fall flat, stale, and unprofitable if presented to the public today. Not that the idea of today is always better than the older idea, but it is different – it hits the present taste."

As the economy expanded across the world during the 19th century, advertising grew alongside. In the United States, the success of this  advertising format eventually led to the growth of mail-order advertising.

Very  important was the growth of mass media, with mass circulation illustrated newspapers in the later 19th century followed by movies, radio and television.

Advertising happens in many different ways. Many products are advertised on television, although not all channels permit advertising. The advertisements usually appear during breaks between a television show. They are usually for products, other television shows, or movies. These ads are not normally much longer than 30 seconds. Some radio stations have audio advertisements that play between programmes.

An advertisement for a movie is called a trailer. It shows a short collection of clips from the movie, and shows the date it will be released in cinemas.

Advertising also takes place on websites. These may appear as "banner ads" or "popups". They are often non-moving images or flash animations. The owner of the website will get money when a user clicks on the advertisement. Sometimes they will get a percentage of the money if they buy a product.

Billboards advertise products on highways and city streets. These may simply be freestanding billboards or may be part of street furniture such as a bus shelter.  Buses and taxis are often covered in adverts, while budget airlines sometimes allow advertising inside their planes. Adverts also appear in newspapers, magazines, and sports programmes. Many sport stadiums have adverts set around them. Sports teams, tournaments, television programmes and public events may have a sponsor who is the main or, sometimes, only advertiser.

Nowadays, the amount of online advertisements is increasing, compared to newspaper and other types of advertising.

Advertisers use many different techniques to get people to notice their adverts, often using shocking or sexy images on purpose. Once advertisers have managed to make people notice their advert, they need to 'sell' the product or brand. They may try to make the product look appealing, however, often, advertisers use humor in such a way that gets people to remember the brand without actually promoting the product. Testimonials are advertisements with people in it. They are often sponsored. Poor adverts can damage sales or spoil a brand's identity.

Advertising is often strictly regulated, for example, in the United Kingdom it is illegal to advertise tobacco, except in the shop where it is sold and this is also restricted. In France, it is illegal to advertise alcohol, meaning that when many European football teams play in France, they cannot play in their usual shirts as breweries often advertise on sports shirts. It is also illegal to advertise on some television channels, the BBC in the United Kingdom and RTE in the Republic of Ireland are not allowed to permit advertising and instead make their revenue from selling a compulsory television licence. Some countries, such as Canada, regulate misleading advertising and labelling to try to prevent deceptive practices and protect consumers.

An airport is a place where airplanes can land or . Most airports in the world have only a long strip of level ground called a runway. Many airports have buildings which are used to hold airplanes and passengers. A building that holds passengers waiting for their planes or luggage is called a terminal. The sections between planes and the terminal are called "gates". Airports also have buildings called hangars to hold planes when they are not used. Some airports have buildings to control the airport, like a control tower which tells planes where to go.

An international airport is a large airport that airplanes can use to fly to and from other countries. A domestic airport is an airport which is usually smaller and only has airplanes coming from different places in the same country. Most international airports have shops and restaurants for airplane passengers to use.

An airport used by the military is often called an air force base or airbase. An aircraft carrier is a ing airbase.

Airports are made and operated for safety. Today, people must walk through a metal detector, a machine that can tell if metal goes through it. If it makes a noise, the officers will make that person take off all things on them that are metal. They also have X-ray machines that can look into luggage. If officers find items such as weapons, or anything that can be used to kill people, that item (and the person who has it) are taken away and possibly arrested. As well as this, passengers are not allowed to bring bottles or containers with over 100 ml of liquid onto the plane because they could be turned into bombs. Therefore, all water bottles must be emptied before entering the secured area.

At some airports, because of better machinery, some metals do not need to be taken out of bags and liquids can now be up to 1 liter.

Processes can be different depending on what airport someone goes to.

When someone first enters an airport, they will need to check in. This is so they can check in their luggage and get their boarding pass (this is needed to enter the plane). Some airlines need you to pay to check in large luggage.

Once somebody has checked in, they will need to go through security. Queues can be long depending on airport. In the European Union, they have a new system called the Entry Exit System, and many people have missed their flights because of very long queues.

After security, some large airports have a large store called a duty free. They sell many items, such as beauty and skincare products.

After duty-free, someone can make their way to a certain gate, where their flight takes off from.

Boarding takes place in stages. Many airlines board first class passengers first, they have paid more money to board first and sit on more comfortable seats. Some airlines have something called a first come first serve policy, if someone turns up earlier they can sit wherever they want in the plane. This is because the plane has less people in it.

People do physical exercises as a part of their healthy lifestyle to get stronger and healthier or stay strong and healthy or to improve their body image. There are three basic modes of physical exercises:

Exercises can be an important part of physical therapy, weight loss, or sports performance.

Exercise can be , but it is important for the exerciser to do what they like and eat enough calories, so when they exercise they are building up muscles, not just breaking them down for fuel. Carbohydrates are muscle-sparing; and if one does not get enough calories overall, there is the risk of burning muscles up with the fat to make up the deficit.

Benefits of exercise for all ages have been known since antiquity. Marcus Cicero, around 65 BC, stated: “It is exercise alone that supports the spirits, and keeps the mind in vigor.”

The CDC recommends that adults should get 150 minutes of physical activity weekly. Regular exercise has been shown to help high blood pressure, obesity, heart disease, diabetes, and depression, among others. Exercise also helps people feel less tired.

Regular exercise can have a profoundly positive impact on depression, anxiety, and ADHD. It also relieves stress, improves memory, helps sleep better, and boosts overall mood. Studies show that exercise can treat mild to moderate depression as effectively as antidepressant medication but without the side-effects, of course.

Medicine is the science that treats and prevents diseases in humans. Medical workers treat injuries, infections, and sickness. Medicine also helps people with disease prevention and the best ways to not get sick from bacteria or viruses. Medical doctors also help unhealthy (bad habits, overweight, underweight) people return to a healthy condition.

People who practice medicine are most often called medical doctors or physicians. Often doctors work closely with nurses and many other types of health care workers.

Many doctors specialize in one kind of medical work. For example, pediatrics is the medical specialty about the health of children.

In the Western world, scientists rely on modern medicine, while in developing countries, they rely on traditional medicine.

In the broadest meaning of 'medicine', there are many different specialties. However, within medical circles, there are two broad categories: "Medicine" and "Surgery."

There are some medical specialties that do not fit into either of these categories, like radiology, pathology, and anesthesia training for these is different to training to become a surgeon, like becoming a doctor of medicine in physiology is with their training, though non-specialist things between them do overlap.

Doctors that have focused on a specific field of medicine are called specialists. This means they have learned more about certain types of medical care.  For example:

A primary care doctor, sometimes called a General practitioner (GP) specialise in referrals, and treat a lot of different medical conditions, mostly common ones.

There are over 50 different medical specialties or job titles within the NHS.

Primary care doctors learn about all of the different subjects of medicine and how to treat a wide range of patients and their health care needs.

These doctors are called primary care doctors or primary care physicians, (PCPs), or generalists, or general practitioners (GP). In the United States, these kind of doctors are sometimes called family practitioners or family medicine doctors.

There are other doctors who are also primary care doctors. Pediatricians are primary care doctors, but only for children. Internists are primary care doctors for adults. Some gynecologists do primary care, but for women only.

In many countries they send people to specialists. They send people for specialist care, which the specialist takes and calls a "referral" to them. General practitioners also refer people to hospitals or other medical services. Also they refer for urgent care. They send people to see specialists for urgent care for treatment from a specialist, when it is an emergency or when the problem is too complex (complicated). Primary care doctors respond to medical emergencies (such as delivering a baby).

Other doctors are called 'specialists'. This means they have learned more about certain types of medical care.  For example:

A primary card doctor, sometimes called a General practitioner (GP) specialise in referrals, and treat a lot of different medical conditions, mostly common ones.

In the U.S., all specialties must pass all three steps of the national medical board examinations.  Steps I and II happen during medical school.  Step III happens during intern year, where a person works as a student at a hospital.

After a person passes these exams, they then have to pass more exams that are specifically about their specialty.  These tests are both written and oral.

There are only a few training spots per specialty each year, so some specialties can be very competitive. Some medical students do not get to train in the specialty they want. Other specialties do not have nearly enough doctors.  This can happen because not enough doctors apply for training spots; because more training spots are needed; or because many people fail out of their training program.

Medical training, unlike surgical training, requires three years of residency training after medical school.  Doctors can then do a one- to two-year fellowship in their subspecialty. In general, medical residents work less hours than surgical residents.

In the broadest meaning of 'medicine', there are many different specialties. However, within medical circles, there are two broad categories: "Medicine" and "Surgery."

There are some medical specialties that do not fit into either of these categories, like radiology, pathology, and anesthesia

Medical training, unlike surgical training, requires three years of residency training after medical school.  Doctors can then do a one- to two-year fellowship in their subspecialty. In general, medical residents work less hours than surgical residents.

Surgical training requires at least five years of residency after medical school. Sub-specialties of surgery often require seven or more years. In addition, fellowships can last another one to three years. Because fellowships can be competitive, many trainees spend another two years on research.  Because of this, for some people, their surgical training will not finish until more than a decade after medical school.

Surgical training can be very difficult and can take a lot of time. An average surgical resident works 75 hours per week.

Some subspecialties of surgery, like neurosurgery, require even longer hours.  Residents training in these specialties often work 80 hours a week.  Officially, these specialties only allow their residents to work up to 88 hours per week.  However, many surgical programs still require residents to work more than 88 hours a week.

Attempts to limit the amount of hours that surgical residents work have been difficult, because:

DNA, short for deoxyribonucleic acid, is the molecule that contains the genetic code of living  organisms. This includes animals, plants, protists, archaea and bacteria. It is made up of two polynucleotide chains in a double helix.

DNA, present in most cells such as skin, muscle, and nerve cells, contains the genetic instructions that cells use to make proteins, but it is absent in some cells like mature red blood cells. Many of these proteins are enzymes. DNA is inherited by children from their parents. This is why children share traits with their parents, such as skin, hair and eye color. The DNA in a person is a combination of the DNA from each of their parents.

Part of an organism's DNA is "non-coding DNA" sequences. They do not code for protein sequences. Some noncoding DNA is transcribed into non-coding RNA molecules, such as transfer RNA, ribosomal RNA, and regulatory RNAs. Other sequences are not transcribed at all, or give rise to RNA of unknown function. The amount of non-coding DNA varies greatly among species. For example, over 98% of the human genome is non-coding DNA, while only about 2% of a typical bacterial genome is non-coding DNA.

Viruses use either DNA or RNA to infect organisms. The genome replication of most DNA viruses takes place in the cell's nucleus, whereas RNA viruses usually replicate in the cytoplasm.

Inside eukaryotic cells, DNA is organized into chromosomes. Before cell division, more chromosomes are made in the process of DNA replication. Eukaryotic organisms like animals, plants, fungi and protists store most of their DNA inside the cell nucleus. But prokaryotes, like bacteria and archaea store their DNA only in the cytoplasm, in circular chromosomes. Inside eukaryotic chromosomes, chromatin proteins, such as histones, help to compact and organize DNA.

DNA has a double helix shape, which is like a ladder twisted into a spiral. Each step of the ladder is a pair of nucleotides.

DNA is made of four types of nucleotide made from the following nitrogenous bases:

The 'rungs' of the DNA ladder are each made of two bases, one base coming from each leg. The bases connect in the middle: 'A' only pairs with 'T', and 'C' only pairs with 'G'. The bases are held together by hydrogen bonds.

Adenine (A) and thymine (T) can pair up because they make two hydrogen bonds, and cytosine (C) and guanine (G) pair up to make three hydrogen bonds. Although the bases are always in fixed pairs, the pairs can come in any order (A-T or T-A; similarly, C-G or G-C). This way, DNA can write 'codes' out of the 'letters' that are the bases. These codes contain the message that tells the cell what to do.

On chromosomes, the DNA is bound up with proteins called histones to form chromatin. This association takes part in epigenetics and gene regulation. Genes are switched on and off during development and cell activity, and this regulation is the basis of most of the activity which takes place in cells.

When DNA is copied, this is called DNA replication. Briefly, the hydrogen bonds holding together paired bases are broken and the molecule is split in half: the legs of the ladder are separated. This gives two single strands. New strands are formed by matching the bases (A with T and G with C) to make the missing strands.

First, an enzyme called DNA helicase splits the DNA down the middle by breaking the hydrogen bonds. Then after the DNA molecule is in two separate pieces, another molecule called DNA polymerase makes a new strand that matches each of the strands of the split DNA molecule. Each copy of a DNA molecule is made of half of the original (starting) molecule and half of new bases.

When DNA is copied, mistakes are sometimes made – these are called mutations. There are four main types of mutations:

Mutations may also be classified by their effect on the structure and function of proteins, or their effect on fitness. Mutations may be bad for the organism, or neutral, or of benefit. Sometimes mutations are fatal for the organism – the protein made by the new DNA does not work at all, and this causes the embryo to die. On the other hand, evolution is moved forward by mutations, when the new version of the protein works better for the organism.

A section of DNA that contains instructions to make a protein is called a gene. Each gene has the sequence for at least one polypeptide. Proteins form structures, and also form enzymes. The enzymes do most of the work in cells. Proteins are made out of smaller polypeptides, which are formed of amino acids. To make a protein to do a particular job, the correct amino acids need to be joined up in the correct order.

Proteins are made by tiny machines in the cell called ribosomes.  Ribosomes are in the main body of the cell, but DNA is only in the nucleus of the cell. The codon is part of the DNA, but DNA never leaves the nucleus. Because DNA cannot leave the nucleus, the cell nucleus makes a copy of the DNA sequence in RNA. This is smaller and can get through the holes – pores – in the membrane of the nucleus and out into the cell.

Genes encoded in DNA are transcribed into messenger RNA (mRNA) by proteins such as RNA polymerase. Mature mRNA is then used as a template for protein synthesis by the ribosome. Ribosomes read codons, 'words' made of three base pairs that tell the ribosome which amino acid to add. The ribosome scans along an mRNA, reading the code while it makes protein. Another RNA called tRNA helps match the right amino acid to each codon.

DNA was first isolated (extracted from cells) by Swiss physician Friedrich Miescher in 1869, when he was working on bacteria from the pus in surgical bandages. The molecule was found in the nucleus of the cells and so he called it nuclein.

In 1928, Frederick Griffith discovered that traits of the "smooth" form of Pneumococcus could be transferred to the "rough" form of the same bacteria by mixing killed "smooth" bacteria with the live "rough" form. This system provided the first clear suggestion that DNA carries genetic information.

The Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment identified DNA as the transforming principle in 1943.

DNA's role in heredity was confirmed in 1952, when Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase in the Hershey–Chase experiment showed that DNA is the genetic material of the T2 bacteriophage.

In the 1950s, Erwin Chargaff  found that the amount of thymine (T) present in a molecule of DNA was about equal to the amount of adenine (A) present. He found that the same applies to guanine (G) and cytosine (C). Chargaff's rules summarises this finding.

In 1953, James D. Watson and Francis Crick suggested what is now accepted as the first correct double-helix model of DNA structure in the journal Nature. Their double-helix, molecular model of DNA was then based on a single X-ray diffraction image "Photo 51", taken by Rosalind Franklin and Raymond Gosling in May 1952.

Experimental evidence supporting the Watson and Crick model was published in a series of five articles in the same issue of Nature. Of these, Franklin and Gosling's paper was the first publication of their own X-ray diffraction data and original analysis method that partly supported the Watson and Crick model; this issue also contained an article on DNA structure by Maurice Wilkins and two of his colleagues, whose analysis and in vivo B-DNA X-ray patterns also supported the presence in vivo of the double-helical DNA configurations as proposed by Crick and Watson for their double-helix molecular model of DNA in the previous two pages of Nature. In 1962, after Franklin's death, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins jointly received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. Nobel Prizes are awarded only to living recipients. A debate continues about who should receive credit for the discovery.

In 1957, Crick explained the relationship between DNA, RNA, and proteins, in the central dogma of molecular biology.

How DNA was copied (the replication mechanism) came in 1958 through the Meselson–Stahl experiment. More work by Crick and coworkers showed that the genetic code was based on non-overlapping triplets of bases, called codons. These findings represent the birth of molecular biology.

How Watson and Crick got Franklin's results has been much debated. Crick, Watson and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1962 for their work on DNA – Rosalind Franklin had died in 1958.

DNA gets damaged a lot of times in cells which is a problem has DNA provide instructions to making proteins. But, cells have ways to fix these problems most of the time. Cells make use of special enzymes. Different enzymes fix different types of damages to DNA. The problem comes in different types:

Police in the United States used DNA and family tree public databases to solve cold cases. The American Civil Liberties Union  raised concerns over this practice.

An astronaut or cosmonaut is a person who goes into outer space. The Soviet Union and countries that it controlled used the word cosmonaut. Western countries including the United States said astronaut. Astronauts are also called "taikonauts" in China or "spationaute" in France.

The first person to go into space was a Russian from the Soviet Union. His name was Yuri Gagarin. This happened on April 12, 1961. The first and second people to walk on the Moon were the Americans Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin. This happened on July 20, 1969. No astronauts have gone to the moon since 1972. No people have visited any other planets yet.

Astronauts used to go into space using many different ways, but now they can only go on the American Dragon 2, the American Starliner, the Russian Soyuz, or the Chinese Shenzhou. Several countries have worked together to build an International Space Station where people stay and work in space for long periods of time.

A few countries and companies are trying to make more ways to get people into space. The United States is building a very big rocket called the Space Launch System. A United States company called SpaceX is also building a very large rocket called "Starship" that is fully reusable and could take people to Mars and further. Some American companies, for example Boeing, Lockheed Martin and SpaceX, are being paid by the United States to make ways for people to go to space.

Yoga is an old discipline of Hindu philosophy. It is both spiritual and physical. Yoga uses breathing techniques, exercise and meditation. It helps to improve health and happiness. Yoga is the Sanskrit word for union. Patanjali was a pioneer of classical yoga. He defined yoga as "the cessation of the modification of the mind" (stopping changing the mind).

A person doing yoga will move from one posture (called asana) to another. However, there are also other aspects which are important in yoga, such as breath-work, mantras, mudras (postures of the hands and fingers), meditation and much more. For example, the "sun-solution" contains 12 poses of asanas, one after the other. It is said to help balance body and soul. There is a specific mantra for each asana. The "sun-salutation" is popularly known as "Suryanamaska".

Yoga was introduced by an Ascetic. Ascetic practices (tapas) are referenced in the  (900 to 500 BC), early commentaries on the Vedas. Several seals discovered at Indus Valley Civilization (~3300–1700 B.C.) depict figures in positions resembling a common yoga or meditation pose. The pose shows "a form of ritual discipline, suggesting a precursor of yoga", according to archaeologist Gregory Possehl. Scholars think there must be some type of connection between the Indus Valley seals and later yoga and meditation practices, though there is no conclusive evidence.

A yogasana is a pose in which a person can sit. The intention of yogasana is to exercise the body and make it free of pains and problems.

Yogi is a person who has mastered yoga or has achieved great success in yoga. Yogasanas are also called Asana or Asanas (plural). A Yogi can sit in any asana for a given time.

A virus is a tiny parasite. Viruses reproduce inside other living things; they are not free-living. A virus makes copies of itself inside another organism's cells. When viruses infect living organisms, they can cause disease. There are many types of diseases caused by viruses, such as polio, ebola and hepatitis. Viruses outnumber all other forms of life on the planet by a long way.

A virus has a simple structure. It has just a protein coat which covers a strand of nucleic acid. Usually the nucleic acid is RNA; sometimes it is DNA. Viruses are much smaller than most kinds of bacteria, and can only be seen under an electron microscope. Viruses were not visible until the invention of the electron microscope.

Viruses reproduce by getting their nucleic acid strand into a prokaryote or eukaryote cell. The RNA or DNA strand then takes over the cell machinery to make copies of itself and the protein coat. The cell then bursts open, spreading the newly created viruses. All viruses reproduce this way, and there are no free-living viruses. Viruses are everywhere in the environment, and all organisms can be infected by them.

With eukaryotic cells, the virus protein coat is able to enter the target cells by certain cell membrane receptors. With prokaryote bacteria cells, the bacteriophage physically injects the nucleic acid strand into the host cell.

When the host cell has finished making more viruses, it undergoes lysis, or breaks apart. The viruses are released and are then able to infect other cells. Viruses can remain "silent" (inactive) for a long time, and will infect cells when the time and conditions are right.

Some special viruses are worth noting. Bacteriophages have evolved to enter bacterial cells, which have a different type of cell wall from eukaryote cell membranes. Envelope viruses, when they reproduce, cover themselves with a modified form of the host cell membrane, thus gaining an outer lipid layer that helps entry. Some of the most difficult viruses to combat, like influenza and HIV, use this method.

Viral infections in animals trigger an immune response which usually destroys the infecting virus. Vaccines can also produce immune responses. They give an artificially acquired immunity to the specific viral infection. However, some viruses (including those causing AIDS and viral hepatitis) escape from these immune responses and cause chronic infections. Antibiotics have no effect on viruses, but there are some other drugs which can be used against viruses. Virology is the study of viruses.

There are many genomic structures in viruses. As a group they are more diverse than plants, animals, archaea, or bacteria. There are millions of different types of viruses, but only about 7,000 of them have been described in detail.49

A virus has either RNA or DNA genes and so is called an RNA virus or a DNA virus. The vast majority of viruses have RNA genomes. Plant viruses usually have single-stranded RNA genomes and bacteriophages usually have double-stranded DNA genomes.96/99

Fewer than 7,000 types have been described in detail. but there are doubtlessly many more to be discovered.

Viral populations do not grow through cell division, because they do not have cells. Instead, they use the machinery and metabolism of a host cell to produce many copies of themselves, and they assemble (put together) in the cell.

The life cycle of viruses differs greatly between species but there are six basic stages in the life cycle of viruses:75/91

The genetic material within virus particles, and the method by which the material is replicated, varies considerably between different types of viruses.

The body's first line of defence against viruses is the innate immune system. This has cells and other mechanisms which defend the host from any infection. The cells of the innate system recognise, and respond to, pathogens in a general way.

RNA interference is an important innate defence against viruses. Many viruses have a replication strategy that involves double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). When such a virus infects a cell, it releases its RNA molecule. A protein complex called dicer sticks to it and chops the RNA into pieces. Then a biochemical pathway, called the RISC complex, starts up. This attacks the viral mRNA, and the cell survives the infection.

Rotaviruses avoid this by not uncoating fully inside the cell and by releasing newly produced mRNA through pores in the particle's inner capsid. The genomic dsRNA remains protected inside the core of the virion.

The production of interferon is an important host defence mechanism. This is a hormone produced by the body when viruses are present. Its role in immunity is complex; it eventually stops the viruses from reproducing by killing the infected cell and its close neighbours.

Vertebrates have a second, more specific, immune system. It is called the adaptive immune system. When it meets a virus, it produces specific antibodies that bind to the virus and render it non-infectious. Two types of antibodies are important.

The first, called IgM, is highly effective at neutralizing viruses but is produced by the cells of the immune system only for a few weeks. The second, called IgG, is produced indefinitely. The presence of IgM in the blood of the host is used to test for acute infection, whereas IgG indicates an infection sometime in the past. IgG antibody is measured when tests for immunity are carried out.

Another vertebrate defence against viruses involves immune cells known as T cells. The body's cells constantly display short fragments of their proteins on the cell's surface, and, if a T cell recognises a suspicious viral fragment there, the host cell is destroyed by killer T cells and the virus-specific T-cells proliferate. Cells such as macrophages are specialists at this antigen presentation.

Not all virus infections produce a protective immune response. These persistent viruses evade immune control by sequestration (hiding away); cytokine resistance; evading natural killer cell activity; escape from apoptosis (cell death), and antigenic shift (changing surface proteins). HIV evades the immune system by constantly changing the amino acid sequence of the proteins on the surface of the virion. Other viruses move along nerves to places the immune system cannot reach.

Viruses do not belong to any group of living organisms, including any of the kingdoms or domains. They are not seen as living organisms because they are not active until the point of infection. However, that is just a verbal point.

Their structure and mode of operation means they have evolved from other living things, and the loss of normal structure occurs in many endoparasites. The origins of viruses in the evolutionary history of life are unclear; some may have evolved from plasmids – pieces of DNA that can move between cells – while others may have evolved from bacteria. In evolution, viruses are an important means of horizontal gene transfer, which increases genetic diversity.

A recent project discovered nearly 1500 new RNA viruses by sampling over 200 invertebrate species. "The research team... extracted their RNA and, using next-generation sequencing, deciphered the sequence of a staggering six trillion letters present in the invertebrate RNA libraries". The research showed that viruses changed bits and pieces of their RNA by a variety of genetic mechanisms. "The invertebrate virome [shows] remarkable genomic flexibility that includes frequent recombination, lateral gene transfer among viruses and hosts, gene gain and loss, and complex genomic rearrangements".

Viruses have been on this planet a long time. We now know that bacteria and archaea had to deal with them first, before our type of cellular life evolved. Details of the defence mechanisms used by archaea and bacteria are discussed on the page CRISPR, which briefly introduces the topic of early defences against viruses.

A group of large viruses infect amoebae. The largest is Pithovirus. Others in order of size are Pandoravirus, then Megavirus, then Mimivirus. They are bigger than some bacteria, and visible under a light microscope.

Viruses are everywhere in the sea. They may outnumber all other forms of marine life by at least an order of magnitude. Through selective infection, viruses influence nutrient cycling and evolution in the ocean.

Viruses are used widely in cell biology. Geneticists often use viruses as vectors to introduce genes into cells that they are studying. This is useful for making the cell produce a foreign substance, or to study the effect of introducing a new gene into the genome. Eastern European scientists have used phage therapy as an alternative to antibiotics for some time, and interest in this approach is increasing, because of the high level of antibiotic resistance now found in some pathogenic bacteria.

A battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy by a chemical reaction.  Usually the chemicals are kept inside the battery.  It is used in a circuit to power other components.   A battery produces direct current (DC) electricity (electricity that flows in one direction, and does not switch back and forth).

Using the electricity from an outlet in a building is cheaper and more efficient, but a battery can provide electricity in areas that do not have electric power distribution.  It is also useful for things that move, such as electric vehicles and mobile phones.

Batteries may be primary or secondary. The primary is thrown away when it can no longer provide electricity. The secondary can be recharged and reused.

A Battery can be one cell or many cells.  Each cell has an anode, cathode and electrolyte.  The electrolyte is the main material inside the battery.  It is often a type of acid, and can be dangerous to touch.  The anode reacts with the electrolyte to produce electrons (this is the negative or - end).  The cathode reacts with the electrolyte and takes electrons (this is the positive or + end). An electric current happens when a wire connects the anode to the cathode, and the electrons move from one end to the other. (But a battery can be damaged by just a wire connecting the two ends, so a load is also needed between the two ends.  The load is something that slows the electrons down, and usually does something useful, like a lightbulb in a flashlight, or the electronics in a calculator).

The electrolyte can be liquid or solid.  A battery is called a wet cell or dry cell battery, depending on the type of electrolyte.

The chemical reactions that occur in a battery are exothermic reactions.  This type of reaction makes heat.  For example, if you leave your laptop on for a long time, and then touch the battery, it will be warm or hot.

A rechargeable battery is recharged by reversing the chemical reaction that occurs within the battery.  But a rechargeable battery can only be recharged a given number of times (recharge life).  Even built-in batteries, cannot be recharged forever.  Moreover, each time a battery is recharged, its ability to hold a charge goes down a bit.  Non-rechargeable batteries should not be charged as various harmful substances can leak out, such as potassium hydroxide.

The cells can be connected to make a bigger battery.  Connecting the positive of one cell to the negative of the next cell is called connecting them in series.  The voltage of each battery are added together.  Two six volt batteries connected in series will make 12 volts.

Connecting the positive of one cell to the positive of the other, and the negative to the negative is called connecting them in parallel.  The voltage stays the same, but the current is added together.  Voltage is the pressure pushing the electrons through the wires, it is measured in volts. Current is how many electrons can go at once, it is measured in amps.  The combination of current and voltage is the power (watts = volts x amps) of the battery.

AA, AAA, C, and D cells, including alkaline batteries, are of standard sizes and shapes, and have about 1.5 volts. The voltage of a cell depends on the chemicals used.  The electric charge it can supply depends on how large the cell is, as well as what chemicals.  The charge a battery delivers is usually measured in ampere-hours.  Since the voltage stays the same, more charge means a bigger cell can supply more amps, or run for a longer time.

The first battery was invented in 1800 by Alessandro Volta. Nowadays, his battery is called the voltaic pile.

In small, modern batteries, the fluid is immobilized in a kind of paste and everything is put in a sealed case. Because of this case, nothing can spill out of the battery. Larger batteries, such as car batteries, still have liquid inside and are not sealed. A kind of battery that uses molten salts as the electrolyte was invented during World War II.

Fuel cells and solar cells are not batteries because they do not store the energy inside them.

A capacitor is not a battery because it does not store the energy in a chemical reaction.  A capacitor can store electricity and create electricity much faster than a battery, but it usually costs too much to make it as big as a battery can be.  Scientists and chemical engineers are working to make better capacitors and batteries for electric cars.

Small electrical generators operated by hand and foot can supply power in small electrical devices. Clockwork radios, clockwork torches and similar devices also have a wind-up spring to store mechanical energy.

A business is a place where people work together. In a business, people work to make and sell products or services. Other people buy the products and services. The business owner is the person who hires people for work. A business can earn a profit for the products and services it offers. The word business comes from the word busy, and means doing things. It works on regular basis.

Originally, individual trades people were qualified, and they hired assistants. The invention of the joint-stock company meant a new era in business. By this means, some people put up the money as capital, and others used it to run the business. There is a law which says this kind of company is a "legal entity": it has a legal life separate from its owners or shareholders. In this way, a company can outlive the people who started it. This idea was invented in medieval times, but really flowered in the 19th century. It has spread around the world since then.

Most businesses are created for commerce. There are big and small businesses. For example, one person can open a small barber-shop. A big business, like Microsoft,  employs thousands of people all over the world.

Some businesses need fixed locations. Examples are an office, store, or farm. For some businesses the worker goes to different locations. Examples are carpenters or electricians. They usually bring everything they need for work in their truck.

Business can also mean the work or current state of a business. A business owner might say: "I am doing a lot of business" or "My business is good" or "Business is bad".

The term can also be used in a more general way. As a noun, it can be used, for example, to speak about a broad area of activity.

A rocket may be a missile, spacecraft, aircraft or other vehicle which is pushed by a rocket engine. Some big rockets are launch vehicles and some are manned (e.g. Saturn V). Other rockets, for example missiles, are unmanned.  ("Manned" means that a person is in it; "unmanned" means that the machine goes without a person.)

Most rockets can be launched from the ground because exhaust thrust from the engine is bigger than the weight of the vehicle on Earth. Some are used to bring satellites into orbit, for example from a spaceport. Some rockets such as ion thrusters are too weak and heavy to lift themselves. They work after other rockets bring them to outer space.

The Chinese invented the rocket using gunpowder. The first rockets were shaped like arrows and weren't very fast. Most rockets still work by fire. The fire makes hot exhaust gases that expand and shoot out a nozzle, pushing the rocket forward.

Most rockets still use solid fuel to make the fire. The biggest ones use liquid fuel because it makes a hotter fire so the rocket is more powerful. However,  the liquid fuel safely is difficult and expensive. Some satellite launch vehicles use both.

Manned rockets, similar to other manned flying machines, are designed to limit their acceleration and vibration to protect the crew. Unmanned rockets however are not bound by the limits of humans.

Some rockets go faster than the speed of sound (). Those that go into Low Earth orbit go .

Yuri Gagarin was a Soviet cosmonaut who, on 12 April 1961, became the first human to fly into outer space. He was in the R-7 rocket launched from Kazakhstan.

On 16 July, 1969, American astronauts Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin became the first humans on the moon, after launching in a Saturn V rocket.

Electricity is the presence and flow of electric current. Using electricity, we can transfer energy in ways that make machines do work. Its best-known form is the flow of electrons through conductors such as copper wires.

The word "electricity" is sometimes used to mean "electrical energy". They are not the same thing: electricity is a transmission medium for electrical energy, like sea water is a transmission medium for wave energy. An item which allows electricity to move through it is called a conductor. Copper wires and other metal items are good conductors, allowing electricity to move through them and transmit electrical energy. Plastics are a poor conductor (they are insulators) and don't allow much electricity to move through them. They stop the transmission of electrical energy.

Electrical energy can be made naturally (such as lightning), or by people (such as in a generator). It can be used to power machines and electrical devices. When electrical charges are not moving, electricity is called static electricity. When the charges are moving they are an electric current, sometimes called 'dynamic electricity'. Lightning is the most known - and dangerous - kind of electric current in nature, but sometimes static electricity causes things to stick together in nature as well.

Electricity can be dangerous, especially around water because water is a form of good conductor as it has impurities like salt in it. Salt can help electricity flow. Since the nineteenth century, electricity has been used in every part of our lives. Until then, it was just a curiosity seen in the lightning of a thunderstorm.

Electrical energy can be created if a magnet passes close to a metal wire. This is the method used by a generator. The biggest generators are in power stations. Electrical energy can also be released by combining chemicals in a jar with two different kinds of metal rods. This is the method used in a battery. Static electricity can be created through the friction between two materials - for instance a wool cap and a plastic ruler. This may make a spark. Electrical energy can also be created using energy from the sun, as in photovoltaic cells.

Electrical energy arrives at homes through wires from the places where it is made. It is used by electric lamps, electric heaters, etc. Many appliances such as washing machines and electric cookers use electricity. In factories, electrical energy powers machines. People who work with electricity and electrical devices in homes and factories are called "electricians".

The idea of electricity, or the fact that amber acquires the power to attract light objects when rubbed, may have been known to the Greek philosopher Thales of Miletus, who lived about 600 B.C.

Another Greek philosopher, Theophrastus, stated in a treatise that this power is possessed by other substances.

The first scientific study of electrical and magnetic happenings, however, did not appear until A.D. 1600, from research done by the English physician William Gilbert. Gilbert was the first to apply the term electric (Greek, elektron, "amber") to the force that substances exerted after being rubbed. He also distinguished between magnetic and electric action.

Ben Franklin spent much time in electrical research. His famous kite experiment proved that the atmospheric electricity (that causes the phenomena of lightning and thunder) is identical with the electrostatic charge on a Leyden jar. Franklin developed his theory that electricity is a single "fluid" existing in all matter, and that its effects can be explained by excesses and shortages of this fluid.

There are two types of electric charges that push and pull on each other: positive charges and negative charges. Electric charges push or pull on each other if they are not touching. This is possible because each charge makes an electric field around itself. An electric field is an area that surrounds a charge. At each point near a charge, the electric field points in a certain direction. If a positive charge is put at that point, it will be pushed in that direction. If a negative charge is put at that point, it will be pushed in the exact opposite direction.

It works like magnets, and in fact, electricity creates a magnetic field, in which similar charges repel each other and opposite charges attract. This means that if you put two negatives close together and let them go, they would move apart. The same is true for two positive charges. But if you put a positive charge and a negative charge close together, they would pull towards each other. A short way to remember this is the phrase opposites attract, likes repel.

All the matter in the universe is made of tiny particles with positive, negative or neutral charges. The positive charges are called protons, and the negative charges are called electrons. Protons are much heavier than electrons, but they both have the same amount of electric charge, except that protons are positive and electrons are negative. Because "opposites attract," protons and electrons stick together. A few protons and electrons can form bigger particles called atoms and molecules. Atoms and molecules are still very tiny. They are too small to see. Any large object, like your finger, has more atoms and molecules in it than anyone can count. We can only estimate how many there are.

Because negative electrons and positive protons stick together to make big objects, all big objects that we can see and feel are electrically neutral. Electrically is a word meaning "describing electricity", and neutral is a word meaning "balanced." That is why we do not feel objects pushing and pulling on us from a distance, as they would if everything was electrically charged. All big objects are electrically neutral because there is the same amount of positive and negative charge in the world. We could say that the world is exactly balanced, or neutral. Scientists still do not know why this is so.

The electrons can move all around the material. Protons never move around a solid object because they are so heavy, at least compared to the electrons. A material that lets electrons move around is called a conductor. A material that keeps each electron tightly in place is called an insulator. Examples of conductors are copper, aluminum, silver, and gold. Examples of insulators are rubber, plastic, and wood. Copper is used very often as a conductor because it is a very good conductor and there is so much of it in the world. Copper is found in electrical wires. But sometimes, other materials are used.

Inside a conductor, electrons bounce around, but they do not keep going in one direction for long. If an electric field is set up inside the conductor, the electrons will all start to move in the direction opposite to the direction the field is pointing (because electrons are negatively charged). A battery can make an electric field inside a conductor. If both ends of a piece of wire are connected to the two ends of a battery (called the electrodes), the loop that was made is called an electrical circuit. Electrons will flow around and around the circuit as long as the battery is making an electric field inside the wire. This flow of electrons around the circuit is called electric current.

A conducting wire used to carry electric current is often wrapped in an insulator such as rubber. This is because wires that carry current are very dangerous. If a person or an animal touched a bare wire carrying current, they could get hurt or even die depending on how strong the current was and how much electrical energy the current is transmitting. You should be careful around electrical sockets and bare wires that might be carrying current.

It is possible to connect an electrical device to a circuit so that electrical current will flow through a device. This current will transmit electrical energy to make the device do something that we want it to do. Electrical devices can be very simple. For example, in a light bulb, current carries energy through a special wire called a filament, which makes it glow. Electrical devices can also be very complicated. Electrical energy can be used to drive an electric motor inside a tool like a drill or a pencil sharpener. Electrical energy is also used to power modern electronic devices, including telephones, computers, and televisions.

Here are a few terms that a person can come across when studying how electricity works. The study of electricity and how it makes electrical circuits possible is called electronics. There is a field of engineering called electrical engineering, where people come up with new things using electricity. All of these terms are important for them to know.

Electrical energy is mostly generated in places called power stations. Most power stations use heat to boil water into steam which turns a steam engine. The steam engine's turbine turns a machine called a 'generator'. Coiled wires inside the generator are made to spin in a magnetic field. This causes electricity to flow through the wires, carrying electrical energy. This process is called electromagnetic induction. Michael Faraday discovered how to do this.

Many sources of heat can be used to boil water for generators. Heat sources may use renewable energy resources in which the supply of heat energy never runs out and non-renewable energy resources in which the supply will be eventually used up.

Sometimes a natural flow, such as wind power or water power, can be used directly to turn a generator so no heat is needed.

Global warming or global heating is the rise in temperature of Earth’s air and oceans. It is happening mainly because humans burn coal, oil, natural gas, and cut down forests.

Average temperatures today are about  higher than before people started burning a lot of coal around 1750. By the year 2100 temperatures will very likely be  to  higher than before 1900.There will be more warming in the Arctic, on land and in the northern half of the world.

Although climate has changed before people started burning a lot of stuff, the last time the Earth was this hot was probably more than 100 thousand years ago.

Global warming is probably getting faster. It is making more heat waves and wildfires, and melting the ice around the North Pole.

The present global warming is mostly because of people burning things, such as gasoline for cars and natural gas to keep houses warm. But the heat from the burning itself only makes the world a tiny bit warmer: it is the carbon dioxide from the burning which is the biggest part of the problem. Among greenhouse gases, the increase of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is the main cause of global warming. Svante Arrhenius predicted this more than a hundred years ago. Arrhenius confirmed the work of Joseph Fourier 200 years ago.

When people burn fossil fuels like coal, oil and natural gas this adds carbon dioxide to the air, since fossil fuels contain lots of carbon and burning means joining most of the atoms in the fuel with oxygen. When people cut down many trees (deforestation), this means less carbon dioxide is taken out of the atmosphere by those plants. Animals who have four places in their stomachs, like cows and sheep, also cause global warming, because their burps contain a greenhouse gas called methane.  Although methane remains in the atmosphere for a shorter time than CO₂—roughly 12 years compared to centuries—it has a much stronger heat-trapping ability, making it a critical target for short-term climate mitigation. Reducing methane emissions can quickly slow the rate of global warming. According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), human-caused methane emissions have increased dramatically since pre-industrial times, accounting for roughly 30% of the rise in global temperatures since the 1800s.

As the Earth's surface temperature becomes hotter, the sea level rises. This is partly because water over  expands when it gets warmer. It is also partly because warm temperatures make glaciers and ice caps melt. The sea level rise causes coastal areas to flood. Weather patterns, including where and how much rain or snow falls, are changing. Deserts will probably become larger. Colder areas will warm up faster than warm areas. Strong storms may become more likely and farming may not produce as much food. These changes will not be the same everywhere.

In the Paris Agreement, almost all countries agreed to keep temperature rise below , but current plans are not enough to limit global warming as much. People in government and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) are talking about global warming. But governments, companies, and other people do not agree on future plans. Some things that could reduce warming are to burn less fossil fuels, grow more trees, eat less meat, and put some carbon dioxide back in the ground. People could adapt to some temperature change. A few people think nothing should change.

Climate change has happened constantly over the history of the Earth, including the coming and going of ice ages. But modern climate change is different because people are putting carbon dioxide into the atmosphere more quickly than before.

Since the 1800's, people have recorded daily temperatures. By about 1850, there were enough places measuring temperature so that scientists could know the global average temperature. In 1979, satellites started measuring the temperature of the Earth.

Climatologists measure other things to try to figure out past temperatures before there were thermometers. This means measuring things that change when it gets colder or warmer. One way is to cut into a tree and measure how far apart the growth rings are. This is called dendrochronology. Trees that live a long time can give us an idea of how temperature and rain changed while they were alive.

For most of the past 2000 years the average temperature of the world didn't change much. There were some times where the temperatures were a little warmer or cooler in some places. One of the most famous warm times was the Medieval Warm Period and one of the most famous cool times was the Little Ice Age (not really an ice age). Tree ring dating can only help scientists work out the temperature back to about 10,000 years ago. Ice cores are used to find out all the temperature back to almost a million years ago, and for some times to over 4 million years ago.

There are several  greenhouse gases that cause the Earth to warm. The most important one is carbon dioxide (CO2). CO2 comes from power plants which burn coal and natural gas to make electricity. Cars and trucks which burn gasoline or diesel put CO2 in the air through their exhaust. Airplanes do too and their contrails make warming worse. About 35 billion tons of carbon dioxide are released into the Earth's atmosphere each year. The amount of CO2 in the air is about 50% more than it was around 1750. About three-quarters of the CO2 that people have put in the air during the past 20 years is from burning fossil fuel like coal or oil. The rest mostly comes from changes in how land is used, like cutting down trees.

The second most important greenhouse gas is methane. A tonne of methane is much more warming than a tonne of CO2 but methane stays in the atmosphere for only about ten years. About 40% comes from nature, like wetlands; and the rest is because of humans, cows, landfill and leaks when oil and gas are produced.

Dust in the air may come from natural sources such as volcanos, erosion and meteoric dust. Some of this dust falls out within a few hours. Some is aerosol, so small that it could stay in the air for years. The aerosol particles in the atmosphere make the earth colder. The effect of dust therefore cancels out some of the effects of greenhouse gases. Even though humans also put aerosols in the air when they burn coal or oil this only cancels out the greenhouse effect of the fuel burning for less than 20 years, The carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere much longer and keeps on warming the earth.

Smoke and dust near the ground is bad, because when people breath it they might get ill, like cancer. But some people say that in a climate change emergency the Earth could be kept cool by reflecting some sunlight back into space, for example by putting dust very high in the air or making clouds whiter. They say this would give more time to do a proper fix. This is so easy and cheap that even a middle-size country could do it. But there are a lot of problems: for example it might be good for that country but bad for some other countries.

Global warming makes heatwaves. Heatwaves are dangerous because very hot weather can kill old or sick people. But fewer people will die from cold. It is very hard to add up how many people will die early, but generally it will be poor people who die from heat, for example if they have not got enough money to buy an air-conditioner.

Heatwaves can dry out forests so they burn more easily, like in Los Angeles in 2024.

Sometimes there is not enough rain, so it is difficult for farmers to grow vegetables. But sometimes there is too much rain, so floods wash away houses. Global warming is making tropical storms stronger, and because the sea is higher they are more likely to flood cities on the coast.

Some people can do things by themselves to slow climate change, but other things can only be done by people working together in business or government. For example if your gas boiler breaks down you might replace it with a heat pump, but only government can change the taxes on electricity and gas. A business can put 10 million solar panels in fields much more cheaply than a million people can put ten panels on each of their roofs.

A government may help businesses, for example to build factories to make electric vehicles. But in a democracy the government might be voted out of power a few years later and the new government might decide to stop that support. As it takes years to build car factories it is very hard for business to plan ahead if climate policy keeps being changed, like in the United States. To try to make this less of a problem government can create an independent organisation to give long-term advice, like in the United Kingdom.

Sometimes people vote for leaders who want to slow climate change. Most countries try to emit less greenhouse gases, for example by shutting down coal-fired power plants. But some countries want to carry on making a lot of money by selling oil or gas. And some countries are not democracies so it is hard for people to change their leaders.

The Kyoto Protocol was signed in 1997. It was meant to reduce the amount of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere to below their levels in 1990. However, carbon dioxide levels have continued to rise.

Energy conservation is used to burn less fossil fuel, for example people in cold countries can put insulation on their houses to keep them warm so they don’t have to burn so much gas for their central heating. People can also use energy sources that don't burn fossil fuel, like solar panels or electricity from nuclear power or wind power.

Some factories might be able to prevent carbon dioxide from getting out into the atmosphere, for example from making cement. This is called carbon capture and storage (CCS).

People can change how they live because of the effect of climate change. This is called adapting to climate change. For example, they can go to places where the weather is better, or build walls around cities to keep flood water out. Or we can make more parks in cities to keep people cool and sponge up a lot of rain.

This costs money, and rich people and rich countries will be able to change more easily than the poor.

As early as the 1820s some scientists were discussing climate change: sunlight heats the surface of the Earth, and Joseph Fourier suggested that some of the heat radiated from the surface is trapped by the atmosphere before it can escape into space. This is called the greenhouse effect.

In 1856 Eunice Newton Foote did tests which showed that the warming effect of the Sun is greater for air with water vapour than for dry air, and that the effect is even greater with carbon dioxide. So she said that "An atmosphere of that gas would give to our earth a high temperature...".

Starting in 1859, John Tyndall showed that nitrogen and oxygen—together totaling 99% of dry air—are transparent to radiated heat. However, water vapour and gases such as methane and carbon dioxide absorb radiated heat and re-radiate that heat into the atmosphere. Tyndall suggested that changes in the concentration of these gases may have caused climatic changes in the past, including ice ages. In 1896, Svante Arrhenius tried to prove that it would take thousands of years for the industrial production of CO2 to raise the Earth’s temperature 5-6°C.

In the mid 20th century, scientists worked out that there was a 10% increase in carbon dioxide in the atmosphere over the 19th century, which made it a bit warmer. It was at this time that people believed the emissions of CO2 would increase exponentially in the future and the oceans would absorb any surplus of greenhouse gases. In 1956, Gilbert N. Plass decided that greenhouse gas emissions would have an effect on the Earth’s temperature. He argued that not thinking about GHG emissions would be a mistake. Soon after, scientists studying all different kinds of science began to work together to figure out the mystery of GHG emissions and their effects. As technology advanced, it was in the 1980s that there was proof of a rise in CO2 levels. An ice core, captured through drilling, provided clear evidence that carbon dioxide levels have risen.

The climate of the Earth will never be absolutely stable because there are small but unpredictable variations in the Earth's orbit about the Sun. In the deep past there have also been large changes in the Earth's atmosphere. For a longer account, see climate change.

Sea level is rising because water over  expands when it gets warmer. Probably more important is the melting of ice sheets. The Antarctica and Greenland ice sheets are melting. Sea level will rise between half and one meter by 2100, and between 2 and 7 meter by 2300.

Low-lying areas such as Bangladesh, Florida, the Netherlands and other areas face massive flooding.

Many cities are sea ports and under threat of flooding if the present sea level rises.

These and the other cities have either started trying to deal with rising sea level and related storm surge, or are discussing this, according to .

A student is a person who goes to school to learn something. Students can be children, teenagers or adults who are going to university, but it may also be other people who are learning, such as in college. A young person who cannot be classed as a student is called a pupil. Usually, students will learn from a teacher or a lecturer if at university. They also do much reading. Students can also be studying for a specific profession. If they study to be officers, they are cadets.

Students in school learn subjects. There are many subjects in school like:

Pollution is when harmful substances are added to the environment and then change it in a bad way. There are six kinds of pollution of the environment:

As pollution grows, ways to combat it have been in demand. Solar energy and wind energy give people clean opportunities to power their homes. But these may also have environmental issues depending on the situation. When people use these alternative forms of energy, they put less carbon dioxide into the environment.

Water pollution is the presence of harmful materials in water, such as sewage, dissolved metal, waste from farms, factories and crude oil spilled from oil tankers. The three main substances that pollute water are nitrates from fertilizers, sewage, and detergents.

Activities such as bathing and washing clothes near lakes, ponds or rivers add nutrients like nitrate and phosphate into the water bodies.This leads to excessive growth of algae on the surface of water. It blocks the penetration of sunlight and air, thus reducing oxygen.

It causes harm to organisms living in water and can also harm people's health. In extreme cases, it may cause diseases like cancer. It also leads to loss of a large amount of aquatic life.

Water pollution has been a problem from the time human population increased, and live in cities. Cities have been prone to cholera and typhoid fever and other infectious diseases since Roman times. Existing water systems put in place in the 19th century are overwhelmed by the rapid growth of population in cities.

Air can be polluted by many things. Examples include poisonous gases, sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, carbon monoxide and very small particulates. Smoke and harmful gases released by fires, industries, and thermal power plants cause air pollution. Using coal and wood as fuels for fire causes a lot of air pollution. Petroleum produces less pollution per ton, but it causes a lot of pollution since a lot of it is burned globally. Air pollution may cause health problems such as asthma or other breathing problems.

Air pollution causes global warming and acid rain. This makes it difficult for some living things to survive.

Noise pollution, also known as sound pollution, is harmful to the brain and hearing of all animals and humans. This includes the sound of vehicles, loud speakers, airplanes, jets, train horns etc. Noise pollution can cause ear problems or even permanent deafness, especially to older people. The schools which are beside the roads suffer from the car exhaust fumes as well as noise pollution caused by cars. Students cannot concentrate in their studies sometimes because of noise pollution. People in hospitals near main roads also suffer.

Thermal pollution is the harmful release of heated liquid into a body of water or heat released into the air as a waste product of an industry.

A common cause of thermal pollution is using water as a coolant by power stations and industrial manufacturers. This puts back warm water, and so raises the temperature and decreases how much oxygen is in the water. The heat released into the air will make the air warmer which increase global warming.

Tourism means people traveling for fun and adventure. It includes activities such as sightseeing and camping. People who travel for fun are called "tourists". Places where many tourists stay are sometimes called "resorts". Places that people go to for tourism are called tourist s.

Package tour operators can offer all these services to a group who will go together. This can be cheaper than paying for them separately.

Tourism can bring damage to the local area, and/or the tourists. Litter, scuba-diving and deforestation are problems for popular places such as St. Lucia, Hawaii and others. Scuba-diving can damage coral reefs which are home to hundreds of species of sea animals. Tourism can change culture when people learn each other's ways, and certain local traditions are being put aside for tourists.

A physician or medical doctor is a person who uses medicine to treat illness and injuries to improve a patient's health.

In most countries, the basic medical degree qualifies a person to treat patients and prescribe appropriate treatment, including drugs. A physician may also do the simplest kinds of surgery.

Doctors are trained in medical schools which are usually part of a university. They hold a degree awarded by a medical school. Doctors work in hospitals, medical clinics, from their own offices, or may even visit people in their homes. They may also work for schools, companies, sports teams, or the military. Medical doctors are often assisted in their work by nurses.

The basic degree is awarded on the successful completion of medical school education and practice. It is given different names in different countries. It is M.D. (Doctor of Medicine) in the USA, Scotland and some other countries. In England, different universities use different terms. The University of London qualification is M.B. Ch.B. (that is, Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery). Most countries have higher qualifications, based on experience, supervised work, more exams, and theses. Because of its history, in England a general practitioner eventually becomes an MRCP (member of the Royal College of Physicians), but a surgeon works towards becoming an MRCS (Member of the Royal College of Surgeons). A similar system is used in Edinburgh, Ireland and Canada.

Medical doctors treat patients by finding out what is wrong with them, known as a diagnosis. They ask questions about the patient's symptoms. These might include fever or pain. They may ask about past illnesses or family members who have been sick. They will then examine the patient. They look at different parts of the body, listen to the heart and lungs with a stethoscope. Sometimes they may need to collect a sample of blood, use an x-ray machine, or use other tools. When they have gathered enough information, a doctor can make a diagnosis and then plan a treatment. Often they prescribe drugs.

Some physicians only work on certain diseases or injuries, or may only work on one part of the human body. These doctors are called specialists. For example, there are doctors who specialize in diseases of the stomach or intestines. Other medical doctors are "general practitioners" or "family practitioners". This means that they do a little bit of everything. The general practitioner the first doctor a patient will see, and this doctor may decide to send them to a specialist doctor if needed.

A qualified doctor has many opportunities to work in different countries, though they may need to pass more examinations.  Many places rely on immigrants to keep their health services going.  In 2023 the highest pay for doctors was in Luxembourg, where specialists could earn $352,300 and GPs $278,900 a year.

A hospital is a place where a person goes to be healed when they are sick or injured. The difference between a hospital and other healthcare places like a clinic or a doctor's office is that a hospital will have beds where patients can stay overnight. These patients are called inpatients. The goal of inpatient treatment is to provide 24-7 medical stabilization, which is why this type of treatment has more of a hospital-like feel since patients are monitored by doctors, nurses, therapists, and social workers. Treatment is structured and has a schedule that can include individual therapy, group therapy, case management, and support groups.

Hospitals also treat people who do not stay overnight, called outpatients. Doctors and nurses work at hospitals. Doctors make use of advanced medical technology to heal patients.

Patients who are staying at the hospital will always be under the care of doctors and nurses who are always available for taking care of the injured or sick patients. Hospitals always have the tools and machines needed for treating the patients.

The word hospital originally meant "a place where people can stay". There have been hospitals for sick people since ancient times. They were often created and run by religious groups. In the early modern period, hospitals began to be funded by donations from rich people and by governments. Today, hospitals might get money from the government, from charging patients for treatments and check-ups, from patients' health insurance, from people giving to charity or a mixture of those things.

Bacteria (singular: bacterium) are very small organisms. They are prokaryotic microorganisms.

Bacterial cells do not have a nucleus, and most have no organelles with membranes around them. Most have a cell wall. They do have DNA, and their biochemistry is basically the same as other living things. They are amongst the simplest and the oldest organisms.

Almost all bacteria are so tiny they can only be seen through a microscope. Bacteria are made up of one cell, so they are a kind of unicellular organism. They were one of the earliest forms of life, and are simple single-celled organisms. They include extremophiles, which live in extreme habitats.

There are probably more individual bacteria than any other sort of organism on the planet. Most bacteria live in the ground or in water, but many live inside or on the skin of other organisms, including humans. There are about as many bacterial cells as human cells in our bodies. Some bacteria cause diseases, but others help us in everyday activities like digesting food (gut flora). Some we use in factories to make cheese and yogurt.

The founder of bacteriology was a German biologist called Ferdinand Cohn (18281898). He published the first biological classification of bacteria, based on their appearance.

A bacterium reproduces (creates more bacteria) by dividing in half and creating two "daughter" cells. Each daughter is identical in shape to the parent.

Bacteria do not have sexes, but they do transmit DNA by several kinds of horizontal gene transfer. This is how they share resistance to antibiotics from one strain to another. The complete DNA sequence is known for many bacterial strains. Each bacterium has only one chromosome.

Bacteria vary widely in size and shape, but in general they are at least ten times larger than viruses. A typical bacterium is about 1 µm (one micrometer) in diameter, so a thousand bacteria lined up would be one millimeter long. There are about five nonillion (5×1030) bacteria on Earth.

Bacteria are identified and grouped by their shapes. Bacilli are rod-shaped, cocci are ball-shaped, spirilla are spiral-shaped, and vibrio are shaped like a comma or a boomerang.

Pathogenic bacteria, the harmful kind, enter the human body from the air, water or food. Once inside, these bacteria attach themselves to or invade specific cells in our respiratory system, digestive tract or in any open wound. There they begin to reproduce and spread while using your body's food and nutrients to give them energy to help them reproduce.

Some bacteria are extremophiles. Some microbes thrive inside rocks up to 580 meters below the sea floor under 2.6 kilometers of ocean off the Pacific Northwest of the United States. According to one of the researchers, "You can find microbes everywhere — they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are."

Viruses were the first and are the most serious enemies of bacteria. Everywhere bacteria are, they get attacked by viruses. The viruses which attack bacteria are called bacteriophages.

Something is now known about how bacteria protect themselves against viruses. Some bacteria and most archaea have CRISPR–Cas systems as an adaptive defence against viruses. These keep sections of viral DNA. These are used to target and destroy later infections by the virus. The process is similar to RNA interference.

All modern ideas start with the sequence analysis of DNA and RNA. In 1987, Carl Woese, the forerunner of the molecular phylogeny revolution, divided bacteria into 11 divisions based on 16S ribosomal RNA (SSU) sequences:

A supermarket, grocery store (or just grocery) is a retail store that sells food. Most grocery stores sell fresh fruit, vegetables, seafood, meat, and other prepared foods.

The person who controls a grocery store is called a grocer.  A grocer will order food from farmers or other people who send out farmers food to other grocery stores and restaurants.

There are a range of different types and sizes of grocery stores.  Some grocery stores are small community stores with a limited range of items.  Other grocery stores are large, with a wide selection of food items.

They may also sell household cleaning and laundry supplies, and hygiene items (soap, toothpaste, etc.). They may also contain a pharmacy (known as a drug store or chemist in some places).

Items at a grocery store can be sold in one of two ways. Most fruits, vegetables, meat, and seafood are usually sold by weight (for example, apples cost 99 cents per pound), while other items are usually sold by quantity (for example, table salt costs $1.59 for each box). Not all items are the same price at each grocery store. Also, every week, some items at grocery stores cost less that what it normally would cost (we say that these items are "on sale"), so people would want to go buy them since they don't have to pay as much as they would normally have to get that item. Many grocery stores print a flyer that shows which items are on sale that week. These flyers are then sent to other people in the mail, who would read the flyer and go to the store to buy the items shown in it.

Supermarkets are large grocery stores that sell a large variety of fresh and packaged food and other consumer or household products. Supermarkets are divided into sections, such as bakery, dairy, produce (fruits and vegetables), frozen, meat, and deli, along with a "general grocery" section where one can find packaged goods, cleaning supplies, and personal hygiene items. Many supermarkets today now also sell hot, prepared food that is ready to eat, or contains a food court with different fast food shops. The term "supermarket" usually refers to a larger store than the term "grocery store."

A hypermarket is a very large supermarket that is part of a larger general merchandise store such as Walmart, which also sells clothes, electronics, household hardware, and other items. It can be said to be a hybrid (or combination) of a grocery store and a department store. These stores are mainly found in suburbs where there is a lot of room to build and near where people live.

Until the 20th century, grocery stores were small.  The owner, called a shopkeeper, would ask the  what he or she would like to buy.  The shopkeeper would then get the items, bring it to the customer, and put them in bags which the customer would take with them.  He would then  how much the customer has to pay, and take the money from the customer.  The customer then took the bags of items out of the store by him/herself.

Today, most groceries stores are too big for one person to take care of.  Because of this, customers must find the items they wants by themselves.  Most often, the customer takes a shopping basket or shopping cart and put the items into the basket or cart.  For some items, like meat and seafood, the customer still has to have an employee get or prepare the item.  When customers have finished selecting, they bring the items to the "checkout", where a person called a cashier scans the customer's items into a cash register (or a computer as part of a point of sale system) and then takes the customer's payment.  Supermarkets typically accept payment by cash, debit cards, and/or credit cards.  In the 21st century, there are so-called self-checkout systems where customers scan the items themselves.

Many large supermarkets also have a loyalty program, where a customer can earn points by purchasing products. When a customer has enough points, a discount or reward is given. These programs are meant to make customers come back to the same store again and again.

A job is any legal activity that allows an individual to perform a service and in return earn credits they can use to buy things.

A job can mean "some work that has to be done", for example: there are jobs to be done in the house: washing up, mending things that are broken, etc.

A job can also mean: work that a person does to earn money.  The word "job" may be used when a person works for someone else "an employer" who pays them for the work. For example, a teacher's job is to teach children or adults. A taxi driver's job is to drive people in a taxi. A firefighter rescues people from burning buildings and puts out fires.   A dermatologist's job is to diagnose and treat skin diseases.  Some jobs pay very little.

The International Labour Organization was established to make people's job conditions better. It became an organization of the United Nations in 1946.

A restaurant (sometimes known as a diner) is a place where cooked food is sold to the public, and where people sit down to eat it. It is also a place where people go to enjoy the time and to eat a meal.

Some restaurants are a chain, meaning that there are restaurants which have the same name and serve the same food. McDonald's, Burger King, and Pizza Hut are examples of chain restaurants that are all over the world. These restaurants serve fast food, that is, inexpensive food, prepared and served quickly. At some, you do not have to even get out of the car to eat. You can pay and get your order from a window. These places are called drive-throughs.

There are also chain restaurants that serve slightly more expensive food. They are called fast casual restaurants. Applebee's and Perkins are examples of this type of chain restaurant.

Haute cuisine or 'fine dining' is found in a guide, such as the Michelin Guide, the most famous restaurant guide in the world. Their 3-star rosettes are given only to restaurants with the highest standards of cooking and service. Interestingly, the Guide gives more 3-stars to Tokyo and Kyoto than to Paris, London and New York together. Traditionally, the restaurants of top hotels such as the Hotel de Paris in Monte Carlo or the Hôtel Ritz Paris were the main places recognized for fine dining. Today, most Michelin Guide restaurants are separate establishments.

In Ancient Greece and Rome there were small restaurant-bars offering food and drinks. They were called thermopolia (singular thermopolium). Many dwellings did not have kitchens, and eating out was an important part of socializing.

In Pompeii, 158 thermopolia with service counters have been found. They were along the main road of the town and round the public spaces.

A nurse is a person who is trained to give care to people who are sick or injured. Nurses work with doctors and other health care workers to make patients well and to keep them fit and healthy. Nurses also help with end-of-life needs and assist other family members with grieving.

Nursing is a profession, like a doctor, but training for a nurse is different in how long a person must train and what kind of training they need. In some places, nurses may train for three to five years or more before they get a license as a nurse.

Nurses work in many places. Nurses work in hospitals, in doctors' offices, and in the community. They even visit people at home if they can not get out.

Sometimes, people decide to become nurses rather than doctors because the nurses will be able to help patients directly, by talking to them, doing things they need, carefully watching that nothing goes wrong, and then seeing them as they get better.

Like doctors, nurses can choose what work they do. Some nurses train and work to help during surgery. Some nurses train to help people understand health issues like nutrition (what to eat), and disease (what can make people sick). Nurses can do many different jobs to help people.

Nurses are in demand across the world because there are not enough nurses to handle the growing number of people who need care. Some nurses travel to another location to work for a few months in what is called travel nursing. Many migrate to richer countries. The British National Health Service, like many others, has relied for many years on importing nurses from poorer countries because not enough were trained in the UK. In 2023, there were more Ghanaian nurses in NHS than in Ghana. Nursing associates  who have less training  were introduced in 2018. 7,900 nursing associates were working in the NHS in 2022 but only 391 have gone on to become a registered nurse.

Registered Nurse in some countries like U.S is a term for an officially registered nurse. In hospitals where nurses wear uniforms with caps, an R.N. is  by the fact that the cap has two black stripes.

Nursing in Australia is done by Registered Nurses or Enrolled Nurses. Both must complete education past high school. An Enrolled Nurse must complete a course of study between 12 and 18 months. Registered Nurses need to complete a Bachelor's degree.

Titles have changed because men as well as women can be nurses. It was, in most countries, a wholly female occupation. The titles were designed for females and have now been revised to be genderless. The exception to this is midwife, a term still used because it seems natural that a nurse helping a mother through childbirth should be a female. There are some males acting as midwives. The supervisory body for UK nursing is the Nursing and Midwifery Council.

Some medical and surgical groups operate as teams. This means that senior surgeons always operate with the same group of people, thereby reducing the risk of mistakes, and allowing juniors to learn and understand the individual cases.

Also, moving around as a team allows specialist groups to serve more than one hospital. This is particularly useful when the amount of work in a speciality does not permit having a full team on site in each hospital.

A vaccine is a biological preparation. It is given to prevent a specific infectious or malignant disease. It only works against the microorganism for which it is prepared. It is usually given by injection, and called vaccination.

At its best, vaccination gives immunity to an infectious disease caused by a particular microorganism (bacteria or virus). For example, the flu vaccine makes it very much less likely that a person will get the flu. The flu virus continually changes, and has many strains. That is why re-vaccination is needed every year.

At first, vaccines were usually made from something that is alive, or was alive. Now they may be built up by viral biochemistry. Each vaccine has its own history, and what is true of one might not be true of another.

The word "vaccine" comes from the Latin vacca, meaning "cow").  In 1796, Edward Jenner used a milkmaid infected with cowpox (variolae vaccinae) to protect people against smallpox. The use of vaccines is called vaccination.

Vaccination had been done before Jenner. Powdered smallpox material was blown up the nostrils of the subject.

Edward Jenner created the first vaccine in the 1770s. At this time, smallpox was a deadly disease. Jenner noticed that people who had already had cowpox (a disease that is related to smallpox) usually did not get smallpox. He thought that getting cowpox protected people against smallpox.

To test this idea, Jenner gave a boy cowpox. Then he infected the boy with smallpox. The boy did not get sick because he had already had cowpox. Jenner was right: having cowpox protected people against smallpox.

Because cowpox inoculation made fewer people sick than smallpox inoculation, England made smallpox inoculation illegal in 1840. In 1853, they made another law that said every child had to be vaccinated against smallpox using Jenner's vaccine.

In the 20th century, scientists created vaccines to protect people against diphtheria, measles, mumps, and rubella. In the 1950s, Jonas Salk created the polio vaccine.

However, vaccines still do not exist for many important diseases, like malaria and HIV.

Many countries have passed compulsory vaccination laws – laws that require certain people to get vaccinated. For example, in many countries, children have to be vaccinated against certain diseases in order to go to public school. On the other hand, there are some religions which ban all forms of vaccination: the Seventh-day Adventist Church is an example.

One common type of vaccine is a "live vaccine". This type of vaccine contains a small amount of a live virus or bacteria. Before the vaccine is given, scientists weaken the virus or bacteria so it cannot make a person sick. When a person gets a live vaccine, their immune system learns to recognize and fight off that virus or bacteria.  hen, if the person is exposed to the virus or bacteria in the future, their immune system will already "know" how to fight it off. Examples of live vaccines include vaccines for measles, mumps, and chickenpox.

Another common type of vaccine is an "inactivated vaccine". These vaccines contain dead viruses or bacteria. These do not cause the immune system to react as strongly as live vaccines. Because of this, people may need "booster shots" – extra doses of the vaccine, given at certain times, so their immune system can "learn" how to fight off the infection. Examples of inactivated vaccines include vaccines for pertussis (whooping cough), rabies, and hepatitis B.

In other vaccines, only a protein molecule from the virus or bacterium is injected into the patient. The protein is enough for the patient's immune system to recognize the whole germ.

With messenger RNA vaccines, only the messenger RNA (mRNA), which acts as a blueprint or recipe for the protein, is injected into the patient. The first mRNA vaccines were made in the 1990s, but scientists did not make large numbers of them until the 2010s.  Some mRNA vaccines work against cancer and can make tumors smaller.

Vaccines do not guarantee complete protection from a disease.  In other words, a person can get a disease that they were vaccinated against.

Sometimes, this happens because the person's immune system did not respond to the vaccine (it did not "learn" how to fight off the disease after the person got the vaccine). This may happen because the person's immune system is already weak (for example, because of diabetes, HIV infection, old age, or steroid use). It may also happen because the person's immune system cannot make the particular B cells which make the antibodies that stick to the pathogen.

Some vaccines work better than others at protecting people from a disease. The decrease in getting the disease is called efficacy. For example, if 80% fewer vaccinated people get the disease, 80% is the efficacy. There are many reasons for different efficacy:

Since vaccines first existed, there have been people who did not agree with the idea of using vaccines. Around the world, most scientists and doctors agree that the benefits of using vaccines are much greater than the risks. The adverse effects from vaccines are rare. Not vaccinating people is a much greater risk, because vaccines prevent suffering and death from infectious diseases.

There have been controversies over using vaccines such as whether vaccines are safe, the amount of research and whether it is morally right to force people to get vaccinated.

Some political groups argue that people should be able to choose whether or not to get vaccinated. They argue that laws requiring people to get vaccinated violate individual rights. In response, one study says: "Vaccine refusal not only increases the individual risk of disease but also increases the risk for the whole community".

Some parents choose not to follow the regular vaccine schedule for their children. One study looked at parents of children ages six months to six years old.  It found that 13% of these parents reported following an alternative vaccination schedule. However, of these parents, less than 1 out of every 5 reported refusing all vaccines. Most refused only certain vaccines, and/or delayed some vaccines until the child was older.

Parents who delay vaccines until their children are older are often concerned about their child's immune system being too young and weak to handle getting many vaccines at once. However, this is a technical issue which is best decided by experts.

One challenge in developing vaccines is economic. The diseases that most need vaccines today – HIV, malaria, and tuberculosis – exist mostly in poor countries. Companies that make vaccines would not make much money because many of the people who need them are too poor to pay for them.  There would also be financial and other risks to these companies if they tried making new vaccines for these diseases.

Throughout history, most vaccines have been developed by governments, universities, and non-profit organizations. Many vaccines have been highly cost-effective and good for public health. In recent decades, the number of vaccines given throughout the world has increased dramatically. This increase, particularly in the number of different vaccines given to children before they start school, may be due to laws and support from governments.

Another obstacle to making new vaccines is that when a new vaccine is made, the maker usually files a patent on their vaccine. These patents can limit the process used to make the vaccine to the maker (in practice the right can be subcontracted). That way the patent makes money for the originator.

Vaccines often contain other things besides the active vaccine (the weakened or dead virus or bacteria). For example, vaccines may contain:

Preservatives in vaccines, such as thiomersal, phenoxyethanol, and formaldehyde, prevent serious adverse effects. Thiomersal is more effective against bacteria, lasts longer in storage, and makes the vaccine stronger, safer, and more stable (less likely to be changed by things like heat). However, in the United States, the European Union, and a few other developed countries, it is no longer used as a preservative in childhood vaccines because it contains mercury.

If no preservative is added to a vaccine, harmful bacteria may grow in the vaccine. For example, in 1928, Staphylococcus bacteria grew in a diphtheria vaccine that had no preservative in it. Of 21 children who got that vaccine, 12 died.

Most versions of anti-coronavirus are kept at very low temperature before use. That helps preserve the vaccine in its most effective state.

Animals are vaccinated to keep them from getting diseases, and to keep them from infecting humans with diseases. Pets as well as livestock are routinely vaccinated.

In some instances, populations of wild animals may be vaccinated. Sometimes, wild animals are vaccinated by spreading vaccine-laced food in a disease-prone area. This method has been used to try to control rabies in raccoons. Where rabies occurs, laws may require dogs to get rabies vaccinations.

Dogs can also be vaccinated against many other diseases, including canine distemper, canine parvovirus, infectious canine hepatitis, adenovirus-2, leptospirosis, bordatella, canine parainfluenza virus, and Lyme disease.

Scientists are also working on vaccines against many noninfectious human diseases, such as cancers and autoimmune disorders. For example, the experimental vaccine CYT006-AngQb has been investigated as a possible treatment for high blood pressure.

An office is generally a room or other area where administrative work is done.  It may also be a position within an organization with specific duties attached to it.  For example, the office of treasurer, or cathedral as the bishop or archbishop's office within the diocese or archdiocese.  In modern use an office usually means the location where white-collar workers are employed.

An office is a design .  It can be a small office such as a bench in the corner of a very small business where the administration work is small.  It can also be anything up to and including a large building full of office workers doing large amount of office work.

Men have done administrative work for many centuries.  But it is not clear when the room where paperwork was created began to be thought of an office.  In the earliest European history it may have been a counting room in a palace, where some kind of accounting was done for the king. Earlier forms of keeping records were known but were not confined to a room or rooms. For example, in ancient China string was knotted to keep count of things as a record. But the record-keeper's "office" was not a room but wherever he needed to be to count something.

In the early Middle Ages many monasteries had a scriptorium.  This was a place where texts of all kinds were written and copied.  All of the work was done by hand.  This may actually be one of the first uses of a room as an office.  The High Middle Ages (1000–1300) saw the rise of the medieval chancery.  This was usually the place where most government letters were written and where laws were copied in the administration of a kingdom.

With the growth of large, complex organizations in the 18th century, actual office spaces were constructed. As the Industrial Revolution grew in the 18th and 19th centuries, the industries of banking, rail, insurance, retail, petroleum, and telegraphy grew dramatically. A large number of clerks were needed. As a result, more office space was needed for these activities. The time and motion study, pioneered in manufacturing by F. W. Taylor led to the “Modern Efficiency Desk” with a flat top and drawers below.  This was designed to allow managers an easy view of the workers.  However, by the middle of the 20th century, it became apparent that offices would need various degrees of privacy.  Gradually the cubicle system evolved.

The main purpose of an office is to support its occupants in performing their job. Work spaces in an office are typically used for conventional office activities such as reading, writing and computer work. There are also meeting rooms, lounges, and spaces for support activities, such as photocopying and filing. Some offices also have a kitchen area where workers can make their lunches. There are many different ways of arranging the space in an office and whilst these vary according to function, managerial fashions and the culture of specific companies can be even more important.

While offices can be built in almost any location and in almost any building, some modern requirements for offices make this more difficult, such as requirements for light, networking, and security. The primary purpose of an office building is to provide a workplace and working environment primarily for administrative and managerial workers. These workers usually occupy set areas within the office building, and usually are provided with desks, PCs and other equipment they may need within these areas.

A hotel or a guest-house is a large building with many rooms, where people can sleep when they are not at home. A motel is a hotel especially for motorists - people who drive cars - where the room door usually opens into the parking lot rather than to an interior corridor. Inn is sometimes used to mean a smaller hotel. Guest house can also mean an accessory dwelling unit. An extended stay hotel is one where suites are rented by the week.

These places will rent a room for any number of days. They offer rooms to sleep as their business. There are also hotels where conferences are held.

Some hotels have a swimming pool. Some hotels are called capsule hotels (in Japan).

Hotels emerged as inns along important transport routes. The first hotels appeared in the days of the Ancient World, in the Middle Ages they also served as shelters for the infirm. This is indicated by the etymology of the word hotel, hôtel: through st.-fr. ostel, hostel it comes from Latin. cubiculum hospitale ("guest room"), whence the word "hospital".

In the 16th-17th centuries, the hotel is an aristocratic residential building with ceremonial and service courtyards.

Today, according to the definition of the World Tourism Organization (WTO), hotels are called a house with furnished rooms for short-term stay of visitors, consisting of a number of rooms that have a single guide and provide certain services. They are grouped into classes and categories according to the types of services provided, with the equipment available in them.

The hotel is also called a residential property complex (building, part of the building, equipment and other property), designed to provide services.

International luxury hotels have high-quality amenities, full-service restaurants and rooms. They usually provide the highest level of personalized and professional service in major or capital cities.

Upscale full-service hotels range in quality from upscale to luxury.

Branded hotels are typically full-service and classified as luxury. A key characteristic is focus on a unique guest experience.

Smaller independent non-branded hotels with 100 rooms or fewer.

Small to medium hotels that give a limited number of amenities. This amenities cater and market to a specific demographic of travelers, such as the single business traveler. Such hotels may lack leisure amenities such as an restaurant or a swimming pool.

Small to medium-sized hotels where clients can stay longer than in traditional hotels.

A motel is an abbreviation for "motor hotel". It is a small-sized low-rise lodging establishment. Usually motels have access to individual rooms from the car park. Motels are good for road travellers, travellers on road trip vacations or workers who drive for their job.

A vitamin is a chemical compound that is needed in small amounts for the human body to work correctly. They include Vitamin A, many B vitamins (like B1, B2, B3, B6, and B12), Vitamin C, Vitamin D, Vitamin E, and Vitamin K. For example, citrus fruits such as oranges and lemons contain vitamin C. A vitamin is also a pill that contains vitamins, eaten regularly to keep one healthy like dietary supplements.

The term was coined in 1912 by biochemist Casimir Funk, who isolated a complex of micronutrients and proposed the complex be named vitamine. By convention the word vitamin does not include other essential nutrients, such as certain minerals, essential fatty acids and essential amino acids.

Thirteen vitamins are recognized at present. Vitamins are classified by their biological and chemical activity, and not their structure. Each vitamin name (the word vitamin followed by a letter) refers to a number of vitamer compounds which all show the same biological activity. For example, vitamin A refers to several different chemicals.  Vitamers convert to the active form of the vitamin in the body. They are sometimes inter-convertible to one another as well.

The body does not make these chemicals. They come from other places, usually food. A short term lack of a certain vitamin is usually not a problem, because the body can store vitamins for a short time. Not having a certain vitamin for a longer period of time can lead to different diseases, depending on the vitamin. Probably the best-known of these diseases is scurvy, which results from not having enough Vitamin C. Beriberi and rickets are others.

Today, many drug companies make inexpensive pills that contain various vitamins. They help people avoid those diseases.

Vitamins can be either fat-soluble or water-soluble.  Fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K) can be stored in the body, and are used when needed.  Water-soluble ones only stay in the body a short time.

Currently there are no vitamins F to J.  These existed at some time.  Today they are no longer seen as vitamins.  Some of them were also false leads, and turned out to be something else.  Others were renamed as B vitamins.  Today, the B vitamins are a whole complex, and not just one vitamin.

The German-speaking scientists who isolated and described vitamin K (in addition to naming it as such) did so because the vitamin is intimately involved in the 'Koagulation' (clotting) of blood following wounding. At the time, most (but not all) of the letters from F through I were already designated, so the use of the letter K was considered quite reasonable.

The following table lists chemicals that had previously been classified as vitamins, as well as the earlier names of vitamins that later became part of the B-complex.

Emotions are what people feel. They are very ancient, and can be seen in all mammals.

Emotions are caused by a complex mixture of hormones and the unconscious mind. Only with great difficulty can we control our emotions by conscious effort. They cause mammals to change behaviour according to changes in their situation. In our case, they sometimes run against our attempt to live our lives in a logical way.

A scientific definition is not simple; over 90 definitions have been offered by experts. A definition of emotion needs to include three things:

In physical terms, emotions involve body systems which have operated for hundreds of millions of years. These are the hormone system, the autonomic nervous system and the 'lower' brain centers (hindbrain and midbrain).

The study of emotions became one of Darwin's books after The Descent of Man. He published The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals in 1873. He had discovered, by sending letters and a list of questions worldwide, that in different societies emotions were expressed in almost the same way.

If so, the mechanisms which made the expressions must be inherited. They must have been developed in the same way as all other features of man, evolution by natural selection. It was already known from anatomy that the muscles and nerves of the face were the same or similar in all humans.

Darwin illustrated the expression of the emotions with a series of photographs and woodcut illustrations. Ekman did the same thing on a research visit to New Guinea, where he asked villagers to identify the emotions shown in the photographs. This was part of a long-term effort to test and extend Darwin's insights into emotions. Some of Ekman's conclusions are:

It is obvious that some animals, mostly mammals, but also some birds, have emotions which are somewhat similar to human emotions as far as one can tell. The most obvious cases are domestic pets which are clearly happy to see owners after a long separation.

Because two large groups of vertebrates have developed emotions (mammals and birds at least), it must be that emotions are helpful in group behaviour. In a quite different group, social insects, the group behaviour is controlled by pheromones: inherited scent patterns. Scent is also important to most mammals, but birds are more sight-oriented.

A teacher is a person who helps people to learn. A teacher often works in a classroom.

There are many different kinds of teachers. Some teachers teach young children in kindergarten or primary schools. Others teach older children in middle, junior high, and high schools. Some teachers teach adults in colleges and universities. Some teachers are called professors.

Teachers are usually professionals with credentials from college and/or graduate school. They use various methods to teach. Teachers explain new knowledge using different pedagogical strategies. Teachers use various tools, from blackboards/whiteboards to computers. Many teachers are exploring artificial intelligence in their lesson planning.

Happiness is a feeling of pleasure and positivity. When someone feels good, proud, excited, relieved or satisfied about something, that person is said to be "happy". Feeling happy may help people to relax and to smile.

Happiness is usually thought of as the opposite of sadness. However, it is very possible to feel both at once, often about different things, or sometimes even about the same thing. You are often excited when you are happy. Happiness can also be inspired too.

Many philosophers have said that people in the world go back and forth between times of happiness and sadness, but there is nobody who is always happy or always sad. Happiness sometimes causes people to cry when they laugh because the emotion takes control of them. Happiness was thought of as the key to love in ancient civilizations such as the Inca and the Maya.

Friendship means familiarity with and liking of each other's mind.

People who are friends talk to each other and spend time . They trust one another and also help each other when they are in  or are hurt. Friends are people that can be looked up to and trusted. Friends usually have similar interests. A friend is one who  another person.

The strength of the bond of friendship between two people can vary. If the bond is very strong, they are called best friends.

There are expectations, demands, and complaints in friendship too. If friends do not match your expectations, it does not mean you will break the friendship. It is all about understanding, realizing, and helping whenever possible.

Friendship is both good and bad. Generally, it is only people of similar age, character, and background, mentality, etc., who can understand the problems of another person. Friends are needed for support and for sharing.

There are many different types of friendships. Most people find friends at a young age. Some do not have friends until much later in life, others will never make friends in their lifetime. Friendships can end. Friends leaving can be caused by differences in opinion or not talking to each other for a long time.

Many movies and TV shows are based on people making friends. An example of a friendship would be that of Sierra, Olivia, Emma, Langli, and Mallory in the movie Eight grade Whittier.

Sleep (also called napping) is a state of resting. It happens in most animals, including humans. To sleep is to be unconscious.

During deep sleep, most of the muscles that animals can control are not active, but resting to regain the energy they need for the next time they wake up. When asleep, humans cannot tell what is happening around them. Like most animals, healthy sleep in humans most often happens at night.

When something is asleep, it cannot react like it would if it was awake. However, waking up from sleep is easier than waking up from hibernation or a coma. All mammals and birds, as well as many reptiles, amphibians and fish have a sleep cycle. In humans and many other animals, regular sleep is essential for survival.

It seems that all animals with complex brains have sleep. We know that sleep is extremely important to human health and well-being. Humans and animals need sleep but we do not know exactly why.  If one is tired (from not getting enough sleep), one will not be able to function properly in common activities. Being sleep-deprived leads to struggling to remember information, changing one's mood, energy, health, focus and a number of other effects. This is why people are told to not drive or use big machines when they feel tired. Sleep deprivation (not allowing a person enough sleep) can even be used as torture. Sleep deprivation causes negative effects for the person such as: irritability (annoyed mood), forgetting things or amnesia, and some pains (for example back ache or neck pain) in different areas of the body. Also, the immune system normally releases compounds known as cytokines which are used to help fight inflammation and infection. If a person does not get enough sleep, their body cannot protect them from illness. The body may not have time to complete memory recollection, muscle repair, and release hormones that regulate growth and appetite.

During daytime, the Sun is out, and most people are awake. People work, go to school, or complete daily errands and activities. Some people sleep for a short time in the early afternoon for a quick rest—or because they are not able to sleep during the day. This is called a nap. A good nap should is recommended to last between 15 and 30 minutes. Naps that are 30–60 minutes can make someone feel dazed, confused, and less focused. It can also make it harder to sleep at night.

In some countries, most notably where the weather is warm, there is a tradition to take a nap early in the afternoon. This tradition is called siesta. It is most common in Spain and Latin America. Some stores and services close while their owners and/or employees take their siesta. It is common because the day gets hottest when the sun is up in the sky and strong. Therefore, people do their activities early in the morning and later in the evening, when it is cooler.

Most of what is said above applies widely in the animal kingdom. However, some primitive animals do not appear to sleep, or more correctly, sleep has never been shown. Some animals sleep as we do, at night, but some sleep during the day and are instead active at night. This is called being nocturnal. Mammals spend much of their early evolution sleeping during the day and being active at night.

The word "sleep" comes from the old Old Germanic verbs for sleep. In Old and Middle High German, it was called "SLAF". The original meaning of the word was "to slap", which was related to the word for "flabby" (not hard or firm).

Many words related to "sleep" have very different meanings. For example, "sleep" may be used to mean death, so that "putting an animal to sleep" means to kill the animal without pain. "Sleep with someone" can also have a sexual meaning. This is called a euphemism, because people do not want to say the actual word they mean.

Sleep helps the brain function. The details are not fully understood, but it is important to get enough sleep for the body and the brain to be healthy and to work properly. In general, animals (and people) sleep at periodic intervals, such as once a day. Certain animals send out signals to the others that they will soon go to sleep. Yawning is such a signal.

Both humans and many animals sleep about once a day. Some animals, such as cats, sleep many times a day for short periods up to 15 hours a day (or even longer).

When people sleep, they often have dreams. Probably some animals do, too.

Not only people sleep, but all mammals and birds, and most fish, reptiles and other animals also too.

While humans sleep, REM and NREM are sleep patterns that help with long-term memory, remembering information, procedural memory, and creative thinking.

In mammals and birds, sleep can be divided into two categories. In one of them, the eyes move rapidly. It is called REM-sleep (rapid eye movement). Most dreams take place in this phase as the body becomes relaxed and the eyes move while sleeping. This phase helps prepare one for the next day. REM-sleep occurs normally at intervals throughout the night, and the periods of REM-sleep increase in length in the second half of the night. It is often encountered 90 minutes after falling asleep, and continues to occur every 90 minutes. REM-sleep was first discovered in 195253.

REM sleep is found in mammals and songbirds, but is "poorly established" in reptiles and fish. According to a survey:

The other category, where this movement of the eyes does not happen, is called NREM-sleep (Non-REM sleep). In general, dreams do not occur during this time. There are three or four stages of NREM-sleep. Stage I is just barely sleeping, or dozing. Stage II is also light sleep. Normally, in adult humans, about half of the time spent asleep is spent in light sleep. Stages III and IV are called deep sleep. Deep sleep is necessary for growth and healing. It can be quite difficult to awaken someone who is in stage III or stage IV sleep. Sometimes, stages III and IV are combined and called stage III.

Adult humans normally sleep in cycles of 90 to 110 minutes each. The night's sleep can be 4 or 5 of these cycles. Each cycle includes, in this order: stage I, stage II, stage III (IV), and REM.

Getting the appropriate amount of sleep is extremely important, as it could affect one's body and increase the chances of serious health problems. For each age group, there are different amounts of sleep that are recommended:

The timing of sleep and the amount of it are both important. Both are different for different people and is based on the circadian rhythm.

How much sleep is enough also depends on age. Children need more sleep than adults. Newborn babies sleep about 18 hours per day. Small babies sleep many times a day, and human babies do not develop circadian rhythms before they are 3 – 4 months old. At the age of 1 year, a baby sleeps for about 14 hours.

A nine-year-old girl should sleep about 9–10 hours per day and teenagers also need that much sleep. Women who sleep less than about 9 hours a day perform worse than those who sleep that long.

Poor habits could affect one’s sleep schedule in many ways without taking notice. Some habits that can disrupt sleep are:

A good night's sleep is extremely important for one's quality of life. However, people may have trouble sometimes going to sleep, staying asleep or getting enough sleep. This usually means that they are too sleepy in the daytime.

There are many things that influence sleep. Also some substances, called stimulants – coffee is an example – can cause poor sleep. When people have just eaten something, the body is busy digesting what they have eaten. This can cause poor sleep, too. Worrying and stress can also cause poor sleep.

There are many diseases that cause poor sleep. Fever can lead to bad dreams. Poor sleep can be a side effect of some medications.

Sleep disorders directly influence how a person sleeps. Examples of sleep disorders are narcolepsy, sleep apnea and circadian rhythm sleep disorders.

Sleep specialists - doctors specialized in sleeping problems - often suggest better sleep hygiene to people with sleeping problems. Sleep hygiene means things people can try, such as:

Recycling is when you recover scrap or waste  and reprocessing the material into useful products. Glass, paper, plastic, and metals such as aluminum and steel are often recycled. Dead plants dead and vegetable scraps can be recycled through composting.

It is important not to confuse recycling with reusing, which is where old things, such as clothes, are donated or given a new use instead of being thrown out.

Recycling reduces trash in landfills and incinerators. Another reason people recycle is to reduce the amount of raw materials and energy used in making things. Most of the time, it takes less energy to recycle trash than to throw it away, The Economist says. Recycling can reduce your carbon footprint and it can help to minimize the whole size of landfills around the world

Most people make about two kilograms of waste (trash) every day, and about 7% of this waste is made up of plastic  that can be recycled. Today, plastic can be recycled into products like picnic tables, park benches, and even high-chairs.

First, plastic is collected and taken to a recycling center, where it is sorted out. When plastic is sorted out by hand, symbols have to be printed on every recyclable plastic product used. Nowadays, machines can sort out the plastic automatically. There are different types of plastic, for example polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, and polyethylene terephthalate. There are two kinds of polyethylene plastic: high density polyethylene (HDPE), and low density polyethylene (LDPE). HDPE plastic is usually used to make milk bottles and bottles for shampoo or detergents. LDPE plastic are usually things like toothpaste tubes, plastic bags, and films for packaging. Polypropylene plastic is used to make buckets, plastic boxes, and flower pots. Polyethylene terephthalate is the material from which water and soft drink bottles are made.

HDPE plastic is  into a small powder. LDPE plastic, which are usually thin films, need to be ground by a special machine. After that, both plastics are washed with hot water and detergent. Dirt and other things, like labels, are taken off. After the wash, the powder is dried with hot air.

Sometimes, the powder is sold. But other times, the powder is heated, colored, and then put into a pelletizer. The pelletizer makes the powder into little pellets, which are bought by a company that shapes the pellets into pieces of plastic "wood". This plastic wood is used to make flowerpots, trash cans, pipes, picnic tables, benches, toys, mats, and many other things.

Space exploration is a term which describes searching outer space. There are many reasons for space exploration. The most important reasons are for scientific research and the interest of humans to learn more about outer space. This is called space science. For centuries, humans had dreamt of reaching outer space. Rockets made it possible in the later 20th century. On October 4, 1957, the former Soviet Union launched the Sputnik 1, which was the first artificial satellite. This started the Space Race and people later went into orbit and Americans visited the Moon in Project Apollo.

Many space probes have gone to various planets and other places in the Solar System to send back information. When people first went to space they didn't know what the effects of microgravity would have on humans so they sent animals instead. But in 1961 the Soviets launched the first human into space, Yuri Gagarin. The journey to planets is hazardous enough so that humans will probably not be used, and machines can pick up samples. Some people think that Mars can be mined for minerals which are rare and valuable. There are no plans at present to send humans to Mars.

The first telescope was probably invented in 1608 by Hans Lippershey. The Orbiting Astronomical Observatory 2 was the first space telescope launched on December 7, 1968. As of February 2, 2019, about 3,891 exoplanets have been discovered. The Milky Way galaxy has more than 100–400 billion stars and more than 100 billion planets. There are about 2 trillion galaxies in the observable universe.

Dreams are what a person sees and hears in their mind when they are sleeping. They are often similar to real life in some ways but can also be very strange. Dreams can feel so real that the person dreaming may not believe they are awake. This tends to happen during a false awakening, where a person dreams of waking up. A person has around 4 - 6 dreams per night and tends to only remember the last two.

Sometimes, a person realizes during a dream that they are dreaming but keeps having the dream. This is called a lucid dream. This rarely happens for most people. During a lucid dream, a person usually has full control over their body as well as the environment around them. There are no limits in lucid dreams, sometimes not even the imagination.

Most people remember their dreams in some way or another, even if it is only a small part, but children are more likely to remember most of their dream clearly. It is often easier for people to remember dreams if they write down what happened in the dream just after they wake up. Because of this, many people have dream diaries where they describe each dream they have. This is called dream recall. The more it is done, the better they remember their dreams. If a person is woken up during a dream, they tend to have a much more reliable memory of it.

Nightmares are dreams which scare or shock people. Nightmares are usually based around a person's everyday fears, like spiders or dark places, but even a dream that's not about those things can feel unpleasant. Nightmares are caused by many different things: being uncomfortable or in pain while sleeping, sickness, stress, or even eating right before sleeping.

There are many different theories about why people dream and what their dreams mean. Every person has different dreams. Some psychologists believe that dreams reflect what is happening in the unconscious mind (the part of the mind that works by itself). Others think that people, places, and objects in dreams are symbols for other things in the dreamer's real life. Throughout history, people have tried to make sense of dreams to learn things from them and have often used them for divination or fortune-telling. Today, there are still many books and websites devoted to making sense of dreams.

Generally speaking, ancient civilizations thought dreams were messages from the gods (see the works of Homer) or some kind of prophecy. However, they knew that often dreams misled the dreamer, and invented various explanations for this. Aristotle started off with ideas like this but later became more skeptical and denied the divine origin of dreams.

In his Interpretation of Dreams, Sigmund Freud connected them to his ideas on psychotherapy. Dreams, in Freud's view, are forms of "wish fulfillment." They are attempts by the unconscious to resolve a  of some sort. Because the information in the unconscious is in an unruly and often disturbing form, a "censor" in the preconscious will not allow it to pass unaltered into the conscious.

Freud describes three main types of dreams: 1. Direct prophecies received in the dream; 2. The foretelling of a future event; 3. The symbolic dream, which requires interpretation.

Some authors, such as Hans Eysenck, have argued that the dreams Freud cites do not really support his theories. Eysenck argues that Freud's examples actually disprove his dream theory.

Since Freud, the emphasis has been on the biology of dreaming.

The discovery of REM (rapid eye movement) and non-REM sleep has been important. Researchers have done many studies on this. Subjects have been woken up in both stages and asked what they were thinking about. It is clear that the reports from non-REM stages were different from REM stages. In particular, dreams occur mostly when the brain is in the REM state. There is also some relationship between dreaming and daydreams. Both seem to occur in a cycle of 90110 minutes.

Apparently, "there is no evidence that a more useful understanding of personality can be gained from them than can be divined from the realities of waking behavior."

If sleep is prevented, people suffer and get worse at every kind of waking activity. From this, it is clear that one important function of sleep is to maintain normal brain activity during awake time. Somehow, during sleep the brain gets restored to its normal functioning. Sleep is, so far as is known, universal amongst vertebrates. That also argues for its great importance. However, it is not known whether dreaming supports this repair function of sleep or whether it is something that just happens.

Marketing is an activity that connects producers with customers. It may be B2B (business to business) marketing or B2C (business to consumer). It may include market research and advertising.

The term marketing, which is commonly known as attracting cust٣komers, incorporates knowledge gained by studying the management of exchange relationships and is the business process of identifying, anticipating and satisfyinبg customers' needs and wants.

Solar energy is a type of energy that comes from the sun's heat. People have been using solar energy for thousands of years in different ways, such as heating, cooking, and drying. Nowadays, it is also used to create electricity in areas where other sources of power are not available, such as remote locations and even outer space.

The cost of generating electricity from solar energy is decreasing, making it a more affordable option. Since the sun provides heat and light constantly, solar energy is considered a renewable energy source and an alternative to non-renewable resources like coal and oil.

After passing through the Earth's atmosphere, most of the Sun's energy is in the form of visible light and infrared light radiation. Plants convert the energy in sunlight into chemical energy (sugars and starches) through the process of photosynthesis. Humans regularly use this store of energy in various ways, such as when they burn wood or fossil fuels, or when simply eating plants, fish and animals.

Solar radiation reaches the Earth's upper atmosphere with the power of 1366 watts per square meter (W/m2). Since the Earth is round, the surface nearer its poles is angled away from the Sun and receives much less solar energy than the surface nearer the equator.

At present, solar cell panels convert, at best, about 24% of the sunlight hitting them into electricity.

The dark disks in the third diagram on the right are imaginary examples of the amount of land that, if covered with 8% efficient solar panels, would produce slightly more energy in the form of electricity than the world needed in 2003.

Many technologies have been developed to make use of solar radiation.  Some of these technologies make direct use of the solar energy (e.g. to provide light, heat, etc.), while others produce electricity.

Solar power plants convert sunlight into electricity, either directly using photovoltaics (PV), or indirectly using concentrated solar power (CSP). Concentrated solar power systems use lenses or mirrors and tracking systems to focus a large area of sunlight into a small beam. Photovoltaics converts light into electric current using the photoelectric effect.

Solar cooking uses the Sun as the source of energy instead of standard cooking fuels such as charcoal, coal or gas.  Solar cookers are an inexpensive and environmentally sound alternative to traditional ovens. They are becoming widely used in areas of the developing world where deforestation is an issue, financial resources to purchase fuel are limited, and where open flames would pose a serious risk to people and the environment. Solar cookers are covered with a glass plate. They achieve a higher temperature by using mirrors to focus the rays of the sun.

The Sun may be used to heat water instead of electricity or gas. There are two basic types of active solar heating systems based on the type of fluid — either liquid or air — that is heated in the solar energy collectors. (The collector is the device in which a fluid is heated by the Sun.)

Liquid-based systems heat water or an antifreeze solution in a "hydronic" collector, whereas air-based systems heat air in an "air collector."  Both air and liquid systems can supplement forced air systems.

Solar cells can be used to generate electricity from sunlight. It is a device that converts light energy into electrical energy. Sometimes the term solar cell is reserved for devices intended specifically to capture energy from sunlight, while the term photovoltaic cell is used when the light source is unspecified.

Solar cells have many applications. They have long been used in situations where electrical power from the grid is unavailable, such as in remote area power systems, Earth-orbiting satellites and space probes, consumer systems, e.g. handheld calculators or wrist watches, remote radiotelephones and water pumping applications. A large no. of solar cells are combined in an arrangement called solar cell panel that can deliver enough electricity for practical use. Electricity produced by solar panels can be stored in rechargeable solar batteries, which is then drawn upon when required.

A passport is a travel  that a person owns. It is a citizen of the country on the passport. A passport asks that the person carrying it be allowed to enter and pass through other countries. They also allow a person to re-enter their country. Passports are given by national governments.

Passports usually have a person's picture, signature, date of birth, nationality and country of birth. Many countries are now issuing passports with biometric properties. This helps confirm that the person carrying a passport is the real owner. These countries have passports that use biometrics: Malaysia, Australia, Turkey, Greece, Israel, New Zealand, Japan, Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom, the United States, Germany, Ireland, Poland, Italy, Slovenia, Singapore, Thailand, India and the Republic of Korea.

Many countries are switching over to biometric passports because it can easily confirm the authenticity of the holder's identity. Passports are used so a stamp can be placed in it to prove that the identity of the holder has been confirmed with the immigration officials in the country of travel.

In 1920, the International Conference on Passports, Customs Formalities and Through Tickets made a law that said passports must be issued in French and at least one other language. Now, many countries issue passports in English and the language(s) of the issuing country.

Passport rankings show which passports make travel easiest. In the 2025 list of 193 countries, Australia comes first for travel freedom: it scores 88.8 points and lets its holders visit 188 places without a full visa. Ireland is next with 88.6 points, and Canada follows at 88.1. At the other end, Afghanistan’s passport opens the door to only 27 countries. The ranking also looks at other goals: Monaco is best for quality of life, while Canada ranks first for offering a safe “plan B.”

Climate change refers to long-term changes in temperature, precipitation, and other atmospheric conditions on Earth.

When people talk about climate change, they are usually talking about the problem of human-caused global warming, which is happening now. But the climate of the Earth has changed over not just thousands of years, but tens or hundreds of millions of years. It has alternated between hotter and colder periods, with some extremes like ice ages.

Global warming primarily involves the warming of the planet due to increased concentrations of greenhouse gases in Earth's atmosphere. These gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, come from human activities such as burning fossil fuels, deforestation, and industrial processes.

These changes can lead to a variety of impacts, including more extreme weather events, rising sea levels, and disruptions to ecosystems and agriculture.

Sometimes, before there were people, the Earth's climate was much hotter than it is today.

For example, about 60 million years ago there were a lot of volcanoes, which burnt a lot of underground organic matter. Squashed and fossilized dead plants and animals became coal, gas and oil. This caused a lot of carbon dioxide and methane to go up into the air, like nowadays. This made the Earth hot enough for giant tortoises and alligators to live in the Arctic.

At times in the past, the temperature was much cooler, with the last glaciation ending about ten thousand years ago.

Ice ages are long times (much much longer than glaciations) when the Earth got colder, and more ice froze at the North and South Poles. Sometimes even the whole Earth was covered in ice, and was much colder than today.

There is no single reason why there are ice ages. Changes in the Earth's orbit around the Sun, and the Sun getting brighter or dimmer are events which do happen. The angle at which the Earth is tilted compared to the Sun might make a difference. Another source of change is the activities of living things (see Great Oxygenation Event and Huronian glaciation).

Several 19th-century scientists discovered the importance of carbon dioxide (CO2) in climate change. These included Joseph Fourier in 1824, Claude Pouillet in 1827 and 1838, Eunice Foote in 1856, John Tyndall from 1863 onwards, Svante Arrhenius in 1896, and Guy Stewart Calendar (1898–1964).

Tyndall, an Irish physicist, proved there were other greenhouse gases as well. Nils Gustaf Ekholm in 1901 invented the term.

The Sun gets a little bit hotter and colder every 11 years. This is called the 11-year sunspot cycle. The change is so small that scientists can barely measure how it affects the temperature of the Earth.

If the Sun was causing the Earth to warm up, it would warm both the surface and high up in the air. But the air in the upper stratosphere is actually getting colder. Therefore the changes in the Sun are not causing the global warming which is happening now.

According to the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the current scientific consensus is that long-term and short-term variations in the Sun's activity play only a very small role in Earth’s climate. Warming from increased levels of human-produced greenhouse gases is actually many times stronger than any effects due to recent variations in solar activity.

For more than 40 years, satellites have observed the Sun's energy output, which has gone up or down by less than 0.1 percent during that period. Since 1750, the warming driven by greenhouse gases coming from people burning fossil fuels is over 270 times greater than the slight extra warming coming from the Sun itself over that same time.

Renewable energy or sustainable energy includes any energy source that cannot be exhausted. This type of energy can remain viable for a long period of time without running out, or lasts forever. Examples are solar, wind, hydropower (water), geothermal, tidal and biomass.

Sustainable energy choices play a crucial role in mitigating the impact of human activities on the environment.

Sunlight from the Sun, when converted, produces solar energy. It is in abundance and freely available. This type of energy is clean and easily renewable. It has low maintenance costs and can generate energy in any climate.

Another clean form of energy is wind. This energy is a plentiful source of renewable energy. However, since it is not always windy, it is only available sometimes.

Through history, the use of wind power has waxed and waned, from the use of windmills in centuries past to high tech wind turbines on wind farms today.

There have been court cases about climate change. At least one case got a verdict at the European Court of Human Rights. The Norwegian government was sued, but won the case in 2025. These kinds of cases are part of Climate change litigation.

Dentistry is a specialty in medicine, which is practiced by a dentist. Dentists find out what's wrong, fix, and help prevent problems with teeth. A dentist has other people that help him with their job. Dental hygienists help people keep their teeth clean. A dental assistant helps the dentist when they are treating a patient. Dental surgeons will perform surgery to fix large or dangerous problems with people's teeth. There are also dentists called orthodontists, who can move people's teeth using braces. Dental surgeons and orthodontists are called specialists.

A company (short for co.) is a legal group made up of persons who work together to reach a goal. They can be real people (called natural persons), or other companies (called juridical persons), or both.

Companies usually have the following features: they are treated like their own person in the eyes of the law, they have limited liability (which means the owners and employees of the company are not fully responsible for its debts), they can sell or give away parts of the company (called shares), they are owned by investors, and they are run by managers. Many small companies are managed by their owners. Companies are created when the government gives them legal permission to start.

When a company is created, it becomes its own legal "person." This means the company—not the people in it—is responsible if something goes wrong, as long as the company follows its rules written in its incorporation papers. If a company closes, it might go through a process called liquidation to take care of its final debts and duties.

Sometimes, companies join together and make a group. These corporate groups often include one big company and smaller ones it owns.

A company can be called an "artificial person". This means it is not a real human, but it is treated like a person by the law. It is invisible, cannot be touched, and is created by laws made by the government.

A company has its own legal rights and can continue to exist even if some of its members die, become unable to work, or go bankrupt. This is called perpetual succession. A company also has a special stamp called a common seal that it can use to sign documents.

The word company comes from the Old French word , which was first used around the year 1150. It meant things like "friendship", "group", or "a group of soldiers". That word came from Late Latin , which means "someone who eats bread with you". This idea came from an old Germanic expression meaning the same thing—basically, a companion is someone you share food with.

The word is related to other old words like Old High German  and Gothic , which also mean "companion" or "friend you eat with".

By the year 1303, the word company was being used to describe trade guilds—groups of people who worked in the same job, like blacksmiths or merchants.

By 1553, it started to mean a "business group"—a group of people working together to run a business. The short form "co." (used in names like “Smith & Co.”) started to appear by 1769.

There are many different kinds of companies. Here are some of the main types:

If a company’s name ends in "Ltd", it means it is a limited company. If it ends in "PLC", it is a public limited company, meaning its shares are sold to the public.

A school is an educational learning institution designed to provide classes and learning environment to teach students, usually with help of a teacher or professor. Some senior secondary schools can also be considered as a college. Almost all countries and states have systems of formal education, which is sometimes compulsory or legally required. There are various types of schools or learning programs. Topics such as reading, writing, and mathematics are central to education for children.

Most of a student's time is spent in a classroom. This is where 10 to 30 people sit to take part in educational discussion. In the United States, the average number of students per classroom in primary schools is 23.1.

The term "school" is used for many educational environments  particularly in North America. In North America, a person taking a first degree at a university is often self-described as "going to school". In Europe that would never be the case. They would describe themselves as "going to university". The style of university education can be so different between countries.

There are different types of schools: elementary schools (primary in the UK), middle schools (secondary in the UK), and so on.

In many places around the world, children must go to school for a certain number of years. Learning may take place in the classroom, in outside environments, or on visits to other places. Colleges and universities are places to learn for students over 17 or 18 years of age. Vocational schools teach skills people need for jobs.

Some people attend school longer than others. This is because some jobs require more training than others, like for example becoming a doctor takes about 10-14 years of education. For young children, one teacher may teach all subjects. Teachers for older students are more specialized, and they only teach a few subjects. Common subjects taught include science, arts such as music, humanities, like geography and history, and languages.

Children with mental health problems, and problems such as autism and other conditions, usually do not go to regular classrooms. These children are given other ways to get schooling, like special classrooms or even special schools. There also are special schools which teach things which regular schools do not, such as how to walk or read braille.

Graduate schools are in universities. They are for students who have graduated with a first degree from colleges and universities. The aim is to offer Masters and PhD courses to the best students.

Education for all is quite modern. In England, for example, most men could not read or write, even early in the 19th century. We know this because when they got married, those who could not write put an 'X on the certificate, and someone else wrote down their name. At the time, most women could write, because they stayed at home. Widespread education for reading and writing began in the 19th century.

Long ago, most schools were run by religious denominations. That is because clerics were once almost the only people who were literate: they were able to read and write.

In most countries, boys were taught differently to girls, and separately from girls. Today, most countries have schools which accept both boys and girls, though some places still have separate schools for girls. Some parents believe that girls do better in schools with only one gender.

In many parts of the world, schools also help children learn things about life.

Pedagogy is the science of teaching children. Different schools use different ways of teaching. There is quite a lot of disagreement about what and how students should be taught. Many countries solve this by allowing different types of schools, so parents and children have some choice. Choices may include home education, which is a controversial idea. Few people do this. Even in pre-modern times, most children were taught in groups. Age grouping is also ancient. It was done in many African tribes for a long time before the present.

A British term which means roughly "a secondary school for all children in a particular neighbourhood". It includes the idea of taking both boys and girls in one school, and the idea of taking children of all abilities. In practice it has many of the problems which are endemic in American high schools. Among its main faults are said to be: putting girls and boys together at the sensitive time of puberty, and the behavioural problems associated with having such a wide range of young people in a large school. Evidence for lowered standards for examinations are disputed, but widely believed to be true.

Boarding schools are schools where children are sent to live on a school campus without their parents. They are expensive, and so are chosen by parents with means. They are not for the average family. They are usually elite schools with the best teachers that money can buy. Children may even be sent to another country. Switzerland is one of the favoured countries. On the other hand, most Western countries have first-rate boarding schools. In England, many public schools are boarding schools. The term "public school" here has a special meaning: it really means "private school".

Some benefits of boarding schools are that students may develop skills for working with their peers. But there are other effects: The poet Robert Graves explains:

"Preparatory schoolboys live in a world completely dissociated from home life. They have a different vocabulary, a different moral system, even different voices. On their return to school from the holidays the change-over from home-self to school-self is almost instantaneous, whereas the reverse process takes a fortnight at least. A preparatory schoolboy, when caught off his guard, will call his mother 'Please, matron,' and always addresses any male relative or friend of the family as 'Sir', like a master. I used to do it".

Shopping is an activity where people look at and sometimes buy (usually with money) things they want or need, often from shops, although there are a lot of other places people might shop at for things (for example, people might shop at a car lot for a car).

The act of "shopping" might include going to shops to buy things (the act of "purchasing"), although sometimes shopping does not include purchasing, only going to look at things for sale (often called "window shopping").

Shoppers often shop at shopping centers. Large, indoor shopping centers, cslled "malls", became commonplace in the 1950s, although they are less popular now than in the 1970s through early 2000s.

Often shopping means buying not just goods, but various services available in the same area, including entertainment (restaurants, cafes, cinema, etc.).

In some places, shopping is considered an important activity or even a hobby.

There is a television program called Shop till you drop. It is a game show for shoppers.

As in the case of alcohol, drugs, gambling, the Internet, food, with a passion for shopping, a painful addiction called oniomania can develop, also named shopaholism. Psychologists confirmed that addicted people become dependent on doing shopping, being in a state of euphoria and thus reducing a level of stress.

Currently, online shopping is becoming an important part in the retail industry. According to different studies, women are more involved in shopping — about 80% of consumers at all.

Shopping is associated with a sense of achievement. Think about the time you scored a vintage necklace from your local neighborhood thrift shop. You were elated to find a piece of jewelry that was unique and within your budget. The heightened emotions of happiness release endorphins, known as the "feel good" chemicals in your brain. Endorphins help you refocus your mind on your body movements, improving your overall mood.

When you shop, you socially interact with people around you - whether they're fellow shoppers or sales associates. In addition, shopping with a best friend, partner, or family member provides a bonding experience that can reduce stress levels. In a study published by the American Psychological Association (APA), levels of cortisol, the stress hormone, were tested in kids who were with their best friend versus kids who were alone during a negative experience. Kids who were with their best friends during a negative experience produced less levels of cortisol than their counterparts, which suggests any form of bonding can be good for the mind, body, and soul.

The mental, physical, and social engagement of shopping can keep your perception intact even in old age. When you shop, you are physically active by walking, going up and down escalators, and trying on clothes. The mental component of shopping is introduced when you revise your budget, check which on-sale item is better, and calculate your total cost. Socially, you meet up with friends or you hold small-talk with an employee at a department store.

It's essential to keep your mental acuity in focus as you age. Therefore, shopping can help prevent dementia, an illness that affects many adults in the beginning of their 60s.

Daily shopping trips were linked to an increase in survival rate with the collection of data of approximately 2,000 elderly men and women aged 65 and over from Taiwan and the statistics of the country's National Death Registration from 1999 to 2008.

"For example, elders may maintain a mall walking routine, perhaps regarded as shopping activity, although more to do with the need to belong to a community or keep physically active in a safe and convenient environment," says the study.

Marriage is a contract by which two people agree to live together as a couple for an extended period of time or for the rest of their lives, often with the aim of starting a family by having or adopting children.

It can be done by signing a contract before a civil authority, or civil marriage, or in a formal ceremony officiated by a religious authority.

The most common form of marriage is a legally binding heterosexual union. Some societies recognize polygamy, which includes but not limited to polygyny and polyandry. In polygyny, a man may be married to many women, while a woman may be married to many men. In Senegal, for example, nearly 47 percent of marriages are multiple.

The most common age to get married is between 25 to 30 years old. In the Western world, marriage for love is common. In some other countries, relatives may plan an arranged marriage.

There are many reasons why people marry, but they usually include one or more of the following:

Marriage usually leads to rights and obligations to those married, these may include:

Marriage is also about sexual intercourse; being unable to have sex, being unwilling to have sex, or having sex outside the marriage may be a reason to undo the marriage.

Often there is also a spiritual part of marriage. In addition to the civil act (wanted by the state) there is sometimes a religious one. A Christian marriage ceremony usually happens in a church. In a Christian marriage, both partners promise to love each other for the rest of their lives. There are certain restrictions on who can marry or be married; those closely related, like brothers and sisters usually cannot marry. This is usually to prevent genetic problems for the children.

Those marrying also have to be of a certain age to be able to marry. If that age is not specified it is usually the age of consent. In Hinduism marriage is considered to be holy and is seen as a union of the goddess "Laxmi" and the god "Narayan".

Some countries and religious communities also permit the union of two partners of the same sex. This is generally known as same-sex marriage. In the Netherlands, the marriage law was changed to allow such unions, called Marriage.

A Moon landing is the  of a spacecraft on the surface of the Moon. It is a follow up to Project Mercury. This includes both crewed and uncrewed (robotic) . The first  object to reach the surface of the Moon was the Soviet Union's Luna 2 mission, on 13 September 1959.

The United States' Apollo 11 was the first crewed mission to land on the Moon, on 20 July 1969. There have been six missions with people onboard that landed on the Moon between 1969 and 1972. There were also numerous landings without people onboard, with no soft landings happening from 22 August 1976 until 14 December 2013.

To date, the United States is the only country to have successfully landed humans on the Moon. The last mission was in December, 1972, and the last human to walk on the Moon was Gene Cernan.

Biology is the science that studies life, living things, and the evolution of life. Living things include animals, plants, fungi (such as mushrooms), and microorganisms such as bacteria and archaea.

The term 'biology' is relatively modern. It was introduced in 1799 by a physician, Thomas Beddoes. It comes from the Greek word βίος (bios), "life", and the suffix -λογία (logia), "study of".

People who study biology are called biologists. Biology looks at how animals and other living things behave and work, and what they are like. Biology also studies how organisms react with each other and the environment. It has existed as a science for about 200 years, and before that it was called "natural history". Biology has many research fields and branches. Like all sciences, biology uses the scientific method. This means that biologists must be able to show evidence for their ideas and that other biologists must be able to test the ideas for themselves.

Modern biology is influenced by evolution, which answers the question: "How has the living world come to be as it is?"

The earliest roots of science, including medicine, go back to ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia around 3000 to 1200 BCE. Their ideas influenced ancient Greek natural philosophy. Greek thinkers like Aristotle (384–322 BCE) added a lot to early biology. He studied causes in nature and the variety of living things. His student, Theophrastus, began the scientific study of plants.

In the medieval Islamic world, several scholars wrote about biology. Al-Jahiz (781–869) and Al-Dīnawarī (828–896) wrote about animals and plants. Rhazes (865–925) studied the body and how it works. Islamic scholars, working from Greek ideas, studied medicine deeply. They also followed Aristotle’s ideas about nature.

Biology grew quickly when Anton van Leeuwenhoek greatly improved the microscope. Scientists then discovered sperm cells, bacteria, and many tiny living things. Jan Swammerdam’s work led to interest in insects and new methods of studying tiny organisms. Better microscopes strongly changed how people thought about life.

In the early 1800s, scientists saw that cells were central to life. In 1838, Schleiden and Schwann said that (1) all living things are made of cells and (2) each cell shows the signs of life. They did not believe that (3) all cells come from other cells; they still thought cells could appear on their own. Later, Robert Remak and Rudolf Virchow proved that new cells come from existing cells. By the 1860s, most scientists accepted all three ideas, which became known as cell theory.

At the same time, natural historians focused on naming and grouping living things. Carl Linnaeus published a basic system in 1735 and gave scientific names to species in the 1750s. Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon, believed species were not fixed and could change, and even suggested that different species might share ancestors.

In 1842, Charles Darwin wrote the first draft of On the Origin of Species. Earlier, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck had offered one of the first full theories of evolution. Darwin built a stronger theory of evolution through natural selection. He used ideas from geography, geology, and population studies, along with his own observations. Alfred Russel Wallace reached similar conclusions on his own.

Modern genetics started with Gregor Mendel’s work in 1865. He explained how traits are passed from parents to offspring. People did not fully understand his work until the early 1900s. Then, evolution and genetics were combined into the modern synthesis.

In the 1940s and early 1950s, experiments by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase showed that DNA is the part of chromosomes that carries genes. Scientists began to study small organisms like viruses and bacteria. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick discovered that DNA has a double-helix shape. After this, biology expanded into molecular genetics. Scientists cracked the genetic code, showing how DNA uses codons to build proteins. This work was done by Har Gobind Khorana, Robert W. Holley, and Marshall Warren Nirenberg. In 1990, the Human Genome Project began to map all human genes.

All living things are made of chemical elements. Most of their mass (about 96%) comes from oxygen, carbon, hydrogen, and nitrogen. Other elements like calcium, phosphorus, sulfur, sodium, chlorine, and magnesium make up almost all the rest. These elements can join together to form compounds, such as water, which is essential for life.  Biochemistry is the study of chemical processes in living things. Molecular biology is the study of how molecules in cells work, including how they are made, changed, and how they interact with each other.

Life began in Earth's first oceans about 3.8 billion years ago. Since then, water has been the most common molecule in all living things.

Water is important for life because it is a great solvent. This means it can dissolve many substances, like salt (sodium and chloride ions) and small molecules, to form solutions. When substances are dissolved in water, they can more easily meet and react with each other, which is necessary for life.

Because of this polarity, water molecules attract each other using hydrogen bonds, which makes water cohesive (they stick together).

Water molecules are always changing. They constantly break apart into hydrogen ions and hydroxyl ions, then join back together again. In pure water, the number of hydrogen ions and hydroxyl ions is equal, making the pH neutral.

Organic compounds are molecules that contain carbon bonded to other elements, such as hydrogen. Except for water, almost all the molecules in living things contain carbon.

Carbon is special because it can form up to four covalent bonds with other atoms. This allows it to make a wide variety of large and complex molecules. For example:

Carbon can also create long chains (like in octane) or ring-shaped structures (like in glucose).

The simplest organic molecules are hydrocarbons, which are made only of carbon and hydrogen. These carbon chains can also include other elements such as oxygen, phosphorus, or sulfur, which change the molecule’s chemical properties.

Groups of atoms attached to carbon chains are called functional groups. These groups help determine how a molecule behaves. The six main functional groups in living things are the amino group, carboxyl group, carbonyl group, hydroxyl group, phosphate group, and sulfhydryl group.

In 1953, the Miller–Urey experiment showed that organic molecules could form naturally under conditions like those of early Earth. This suggested that the complex molecules needed for life may have appeared spontaneously in Earth’s early history.

Macromolecules are large molecules made from smaller building blocks called monomers. Examples of monomers include sugars, amino acids, and nucleotides.

Carbohydrates are made of sugar monomers or chains of sugars. They can serve as energy sources or provide structure to cells. Lipids are different from other macromolecules because they are not made of polymers. They include fats, phospholipids, and steroids. Lipids do not mix well with water because they are mostly nonpolar and hydrophobic.

Proteins are the most varied type of macromolecule. They can act as enzymes, transport materials, send signals, form structures, or work as antibodies. The building blocks of proteins are amino acids, and living things use twenty different amino acids to make them.

Nucleic acids are made of nucleotides. Their job is to store, pass on, and express genetic information. DNA and RNA are examples of nucleic acids.

Cell theory says that cells are the basic building blocks of all living things. Every living thing is made of one or more cells, and new cells come from existing cells by dividing. Most cells are very small—only about 1 to 100 micrometers wide—so you can only see them with a light or electron microscope.

Prokaryotes, like bacteria, are always single-celled. Eukaryotes can be either single-celled or made of many cells. In living things made of many cells, all the cells in the body originally come from one cell: the fertilized egg.

Every cell is surrounded by a cell membrane that separates the inside of the cell, called the cytoplasm, from the outside space. The membrane is made of a double layer of lipids. Cholesterol sits between these lipids and helps the membrane stay flexible at different temperatures. The cell membrane is semipermeable, which means small molecules like oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water can move through it easily, while larger molecules and charged particles such as ions cannot pass through as easily.

The membrane also contains proteins. Some of these proteins go all the way through the membrane and help move substances in and out of the cell. Others are attached loosely to the outside of the membrane and can act like enzymes or help give the cell its shape. The cell membrane has several important roles, such as helping cells stick to each other, storing electrical energy, and sending or receiving signals. It also provides a surface where structures like the cell wall, the cytoskeleton, or the glycocalyx can attach.

Inside the cytoplasm, there are many important molecules, including proteins and nucleic acids. Eukaryotic cells also contain special structures called organelles, many of which are surrounded by their own lipid membranes. The nucleus holds most of the cell’s DNA. Mitochondria produce ATP, which is the energy the cell uses. The endoplasmic reticulum helps make proteins and other molecules, while the Golgi apparatus packages and sends out proteins. Lysosomes can break down proteins and other unwanted materials.

Plant cells have some organelles that animal cells do not. They have a cell wall that gives the cell support and shape. They also have chloroplasts, which use sunlight to make sugar, and vacuoles, which store materials, help support the cell, and can take part in reproduction and seed breakdown.

Eukaryotic cells also have a cytoskeleton that helps the cell keep its shape and allows movement. It is made of microtubules, intermediate filaments, and microfilaments. Microtubules are made from tubulin, intermediate filaments are made from fibrous proteins, and microfilaments are made from actin, which interacts with other proteins. These parts work together to support the cell and move the organelles inside it.

All cells need energy to carry out their activities. Metabolism is the name for all the chemical reactions that happen in a living organism. Metabolism has three main jobs: turning food into energy for the cell, turning food into small building blocks the body can use, and getting rid of waste made during these processes. These reactions, which are helped by enzymes, make it possible for organisms to grow, reproduce, maintain their structure, and react to their surroundings.

Metabolic reactions can be grouped into two types. Catabolic reactions break down larger molecules into smaller ones, such as when glucose is broken down into pyruvate during cellular respiration. These reactions usually release energy. Anabolic reactions build larger molecules from smaller ones, such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids. These reactions usually require energy.

The chemical reactions in metabolism are arranged in steps called metabolic pathways. In these pathways, one substance is changed step by step into another, and each step is carried out by a specific enzyme. Enzymes are essential to metabolism because they make it possible for organisms to perform useful reactions that need energy and would not happen on their own. They do this by linking those reactions to other reactions that release energy. Enzymes act as catalysts, which means they speed up reactions without being used up. They do this by lowering the activation energy needed to turn reactants into products. Enzymes also help control how fast a metabolic reaction happens, depending on the cell’s environment or signals from other cells.

Cellular respiration is the process cells use to turn the chemical energy in nutrients into ATP, which is the main energy source cells use to function. During this process, waste products are also released. The reactions in respiration are catabolic, meaning they break large molecules into smaller ones and release energy. Respiration is one of the main ways cells get the energy they need. Even though cellular respiration is a type of combustion, it does not look like burning because the energy is released slowly and in a controlled way through several steps.

Glucose, a type of sugar, is the main nutrient that animal and plant cells use in respiration. When oxygen is present, the process is called aerobic respiration, and it happens in four stages: glycolysis, the citric acid cycle (also called the Krebs cycle), the electron transport chain, and oxidative phosphorylation. Glycolysis happens in the cytoplasm and breaks one glucose molecule into two pyruvate molecules, producing two ATP molecules. Each pyruvate is then converted into acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which also produces NADH and carbon dioxide. Acetyl-CoA enters the citric acid cycle in the mitochondrial matrix. From one glucose molecule, this cycle produces a total of six NADH, two FADH₂, and two ATP molecules.

The final stage, oxidative phosphorylation, happens in the mitochondrial cristae of eukaryotic cells. It includes the electron transport chain, where four protein complexes pass electrons from one to another. This releases energy from NADH and FADH₂, which is used to pump protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane. This creates a proton gradient called the proton motive force. ATP synthase then uses this energy to make more ATP by adding phosphate to ADP. Oxygen is the final electron acceptor at the end of the electron transport chain.

If oxygen is not available, pyruvate cannot go through cellular respiration. Instead, it stays in the cytoplasm and goes through fermentation. In fermentation, pyruvate is turned into waste products that the cell can remove. This process allows NADH to be converted back into NAD⁺ so glycolysis can continue. Without oxygen, fermentation prevents the buildup of NADH and provides NAD⁺ for glycolysis to keep making ATP.

The waste product of fermentation depends on the organism. In human muscle cells, the waste product is lactic acid, so this process is called lactic acid fermentation. During intense exercise, when the body needs more energy than it can get from oxygen-based respiration, hydrogen atoms carried by NADH join with pyruvate to form lactate. This step is helped by the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase and can be reversed. Lactate can also be used later to help make glycogen in the liver. When oxygen is available again, hydrogen from lactate combines with NAD⁺ to help make ATP.

In yeast, fermentation produces ethanol and carbon dioxide, so this is called alcoholic or ethanol fermentation. The ATP made during fermentation comes from substrate-level phosphorylation, which does not require oxygen.

Photosynthesis is the process that plants and some other organisms use to change light energy into chemical energy. This chemical energy is stored in carbohydrates like sugars, which are made from carbon dioxide and water. Later, the stored energy can be released through cellular respiration to power the organism’s activities. In most cases, oxygen is released as a waste product. Most plants, algae, and cyanobacteria perform photosynthesis, and this process is mainly responsible for maintaining the oxygen in Earth’s atmosphere and providing most of the energy needed for life.

Photosynthesis happens in four stages: light absorption, electron transport, ATP production, and carbon fixation. Light absorption is the first step. During this stage, chlorophyll pigments in the thylakoid membranes absorb light energy. This energy is used to remove electrons from water and pass them to a primary electron acceptor called quinone, or Q.

In the second stage, these electrons move from the quinone through several electron carriers until they reach their final electron acceptor, which is usually NADP⁺. NADP⁺ is reduced to NADPH during this process, which takes place in a protein complex called photosystem I. As electrons are passed along, protons (hydrogen ions) are moved from the stroma into the thylakoid space. This creates a pH difference across the membrane, with more hydrogen ions in the lumen than in the stroma. This is similar to the proton gradient created in mitochondria during aerobic respiration.

In the third stage, the hydrogen ions move back down their concentration gradient from the thylakoid lumen to the stroma through ATP synthase. As they pass through ATP synthase, ATP is produced. The NADPH and ATP made during the second and third stages supply the energy and electrons needed for the final step.

In the fourth stage, carbon fixation, the energy from ATP and the electrons from NADPH are used to make glucose. This happens by adding carbon dioxide from the air to existing carbon compounds like ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP). These reactions do not require light directly and are called the Calvin cycle.

Cell signaling, or cell communication, is the way cells receive, process, and send signals to their surroundings and to themselves. Signals can be physical, such as light, electrical impulses, or heat, or they can be chemical. Chemical signals, also called ligands, connect with receptors that may be located on the cell membrane of another cell or inside a cell.

There are four main types of chemical signaling: autocrine, paracrine, juxtacrine, and hormonal. In autocrine signaling, a cell releases a chemical signal that affects itself. For example, some tumor cells divide uncontrollably because they produce signals that trigger their own growth. In paracrine signaling, the chemical signal spreads to nearby cells and affects them. An example is neurons in the brain, which release neurotransmitters that cross the synaptic gap and bind to receptors on nearby neurons or muscle cells. In juxtacrine signaling, the signaling cell and the receiving cell are in direct contact with each other. Hormonal signaling involves signals that travel through the bloodstream in animals or through the vascular system in plants to reach distant target cells.

When a ligand binds to a receptor, it can change the behavior of the target cell, depending on the type of receptor. For example, neurotransmitters that bind to an ionotropic receptor can change how easily a target cell becomes active. Other receptors include protein kinase receptors, like the insulin receptor, and G protein-coupled receptors. When G protein-coupled receptors are activated, they can start a chain of reactions called a second messenger cascade. The whole process by which a physical or chemical signal causes a series of molecular events inside a cell is known as signal transduction.

The cell cycle is the set of events that a cell goes through to divide and form two new daughter cells. During this process, the cell makes a copy of its DNA and some of its organelles. Then the cytoplasm is split into two new cells. This process is called cell division.

In eukaryotes, such as animals, plants, fungi, and protists, there are two types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis. Mitosis is the type that produces two new cells that are genetically identical to the original cell and have the same number of chromosomes. Before mitosis begins, the DNA is copied during the S phase of interphase. Mitosis separates the duplicated chromosomes into two nuclei. It is usually followed by cytokinesis, which divides the cytoplasm, organelles, and cell membrane so that each daughter cell gets a roughly equal share. The stages of mitosis together make up the mitotic phase of the cell cycle. This process is essential for growth, development, and tissue repair. After division, each daughter cell starts a new cycle with interphase.

Meiosis is different from mitosis. It produces four daughter cells, each with half the number of chromosomes (haploid cells). Meiosis involves one round of DNA replication followed by two divisions. In meiosis I, homologous chromosomes are separated. In meiosis II, sister chromatids are separated. Meiosis is used to produce sex cells and is part of sexual reproduction. Both mitosis and meiosis likely existed in the earliest eukaryotic ancestors.

During meiosis, chromosomes are copied and homologous chromosomes exchange genetic information in the first division. The second division creates four haploid gametes.

Prokaryotes, like bacteria and archaea, also divide, but in a simpler way called binary fission. Unlike eukaryotic cells, they do not form a spindle. Before binary fission, the DNA is tightly coiled. Once it uncoils and copies itself, the DNA strands move to opposite ends of the cell as the cell grows. A new cell wall begins to form in the middle of the cell, guided by proteins like FtsZ that form a “Z-ring.” The new wall, called the septum, eventually divides the cell completely. The result is two new daughter cells, each with tightly coiled DNA, ribosomes, and plasmids.

Meiosis is an important part of sexual reproduction in organisms with complex cells. Its main job is to make sure the DNA passed from parents to their children stays correct and complete.

The benefits of outcrossing are often called hybrid vigor or heterosis. In 1878, Charles Darwin wrote that cross-fertilizing plants was usually helpful, while self-fertilizing them could sometimes be harmful.

Sexual reproduction also creates genetic differences among offspring. These differences can help species that practice outcrossing survive and adapt over long periods of time.

Genetics is the science that studies how traits are passed from parents to their offspring. Mendelian inheritance explains how genes move from one generation to the next. Genes come in different forms, called alleles, and each parent gives one allele to its offspring. Some alleles are dominant and others are recessive. If an organism has at least one dominant allele, it will show the dominant trait. When gametes, such as sperm or eggs, are formed, the two alleles for a gene separate so that each gamete carries only one allele. If an organism has two different alleles for a gene, it will produce gametes that carry each allele in equal amounts. Another principle, called the law of independent assortment, says that alleles for different traits are usually passed on separately, meaning one trait does not normally affect how another is inherited. However, sex-linked traits can be exceptions to this. To figure out the hidden genetic makeup of an organism that shows a dominant trait, scientists can use a test cross, and a Punnett square can help predict the results. The chromosome theory of inheritance, which states that genes are found on chromosomes, was supported by Thomas Morgan’s experiments with fruit flies, where he showed that eye color was linked to sex.

Gene expression is the process by which the information in an organism’s DNA is used to create traits in its body. This happens through the production of proteins, which affect the organism’s characteristics. The process follows the central dogma of molecular biology, proposed by Francis Crick in 1958, which states that genetic information flows from DNA to RNA and then to protein. Gene expression involves two main steps: transcription, where DNA is copied into RNA, and translation, where RNA is used to build proteins.

A gene is a unit of heredity and is a section of DNA that carries the instructions for an organism’s form or function. DNA is made of two long chains of nucleotides that twist together to form a double helix. In eukaryotes, DNA is arranged in linear chromosomes, while in prokaryotes it is found in circular chromosomes. All of the chromosomes in a cell together make up its genome. In eukaryotic cells, most DNA is located in the nucleus, whereas in prokaryotic cells, it is found in a region called the nucleoid. The genetic information inside an organism is stored in its genes, and the complete set of this information is called the genotype. When DNA is copied, the process is called semiconservative replication, meaning each original strand is used as a template to make a new one. Mutations are changes in DNA that can be passed on to offspring. They can happen on their own during DNA replication if an error is not corrected, or they can be caused by environmental mutagens such as chemicals or radiation. Mutations can have different effects, such as causing a gene to lose its normal function, gain a new function, or work only under certain conditions. Some mutations are helpful because they create genetic variation that can drive evolution. Others are harmful if they interfere with genes that are needed for survival.

Gene expression can be controlled by environmental factors and by the stage of development, and this control can happen at different steps, such as transcription, RNA splicing, translation, and protein modification after translation. Gene expression is regulated by proteins called transcription factors, which can either increase or decrease activity depending on whether they activate or repress a gene. A group of genes that share the same promoter is called an operon, which is mostly found in prokaryotes and some simple eukaryotes. In positive regulation, an activator transcription factor binds to the promoter region to turn on transcription. In negative regulation, a repressor binds to a DNA sequence called an operator to block transcription. Repressors can be turned off by molecules called inducers, allowing transcription to occur. Genes that can be turned on by inducers are called inducible genes, while constitutive genes are almost always active. Structural genes produce proteins that do not control gene activity. In addition to these mechanisms, gene expression can also be regulated by epigenetic changes to chromatin, the combination of DNA and proteins in eukaryotic cells.

Development is the process by which a multicellular organism, such as a plant or animal, changes from a single cell into the many specialized cells and forms that make up its body during its life cycle. There are four main processes in development: determination, differentiation, morphogenesis, and growth. Determination sets the future role of a cell, which becomes more limited as development proceeds. Differentiation is when specialized cells form from less specialized cells, like stem cells. Stem cells are undifferentiated or partly specialized cells that can both make more stem cells and turn into different types of cells. Differentiation changes a cell’s size, shape, activity, and how it responds to signals, mainly due to changes in gene expression and epigenetics, without altering the DNA sequence itself. This is why cells can look and act very differently even though they have the same genome. Morphogenesis is the process that shapes the body, guided by differences in gene expression. A small group of genes, called the developmental-genetic toolkit, controls the development of an organism. These toolkit genes are very old and similar across many animal groups. How these genes are used determines the body plan and the arrangement of body parts. Among these, Hox genes are especially important, as they tell the embryo where repeated parts, like the many vertebrae of a snake, should develop.

Evolution is a key idea in biology. It is the change in inherited traits of populations over many generations. In artificial selection, humans breed animals or plants for specific traits. Darwin realized that, in nature, a similar process happens without human intervention. Because traits are inherited and populations have variation, individuals with traits that help them survive are more likely to live longer and have more offspring. Over many generations, these favorable traits become more common, making the population better suited to its environment.

A species is a group of organisms that can mate with each other. Speciation is the process where one group splits into two separate groups that evolve independently. For speciation to happen, the groups must become reproductively isolated, meaning they can no longer successfully interbreed. This isolation can occur because of genetic incompatibilities, as explained by the Bateson–Dobzhansky–Muller model, and it usually increases as the groups become more genetically different. Speciation can also happen when physical barriers, like mountains or rivers, separate a population, a process called allopatric speciation.

Phylogeny is the evolutionary history of a group of organisms or their genes. It can be shown with a phylogenetic tree, a diagram that traces lines of descent. Each line represents a lineage of descendants from a species or population, and when a lineage splits into two, it appears as a fork in the tree. Phylogenetic trees help scientists compare and group different species. Species that share traits inherited from a common ancestor are said to have homologous features. Phylogeny also forms the basis of biological classification, which organizes living things into ranks: domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. All organisms belong to one of three domains: Archaea, Bacteria, or Eukarya, which includes fungi, plants, and animals.

The history of life on Earth shows how living things have changed and evolved from the earliest forms to the present. Earth formed about 4.5 billion years ago, and all life, living and extinct, comes from a last universal common ancestor that lived around 3.5 billion years ago. Geologists divide Earth’s history using a geologic time scale, which includes four eons: Hadean, Archean, Proterozoic, and Phanerozoic. The first three eons, called the Precambrian, lasted about 4 billion years. The Phanerozoic eon, starting 539 million years ago, is divided into three eras: Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Cenozoic, which together include eleven periods, from the Cambrian to the Quaternary.

All living species today share similarities that show they evolved from a common ancestor. The universal genetic code is further evidence that bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes all share this common descent. In the early Archean eon, microbial mats of bacteria and archaea were the dominant life forms, and many key steps in early evolution happened in this environment. The first eukaryotes appeared around 1.85 billion years ago, and their diversity increased when they began using oxygen in metabolism. Multicellular organisms appeared around 1.7 billion years ago, with specialized cells performing different functions.

Land plants similar to algae date back about 1 billion years, though microorganisms may have formed the first terrestrial ecosystems at least 2.7 billion years ago, helping prepare the way for land plants in the Ordovician period. Land plants became so successful that they may have contributed to the Late Devonian extinction. Ediacara biota appeared during the Ediacaran period, and vertebrates along with most modern animal groups originated about 525 million years ago during the Cambrian explosion. During the Permian period, synapsids, including ancestors of mammals, dominated land but were mostly wiped out in the Permian–Triassic extinction 252 million years ago. After this event, archosaurs became the most common land vertebrates, and one group, the dinosaurs, dominated the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods. When the non-avian dinosaurs went extinct 66 million years ago in the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction, mammals rapidly grew in size and diversity. These mass extinctions may have sped up evolution by creating opportunities for new groups of organisms to flourish.

Bacteria are tiny single-celled organisms that belong to a large group of prokaryotes (cells without a nucleus). They are usually a few micrometers long and can have different shapes, like spheres, rods, or spirals. Bacteria were among the first forms of life on Earth and live in almost all environments, including soil, water, hot springs, radioactive waste, and deep underground. They can also live in or on plants and animals, sometimes helping them and sometimes harming them. Most bacteria are not well studied, and only about 27% of bacterial groups can be grown in a lab.

Archaea are another group of prokaryotes. They were first thought to be bacteria and were called “archaebacteria,” but that name is no longer used. Archaea have special features that make them different from bacteria and eukaryotes (cells with a nucleus). They are similar in size and shape to bacteria, though some archaea, like Haloquadratum walsbyi, have unusual shapes such as flat squares. Even though they look like bacteria, archaea have genes and ways of making proteins more like eukaryotes. They also have unique cell membranes made of special fats called ether lipids. Archaea can get energy from many sources, including sugars, ammonia, metals, hydrogen gas, and sunlight (for salt-loving species called Haloarchaea). Some archaea can take in carbon, but unlike plants, no archaea can do both photosynthesis and carbon fixation. Archaea reproduce asexually through binary fission, splitting, or budding. Unlike bacteria, they do not form spores.

The first archaea discovered were extremophiles, living in extreme places like hot springs and salty lakes where no other life could survive. Later, scientists found archaea in almost every habitat, including soil, oceans, and marshes. They are especially common in oceans, and some plankton archaea may be among the most abundant organisms on Earth.

Archaea are an important part of life on Earth. They live in the microbiomes of humans and other organisms, including the gut, mouth, and skin. Because archaea have different shapes, metabolisms, and habitats, they play many ecological roles, such as fixing carbon, cycling nitrogen, breaking down organic matter, and supporting communities of other microbes.

Eukaryotes (living things with complex cells) are thought to have evolved from archaea. Later, these early eukaryotes formed partnerships with bacteria. These bacteria eventually became mitochondria and chloroplasts, which are now permanent parts of eukaryotic cells.

About 1.5 billion years ago, eukaryotes split into several major groups. Scientists group them into eight main clades:

Five of these groups are often called protists. Protists are mostly tiny eukaryotic organisms that are not plants, animals, or fungi. Most protists are single-celled, and they are sometimes called microbial eukaryotes. The term “protist” is used for convenience, not as an official scientific group, because some protists are more closely related to plants, animals, or fungi than to other protists.

Plants are mostly multicellular and perform photosynthesis. They belong to the kingdom Plantae, which does not include fungi or some algae. Plant cells began when an early eukaryote absorbed a cyanobacterium about 1 billion years ago, leading to the formation of chloroplasts.

Early plant-like organisms were aquatic and are often called algae, though algae are not all closely related. Algae include groups like:

Fungi are eukaryotes that digest food outside their bodies. They release enzymes that break food down first, then absorb it. Many fungi feed on dead material and act as decomposers, helping recycle nutrients in ecosystems.

Scientists have identified over 1.5 million living animal species so far, including about 1 million insects. However, there may be more than 7 million animal species in total. Animals interact with each other and their surroundings, forming complex food webs.

Viruses are tiny germs that are too small to see with a regular microscope. They can only make copies of themselves when they are inside the cells of living things. Viruses can infect all kinds of life — animals, plants, bacteria, and even very simple organisms called archaea. Scientists have studied and described more than 6,000 kinds of viruses. Viruses exist almost everywhere on Earth and are the most common type of biological thing.

Scientists are not sure where viruses first came from. Some might have started as bits of DNA that can move between cells (called plasmids), while others may have come from simple bacteria. In evolution, viruses help move genes from one organism to another, which adds variety to life, similar to what happens in sexual reproduction.

Because viruses have some features of living things but not all, people sometimes call them “organisms at the edge of life” or “self-replicators.”

Ecology is the study of the distribution and abundance of life, the interaction between organisms and their environment.

An ecosystem is made up of living things (like plants, animals, and microbes) and nonliving things (like water, air, sunlight, temperature, soil, and acidity) that exist together in one place. The living and nonliving parts are connected through the flow of energy and the recycling of nutrients. Energy from the sun enters the ecosystem when plants use photosynthesis to make food. Animals eat plants and other animals, which moves energy and matter through the system. Animals also affect how much plant and microbe life there is. When living things die, decomposers break down their remains. This process releases carbon back into the air and changes the nutrients in dead material into forms that plants and microbes can use again.

A population is a group of living things of the same species that live in one area and reproduce over many generations. You can estimate how big a population is by multiplying how many organisms are in a certain space (population density) by the size of the area or volume. An environment’s carrying capacity is the largest number of individuals of a species that the environment can support. This depends on things like food, water, space, and shelter. The carrying capacity can change if the environment changes—for example, if resources become harder to find or more expensive to use. For humans, new technologies—like those from the Green Revolution—have helped increase how many people Earth can support. This growth has proved wrong some older predictions that human populations would soon decline, such as those made by Thomas Malthus in the 1700s.

A community is a group of different populations of species that live in the same place at the same time. A biological interaction is how two organisms in a community affect one another. These organisms can be from the same species (intraspecific) or from different species (interspecific). Some interactions are short-term, like pollination or hunting. Others are long-term and can strongly affect how species evolve.

A long-term relationship between species is called a symbiosis. Symbiosis can be:

Every species in a community is either a consumer, a resource, or both. These roles form food chains and food webs.

Only about 10% of the energy from one trophic level is passed to the next. The remaining 90% is lost as heat or used by decomposers to break down waste and dead material.

In the world ecosystem (the biosphere), matter is found in different parts that interact with each other. These parts can be living (biotic) or nonliving (abiotic), and they can be easy to use (accessible) or hard to use (inaccessible) depending on where they are and what form they take.

A biogeochemical cycle is the path that a specific element of matter takes as it moves through the living parts of Earth (the biosphere) and the nonliving parts (the lithosphere, atmosphere, and hydrosphere).

There are biogeochemical cycles for nitrogen, carbon, and water.

Conservation biology is the study of protecting Earth’s biodiversity. Its goal is to save species, their habitats, and ecosystems from disappearing too quickly and to keep natural interactions between living things intact.

It looks at what causes biodiversity to be lost, what helps it survive, and how it can be restored. It also studies how evolution continues to create diversity in genes, populations, species, and ecosystems. Scientists are concerned because estimates suggest that up to half of all species on Earth could disappear in the next 50 years. Losing biodiversity can lead to problems like poverty, hunger, and big changes in how life evolves on Earth. Biodiversity is important because it keeps ecosystems working. Ecosystems provide many services that humans rely on. Conservation biologists study how biodiversity loss and species extinction affect our ability to live well. Governments, organizations, and citizens are taking action through conservation plans. These plans include research, monitoring, and education programs, helping protect biodiversity from local to global levels.

Chemistry is the science that studies what everything is made of and how it changes. It looks at matter, which is anything that takes up space. Chemistry tries to understand how matter is built, how it behaves, and how it can change. Chemistry explores how tiny particles called atoms and molecules come together, break apart, or rearrange to form new substances. People often call chemistry the “central science” because it connects other sciences like physics (which studies energy and forces) and biology (which studies living things). Chemistry helps explain things all around us, like why iron rusts, how food gives us energy, and how soap cleans our hands.

The history of chemistry is lengthy. Thousands of years ago, people in places like Mesopotamia, Egypt, India, and China used early forms of chemistry in their daily lives. They practiced metalworking, made dyes for clothes, and learned to ferment food and drinks. These skills were based on watching and experimenting, even though people did not yet understand the science behind them. Later, a practice called alchemy became popular. Alchemists hoped to turn ordinary metals into gold and find a magic liquid that would give eternal life. Even though their ideas were not always scientific, alchemists invented tools and methods that would help future scientists. In the 1600s, chemistry began to change. Scientists like Robert Boyle said that experiments, not just ideas, should be used to understand the world. In the 1700s, Antoine Lavoisier carefully measured chemicals and discovered that matter cannot be created or destroyed, only changed. This became a key idea in modern chemistry. As time went on, scientists developed the atomic theory, created the periodic table, and learned how atoms bond together.

Chemistry is a type of physical science, which means it focuses on understanding matter and how it changes using careful measurements and natural laws. It is closely related to physics, especially in areas like heat and energy (thermodynamics), the behavior of tiny particles (quantum mechanics), and how fast reactions happen (kinetics). These help scientists understand how and why chemical reactions take place. While physics looks for broad, universal rules, chemistry often focuses on how specific molecules and materials behave. Chemists study how atoms come together to form molecules, how energy moves during reactions, and how things like temperature, pressure, and the amount of each substance can affect the speed of a reaction. Using tools and models, chemistry helps us explore both the tiny world of atoms and the larger world of solids, liquids, gases, and plasma. It plays a big role in helping us understand the materials that make up everything around us.

Chemistry is very important in both science and everyday life. It plays a big role in many areas, like medicine, farming, energy, and making new materials. You can find chemistry in everything from the food you eat to the soap you use and the medicine you take when you are sick. Thanks to chemistry, we have clean water, solar panels, plastic, and life-saving drugs. It helps explain everyday things, like why bread rises when you bake it, how soap gets rid of grease, and what happens when your body digests food. Chemists also study pollution, look for better ways to protect the environment, and create new materials that are safer and better for the planet. As the world faces problems like climate change, diseases, and limited resources, chemistry helps us find smart and useful solutions.

Chemistry is not a subject that stands alone. It is closely connected to many other sciences. Chemistry and physics are closely linked because the movement of atoms, energy, and tiny particles like electrons all follow the laws of physics. In biology, chemistry helps us understand how living things work. It explains how enzymes speed up reactions in the body, how DNA carries genetic information, and how cells turn food into energy. This area of science is called biochemistry. In geology, chemistry helps us learn what rocks and minerals are made of, how volcanoes work, and how elements move through Earth’s surface, oceans, and air. Chemistry is also important in environmental science, astronomy, engineering, and making new materials. Because of these connections, chemistry is one of the most important and wide-reaching sciences.

In prehistoric times, chemistry was not a real science like it is today. Instead, it was more of a mix of practical skills and simple observations that helped people survive. Early humans learned how to use the materials around them by trying things out and watching what happened. Over time, they began to understand how some things changed. This hands-on experience helped them slowly build a basic understanding of chemical changes, even though they did not know the science behind it. One of the most important achievements of early humans was learning how to control fire. Cooking was one of the most important uses of fire. It made food taste better and easier to digest. Cooking also helped kill germs, which made food safer to eat, especially meat. Since early humans did not have refrigerators, cooking food helped it last longer and reduced the chance of them getting sick from spoiled or raw meat. Fire was also used for other important tasks. For example, early people discovered that heating the tips of wooden tools made them harder and stronger. They also learned to shape wet clay into pots and bowls, then bake them in fire to make them tough and long-lasting.

By around 5000 BCE, people began to discover a new use for fire, making metal from rocks. This early process was called smelting. It marked the beginning of metallurgy, the science of working with metals. Before this, people mostly used native metals, which are found in nature in pure form, like small lumps of gold or copper. But now, they learned how to get copper out of rocks called ores, such as malachite or azurite. To smelt copper, they had to heat the ore in a very hot fire, hot enough to melt the metal and separate it from the rock. This was not easy. It required skill in building and controlling fire. Sometimes they used tools like bellows to blow air and make the fire hotter. They also had to choose the right rocks and other materials to help the process work better. The result was soft copper, which could be shaped into tools, weapons, and jewelry.

One of the earliest examples of prehistoric chemistry was using natural pigments for cave paintings. People ground up minerals like ochre (which is made of iron oxide), charcoal (which is made of carbon), and manganese dioxide into powders. They mixed these powders with animal fat or water to make paint. People used these paints for rock art and decorating their bodies. Another important skill was tanning hides. This meant soaking animal skins in plants with tannins, like tree bark. This process made the leather last longer, stay flexible, and be useful for making clothes or tools. Fermentation also started during this time. At first, it probably happened by accident when fruit or grains went sour. As early as 7000 BCE, people in China were mixing rice, honey, and fruit to make a kind of early alcoholic drink. At the same time, people in Mesopotamia and Egypt were learning how to brew beer and make bread rise by fermenting dough. These processes used wild yeasts and bacteria to turn sugars into alcohol or carbon dioxide, which changed the taste and texture of the food. Even though they did not know about microorganisms, early humans figured out how to make fermentation work.

Metals like gold, silver, and copper became very special. Gold was rare, shiny and beautiful, and also did not get dull or rust, so it was used for ceremonies and to show status. Silver was shiny and easy to shape, so it was used for jewelry and everyday items. Copper was valuable because it could be made into tools and weapons. People started mining these metals on purpose and trading them. One of the biggest discoveries was mixing copper with tin to make bronze. Bronze was first made about 3300 BCE, during the time between the late Stone Age and the early Bronze Age. The oldest proof of making bronze comes from Mesopotamia, an area that is now Iraq and parts of Syria and Turkey. People there started mixing copper with tin to make a metal that was stronger and lasted longer. This new way of making metal eventually spread to other places like the ancient Near East, Europe, and the Indus Valley. Bronze was stronger and harder than tin or copper alone. This was one of the first times people made a new material on purpose by combining substances. Bronze tools and weapons helped societies grow, build cities, and create professional armies.

Salt was one of the most important chemical substances in early civilization. It was not just used to add flavor to food. It helped people keep meat and fish from spoiling, so they could store food for a long time. This made it possible to travel farther, plan for different seasons, and build towns away from places with fresh food. Because salt was so useful, it became very valuable and was traded over long distances. Some trade routes and even early cities grew around places where salt was found, and in some cultures, salt was even used as money.

In ancient civilizations, chemistry started to become more organized and intentional. Unlike the earlier times when people learned mostly by guessing and trying things out, ancient cultures began to keep records and follow steps more carefully. Even though they did not know about atoms or molecules, they still learned how to change and use natural materials in useful ways. Civilizations like ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, India, China, and Greece all made important contributions. They used chemistry for everyday needs like making metal tools, preserving food, and creating medicines. They also used it for spiritual or religious reasons, such as preparing bodies for burial (embalming), making perfumes, or using special materials in ceremonies. These cultures wrote down their ideas and methods on things like clay tablets and scrolls. This helped them improve their techniques and pass knowledge down to future generations.

In ancient Egypt, chemistry was closely connected to religion, medicine, and daily life. The Egyptians were skilled at using natural materials like minerals, dyes, and plant resins, especially when it came to preserving bodies for the afterlife. They used a special salt mixture called natron, made of natural chemicals like baking soda and salt, to dry out dead bodies and prevent decay. They also added oils, herbs, and resins to stop bad smells and protect the body. Egyptians were also talented metalworkers. They knew how to melt down copper ores like malachite in hot furnaces using charcoal to get pure metal. They used metals like gold, copper, and lead to make tools, jewelry, and statues. They also made green eye paint from malachite and black eyeliner (kohl) from a mineral called galena (lead sulfide). These were not just for beauty. They were believed to help protect their eyes from infections and bright sunlight. Egyptians also made perfumes and scented oils by mixing plant parts, resins, and fats. They used early versions of extraction methods, like soaking flowers in oils or using heat. Some even think they may have used very simple distillation to collect scents. One of their greatest chemical achievements was glass-making. As early as 1500 BCE, they were making colorful glass beads and jars using a mix of sand (silica), soda (a type of salt), and lime, all melted together in hot ovens. By adding different metals, they could change the color. Copper made blue, iron made green, and manganese made purple. Chemistry also played a role in Egyptian medicine. Ancient texts like the Ebers Papyrus included hundreds of recipes for medicines made from minerals, herbs, and animal parts. Some treatments were based on beliefs and rituals, but many were surprisingly accurate and showed real knowledge of how the human body reacted to certain substances.

In Mesopotamia, especially in places like Sumer and Babylon, people made important early discoveries in chemistry, mostly through practical work. They wrote down their knowledge on clay tablets using a writing system called cuneiform. These records show  in detail how they used different materials. One of their biggest contributions was in metalworking. The Sumerians and Babylonians learned how to get metals like copper, tin, lead, silver, and gold from rocks called ores. They built furnaces hot enough to melt these ores. By mixing copper and tin, they created bronze, a strong metal used for making tools, weapons, and art. This marked the start of the Bronze Age. Pottery and ceramics were also important. They used kilns (hot ovens) to bake clay and to make glazes, which gave pottery shiny, colorful finishes. These glazes were made by mixing minerals and metal powders like copper or iron, which changed color when heated. Pottery was used in homes, temples, and for special objects. Mesopotamians also made progress in perfume-making. Ancient clay tablets from cities like Mari and Babylon describe how they got scents from plants, spices, and tree resins. They may have used early versions of distillation, heating ingredients and collecting the vapor to concentrate smells. These perfumes were used in religious ceremonies, for personal grooming, and sometimes in medicine. In medicine, Mesopotamian healers called asu (practical doctors) and ashipu (spiritual healers) made remedies by mixing minerals, herbs, and animal parts. Some ingredients, like sulfur, salts, and alkalis, had real chemical effects. Their treatments, written on Assyrian tablets, included directions for curing fevers, wounds, and stomach problems, often with both practical steps and magical prayers. Another interesting substance they used was bitumen, a sticky, black natural material similar to modern asphalt. They used it for building, waterproofing, and even to preserve bodies like in mummification.

In ancient India, people had a deep and detailed knowledge of chemistry, especially in medicine and spiritual practices. This knowledge was recorded in early texts like the Vedas and Ayurvedic writings. One major area of chemical knowledge was Ayurveda, the traditional Indian system of medicine. Ayurvedic healers used herbs, minerals, and even animal products to make medicines that matched each person’s body type, known as a dosha. These healers used careful steps like heating, grinding, and washing to prepare them. For example, they used mercury (called rasa) in special medicines called rasaushadhis, often mixing it with sulfur. Ancient Indian alchemy, called Rasayana Shastra, also played a big role. While it had mystical goals like living longer or turning base metals into gold, it led to real scientific progress. They used early chemical techniques like calcination (marana), distillation (patan), sublimation (sublimna), and fermentation (sandhana). They built and used tools such as yantras (distillers), musha (crucibles), and retorts (curved tubes), often made from clay or metal. Metallurgy, the science of working with metals, was another area where ancient India stood out. Indian blacksmiths were some of the first to smelt iron, and by the first millennium BCE, they had invented a special kind of strong steel called Wootz steel. This steel was famous for its strength and was traded all over the world. A great example of their skill is the Iron pillar of Delhi, built around the 4th century CE, which has not rusted much even after 1,600 years. India was also among the first cultures to extract and purify zinc. They worked with metals like gold, silver, copper, and lead. In daily life, Indian chemistry showed up in dyeing, cosmetics, and perfumery. Artisans made colorful dyes from plants and minerals for clothes and art. They made perfumes and incense by collecting scented oils from flowers and herbs using early forms of distillation. These recipes and tools were written down in books like the Brihat Samhita, which explained not just what to use, but how to prepare each substance step by step.

In ancient China, chemistry was closely connected to Taoist beliefs and natural ideas, especially the concepts of yin and yang and the Five Elements: wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. These ideas helped guide how people thought substances changed and interacted with each other. One of the most important parts of Chinese chemistry was alchemy, “the way of the elixir”. Alchemists tried to create special elixirs, magical mixtures that they believed could bring immortality or spiritual powers. They used materials like mercury, sulfur, arsenic, and other minerals and metals. While some of these elixirs were dangerous or poisonous, the work led to better knowledge of how different substances behaved and reacted. For example, Chinese alchemists learned how to heat cinnabar (a mercury mineral) to get liquid mercury. These experiments accidentally led to one of the greatest discoveries in chemistry: gunpowder. Around the time of the Tang Dynasty (7th–10th century CE), Taoist alchemists trying to make an elixir of life mixed sulfur, saltpeter, and charcoal, and instead discovered an explosive powder, gunpowder. This changed warfare forever and eventually spread around the world. The recipe was written down in military books like the Wujing Zongyao (written in 1044 CE). Besides alchemy and gunpowder, the Chinese were also masters of metallurgy. Long before Europe, they had created blast furnaces to make cast iron. They developed strong metal mixtures like bronze (copper and tin) and even steel. These metal tools and weapons helped China grow and succeed. Ancient China also developed medicine. Books like the Shennong Bencao Jing (written around the 1st century CE) listed hundreds of plants, minerals, and animal parts used to treat illness. Medicines were made using chemical techniques like grinding, boiling, fermenting, and roasting. Doctors noticed how different amounts, preparation styles, and combinations of ingredients affected the body, even though they explained it using traditional ideas like qi (life energy) and balance between organs. Finally, ancient Chinese people were experts in ceramics, dyeing, and glass-making. The art of making porcelain used special clay (kaolinite) and very high firing temperatures in kilns. They carefully controlled the heat and mixed minerals to make beautiful glazes. Chinese artists also used metal powders to make colorful finishes, like cobalt for blue, copper for green, and iron for brown or black.

In the history of chemistry, classical theories of matter were the early ideas people had about what everything is made of and how it changes. These ideas came from ancient civilizations long before scientists understood atoms like we do today. Even though these early theories did not use experiments like modern chemistry, they helped people start thinking about the nature and structure of matter. These ideas set the stage for many important discoveries later in chemistry.

In ancient Greece, people had different ideas about what matter was made of. One early idea came from Empedocles in the 5th century BCE. He said all matter was made of four basic elements: earth, water, air, and fire. These elements could mix and change because of two forces: love (which brings things together) and strife (which pulls things apart). Later, Aristotle added a fifth element called aether, which he believed made up the sky and stars. He also linked the four elements to qualities like hot, cold, wet, and dry, which helped explain how matter could change. Another important idea came from Democritus and his teacher Leucippus. They said that everything was made of tiny, unbreakable particles called atoms. These atoms were different in shape and size, and how they combined created all the different materials around us. Even though they did not have experiments to prove it, this idea was very similar to what scientists believe today and was very different from Aristotle’s ideas.

In ancient India, there was an idea similar to atoms in a school of thought called Vaisheshika, started by a thinker named Kanada around the 2nd century BCE. They believed that everything is made of tiny, unbreakable particles called “anu” or “paramanu.” These particles combine in different ways to make all kinds of materials. They also created a way to group things based on qualities like taste, color, and how they feel. Even though their ideas were mixed with philosophy and spirituality, they were trying to explain how things change and why there are so many different materials. At the same time, in ancient China, people explained matter using the ideas of yin and yang and the Five Elements (called Wu Xing): wood, fire, earth, metal, and water. These were not elements like we think of them today but were seen as phases or processes that energy goes through. Each element had connections to different qualities, directions, body organs, and natural events. This system helped explain things like nature’s cycles, health, and balance in society, and it influenced Chinese medicine, alchemy, and ideas about the universe for many centuries.

During the medieval period (about the 5th to 15th century AD), chemistry was not yet a formal science like it is today. Instead, it was mixed with hands-on crafts, spiritual beliefs, and ideas passed down from ancient times. This period was like a bridge between ancient alchemy and the modern science of chemistry that would come later. People during this time used chemical knowledge in many parts of daily life. For example, medicine used herbal mixtures, metal-based compounds, and special liquids called elixirs to treat sickness. These were made through experiments and trial-and-error methods. Metalworking, or metallurgy, was also important. Craftsmen learned how to extract metals like iron, copper, tin, and lead from ores. They used fire and special tools to melt and combine metals, which involved real chemical changes like smelting and making alloys. Other industries like glassmaking and dyeing cloth also depended on chemistry. Workers learned how heat, minerals, and plants could change color or texture. Even though they did not fully understand why it worked, they gained skills and passed them on through guilds and workshops. This time in history helped keep old knowledge alive and slowly improved it, setting the stage for the science of chemistry to grow in the future.

During the medieval period, the Islamic world became one of the most advanced places for chemical knowledge and learning. After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the Islamic Golden Age (from the 8th to the 14th century) saw a great effort to collect and build upon the science of earlier civilizations. Scholars in cities like Baghdad, Cairo, and Cordoba translated important books from Greek, Persian, and Indian languages into Arabic. But they did not just copy old ideas, they improved them. One famous scientist, Jabir ibn Hayyan (known in Europe as Geber), is often called the “father of Arab chemistry.” He wrote hundreds of books describing different substances and how they reacted with each other. He also created new ways to study materials using experiments. Jabir worked with processes like distillation, crystallization, and calcination. He even helped design tools like alembics and retorts, which were used in early chemistry labs. Jabir tried to understand matter by observing its properties, like how easily it burns or changes. Even though his ideas were influenced by alchemy and religious beliefs, he took important steps toward using experiments to test ideas. His work also introduced many Arabic words for chemicals and tools that later became part of European chemistry. Other Islamic scholars, like Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) and Al-Tughra'i, continued to build on Jabir’s work. Al-Razi was especially important in medicine. He made antiseptics, acids, and cures for different illnesses. He was also one of the first people to tell the difference between trying to turn metals into gold (a common alchemical goal) and doing useful science to understand how materials behave. These Islamic chemists helped create important tools and methods that were later shared with European scientists. Their books were translated into Latin in places like Sicily and Spain, allowing European scholars to learn from their experiments. This knowledge helped Europe begin its own journey toward modern chemistry.

In medieval Europe, alchemy was shaped by a mix of ancient ideas, Christian beliefs, and mystical thinking. European alchemists believed that changing metals was not just about science, it also had a spiritual meaning. For them, turning ordinary metals into gold was a symbol of purifying the soul and reaching a higher, more perfect state. One of their main goals was to create the Philosopher’s stone, a magical substance they thought could change metals into gold and even give eternal life. Even though alchemy was full of spiritual ideas, it also led to real scientific progress. Important European alchemists like Roger Bacon, Albertus Magnus, and Raymond Lull helped connect mystical ideas with careful observation and early experiments. Roger Bacon, a monk, believed that learning through experiments was important and studied things like light and materials. Albertus Magnus wrote a lot about minerals and metals and helped organize what people knew about them. Raymond Lull used symbols to explain complex ideas, and some of his systems were later used to describe chemical reactions.

During the Middle Ages, the translation of books played a big role in helping chemistry grow in Europe. As Europeans came into more contact with the Islamic world, through trade, the Crusades, and the reconquest of Spain, they discovered many scientific texts written in Arabic. These included both translations of ancient Greek writings and original works by Muslim scientists. Cities like Toledo in Spain and Palermo in Italy became important places where scholars translated Arabic texts into Latin. Thanks to this, the ideas of famous Islamic chemists like Jabir ibn Hayyan and Abu Bakr al-Razi became known across Europe. Their work helped inspire European scientists and planted the seeds for future experiments. At the same time, monasteries in Europe were important for keeping and sharing knowledge. Even though monks mainly focused on religion, they also worked on tasks that used chemical skills. For example, making fancy books called illuminated manuscripts required knowledge about how to make colorful inks from minerals and plants. Monks also brewed beer, made wine, preserved food, and prepared herbal medicines. These activities were based on chemical knowledge, even if the monks did not call it “chemistry.” Craft workers in cities also helped chemistry grow through hands-on work. People like blacksmiths, potters, glassmakers, tanners, dyers, and brewers learned how to change raw materials into useful things. They melted metals, made shiny glazes for pottery, created dyes from plants and bugs, and controlled how things fermented. These workers learned by doing, often as apprentices in guilds. Even though they were not scientists, they used chemistry in their everyday jobs and passed their knowledge down through generations.

By the late Middle Ages, as Europe moved into the early modern period, alchemy started to change. People were becoming less interested in trying to make gold or find ways to live forever, because those goals rarely worked. Instead, more people began to focus on real results. Things they could see, test, and use in everyday life. One important thinker during this time was Paracelsus, a doctor in the 1500s. He believed that alchemy should be used to help people, especially in medicine. He used minerals like mercury, arsenic, and antimony in treatments, substances that were usually feared. Paracelsus is famous for saying, "The dose makes the poison," which means that even dangerous substances can be helpful if used in the right amount. This idea became an important rule in medicine and toxicology. Paracelsus also believed that people should learn about nature by observing and experimenting, not just by reading old books. He studied how chemicals reacted and how they affected the human body. This helped move chemistry away from mystical ideas and closer to real science. Another key figure was Andreas Libavius, a German doctor and chemist. He believed that knowledge should be shared clearly and openly. In 1597, he wrote Alchemia, one of the first chemistry textbooks. In it, he explained tools, techniques, and substances in a simple and organized way. This was very different from the secret codes and symbols used by older alchemists.

The birth of classical chemistry in the 1500s and 1600s was a big turning point. During this time, chemistry began to move away from the old mystical ideas of alchemy and become a more careful, scientific way of understanding the world. This change happened during the Scientific Revolution, a time when people started to focus more on observing nature, doing experiments, and thinking for themselves instead of just trusting old books and beliefs. Classical chemistry did not appear overnight. It grew slowly as scientists developed better ways to test ideas, improved their lab tools, and began to think differently about matter and how it changes. One important change was that scientists started to question the old idea that everything was made of four or five elements, like earth, water, fire, and air. Instead, they looked more closely at how substances were made and how they reacted in real-life experiments. This new way of thinking helped turn chemistry into a true science, based on facts, testing, and clear thinking.

Robert Boyle was an important figure in the history of chemistry. His book The Sceptical Chymist, published in 1661, is often seen as the moment when chemistry started to move away from old alchemical ideas and become a true science. He challenged long-held beliefs about what matter is made of and how it changes. At the time, many people still believed in the old idea that everything was made of four elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Boyle disagreed. Instead, he suggested that all matter is made of tiny particles, which he called "corpuscles." These particles could combine in different ways to form all the materials in the world. This idea was an early step toward what we now call atomic theory. One of Boyle’s biggest contributions was his new definition of a chemical element. He said an element is a substance that cannot be broken down into anything simpler by chemical methods. Even though he did not know about all the elements we recognize today, his definition helped future scientists, like Antoine Lavoisier, build a better system for understanding them. Boyle was also a strong supporter of careful, repeatable experiments. He believed scientists should write down exactly what they did and what happened, so others could try the same experiments and check the results. This idea of clear, honest reporting is a key part of how science works today. Unlike many alchemists who kept their findings secret, Boyle wanted to share knowledge. He helped start the Royal Society of London, a group that encouraged scientists to share ideas and discoveries openly.

During the 1500s and 1600s, as chemistry was changing, the tools and techniques used in the laboratory improved a lot. Old alchemical tools like retorts, alembics, crucibles, and furnaces were still used, but they were made better. A retort was often made of glass and metal. It was used to heat liquids and collect their vapors, and helped scientists separate parts of a mixture by heating it. An alembic was another tool that helped separate and cool down gases, turning them back into liquids. Over time, alembics were made with better seals and more consistent shapes so they worked better and gave more reliable results. Crucibles were small containers used to heat materials to very high temperatures. They were often made from strong ceramics that could handle the heat and be used many times, which was especially important when working with metals and minerals. Many chemical processes were also becoming clearer and more organized. For example, distillation was used to purify substances like alcohol or perfumes. Filtration was used to separate solid bits from liquids using cloth, paper, or fine mesh. Precipitation meant making a solid appear out of a liquid by mixing certain chemicals, useful for finding out how different substances react. Crystallization helped scientists purify salts and study the shapes of crystals. Glassmaking became very important too. In places like Venice and other parts of Europe, people learned to make clear, heat-resistant glass. This allowed scientists to see what was happening inside their experiments. Tools like flasks, beakers, funnels, test tubes, and condensers became more uniform, meaning they looked and worked the same in different labs. This made it easier for scientists to copy each other’s work and learn together. New measuring tools also made a big difference. Scientists started using balances (scales) that were more sensitive, which helped them measure materials more accurately. This led to the early idea that the total amount of matter stays the same during a reaction, a key idea in modern chemistry. Thermometers, improved by people like Galileo, let scientists track temperature changes during experiments. With better tools and more exact methods, chemistry became less about guessing and more about testing, recording, and sharing results.

In the world of medicine, a new idea called iatrochemistry began to change how people thought about health and healing. Iatrochemistry combined chemistry with medicine and was based on the bold ideas of a scientist named Paracelsus. At the time, most doctors believed in humoral theory, which said sickness came from imbalances in body fluids. But Paracelsus disagreed. He believed that diseases came from outside the body or from chemical problems inside it, and that they should be treated with chemical medicines, not just herbs or bloodletting. Paracelsus introduced the idea of using minerals and man-made substances to treat illnesses. This opened the door to pharmacology, the science of making and testing medicines. By the 1600s, doctors and chemists started working together more closely. They tested materials like antimony, mercury, arsenic, and different salts and tinctures to see if they could cure diseases. Some of these early treatments were harmful or did not work well, but the process of testing, observing, and improving them helped medicine become more scientific. Apothecaries and early pharmacy labs became important places where these treatments were studied and made. At the same time, growing industries in Europe helped chemistry move forward in other ways. As people needed more metals, dyes, ceramics, textiles, and glass, workers had to learn more about how materials changed and reacted. For example, mining and metalwork required people to understand how to find and melt metal ores, how to mix metals into alloys, and how to deal with waste. These jobs needed a good understanding of heat and chemical reactions, so chemists began studying materials more carefully. In the textile and dye industries, creating bright, long-lasting colors for fabrics took a lot of experimenting. Workers used substances like alum, indigo, madder, and cochineal (a red dye made from insects) and had to figure out how to make the colors stick to the cloth. Glassmakers and potters also used chemistry to improve their crafts. They learned to mix silica, soda, and lime in just the right amounts to make clear or colorful glass. By adding small amounts of metals like cobalt for blue, copper for green, or gold for red, they could make beautiful glassware. In trying to copy Chinese porcelain, European makers studied how clays and glazes behaved when heated in kilns, leading to more discoveries in chemistry.

One of the most important changes in science during the 1600s was the creation of scientific societies. These were groups where scientists could meet, share their work, and learn from each other. One of the first and most famous of these groups was the Royal Society of London, founded in 1660. It brought together people like doctors, inventors, and scientists who were all interested in studying nature in a careful, organized way. The Royal Society had a special motto: "Nullius in verba," which means "take nobody’s word for it." This meant they believed in evidence and experiments, not just trusting old books or famous people. Scientists had to prove their ideas through testing and clear results. This approach was a big step forward in turning chemistry into a serious science. Similar groups started in other countries too. In France, the Académie des Sciences was created in 1666. These societies gave chemistry a new home in public places where experiments could be watched, repeated, and discussed by others. Scientists now had places to show their work, get feedback, and improve their ideas based on what others had done. Another big change was the rise of scientific journals. These were like magazines for scientists to publish their discoveries. The Royal Society started one of the first, called Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, in 1665. It helped chemists share their methods, tools, and results with other scientists across Europe. This helped science move faster because others could repeat experiments, test new ideas, or improve old ones. Books like Physica Subterranea by Johann Joachim Becher and writings by Georg Ernst Stahl (who supported the phlogiston theory) showed how print helped scientists share and debate their ideas, even when they did not agree. In addition to books and journals, letters were very important. Scientists like Robert Boyle, Antoine Lavoisier, Isaac Newton, and Robert Hooke often wrote to each other, sharing drawings, experiments, and new ideas. These letters helped build an international community of scientists, even before the internet or telephones existed. At first, chemistry was not seen as important as math or physics. Some people thought it was too close to the strange ideas of alchemy. But chemistry began to earn respect because it was useful and connected to the Age of Enlightenment, a time when people believed in reason, progress, and discovery. Slowly, universities began teaching chemistry, and students got to learn in real labs, not just from books. This helped turn chemistry into a respected professional science, just like it is today.

At the start of the 18th century, chemistry still relied on old ideas from alchemy and natural philosophy. One of the most famous ideas was the phlogiston theory, first created by Johann Joachim Becher and later improved by Georg Ernst Stahl. This theory said that all things that could burn had a special substance called phlogiston inside them. Phlogiston was thought to be invisible and weightless, and was released when something burned. According to the phlogiston theory, when a material burned or when metal rusted, it was losing phlogiston into the air. For example, when wood turned into ash or iron became rust, people believed the phlogiston left the material, and what was left behind was called “dephlogisticated.” This idea also tried to explain other things, like how animals breathe, thinking that breathing was the slow release of phlogiston from the body. The phlogiston theory seemed to explain many observations about fire and burning, so it became very popular in European chemistry for many years. However, no one could ever find or measure phlogiston directly. Scientists could not isolate it or prove it was real. Sometimes they had to change the idea to fit what they saw. For example, when metals actually gained weight after burning, they said phlogiston had "negative weight," which did not make sense.

One of the biggest changes in 18th-century chemistry was the rise of pneumatic chemistry, which is the study of gases and their properties. Chemists like Stephen Hales helped start pneumatic chemistry by inventing special tools to catch and measure gases. He used a method to collect gases over water, which let scientists isolate different kinds of “airs” (what people called gases back then). This was a big deal because it gave chemists a way to study gases carefully and learn how they acted. Building on this work, Joseph Black made an important discovery with a gas called carbon dioxide, which he called “fixed air.” Black showed that fixed air was different from normal air. He found that this gas could put out flames and that it reacted with limewater to make a solid. These tests proved that fixed air had its own special chemical properties. Black’s discovery showed that air was not just one thing but a mix of different gases.

The study of gases led to many important discoveries. Henry Cavendish found hydrogen, which he called “inflammable air” because it burned easily with a pale blue flame. Cavendish also showed that when hydrogen burns, it combines with oxygen to make water. This was a big surprise because people used to think water was a basic element. Cavendish proved that water is actually made of two gases, which changed how scientists understood chemistry. At the same time, two chemists, Joseph Priestley and Carl Wilhelm Scheele, both discovered oxygen. They found this gas independently, but Priestley was the first to publish his results. He called it “dephlogisticated air” because he believed in the phlogiston theory, thinking oxygen was air that had lost something called phlogiston. Scheele probably found oxygen first but published later. He described oxygen’s strong ability to help things burn and support breathing, though he also still believed in the old phlogiston ideas. Even though their ideas about phlogiston were wrong, these discoveries of oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon dioxide changed chemistry forever. These findings helped lead to the end of the phlogiston theory and the start of modern chemistry.

Even though scientists had made big discoveries about gases and started to question the phlogiston theory, it was a French chemist named Antoine-Laurent de Lavoisier who finally proved the theory wrong and helped create modern chemistry. Lavoisier showed that burning and breathing were not about releasing an invisible substance called phlogiston. Instead, these were chemical reactions where things combined with oxygen, which is a part of air. Lavoisier did careful experiments where he weighed things before and after chemical reactions. He found out that the total weight stayed the same, even though the substances changed. This idea is called the conservation of mass, meaning matter cannot be made or destroyed, only changed into something new. This was a brand-new way of thinking that went against the old phlogiston ideas.

Besides his important experiments, Lavoisier knew it was necessary to have a clear and simple way to name chemicals. Before his work, chemical names were confusing because the same substance could have different names in different places. In 1787, Lavoisier and his helpers, like Berthollet and Guyton de Morveau, created a system to name chemicals based on what they were made of and their properties. This made it easier for scientists to talk and work together. In 1789, Lavoisier published a famous book called Traité Élémentaire de Chimie. This book is considered the first modern chemistry textbook. In it, he clearly explained what chemical elements are, substances that cannot be broken down into simpler parts by chemical means. He also listed many elements known at the time, such as oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, and some metals. This helped create the idea of elements that chemists still use today. Lavoisier’s work also led to a new way of studying chemistry called stoichiometry. This means understanding the exact amounts of substances used and produced in chemical reactions. He introduced balanced chemical equations that showed these reactions in symbols and numbers. Because of this, chemistry became a science based on measurements and math, making it easier to predict and repeat experiments.

In the 19th century, a big change in chemistry was the development of atomic theory by John Dalton, an English teacher and chemist. In 1803, Dalton said that everything is made of tiny, invisible particles called atoms. Each element is made of its own kind of atom, and each kind has a specific weight. Dalton’s idea was based on careful observations and experiments. He also explained that atoms combine in simple, whole-number amounts to form compounds. This helped explain why compounds always have the same kinds of atoms in the same amounts. For example, carbon and oxygen make two different compounds: carbon monoxide (CO) and carbon dioxide (CO₂). In these compounds, the amount of oxygen compared to carbon is always in simple ratios like 1 to 2. Dalton’s work supported the idea that matter is made of small, separate particles. He even made one of the first lists of atomic weights, comparing everything to the weight of hydrogen atoms. Dalton also used special symbols to stand for atoms and molecules, which later became the chemical symbols we use today.

In the 19th century, there was a big change in how scientists understood organic chemistry. For a long time, people believed in something called vitalism. This was the idea that organic compounds, chemicals found in living things, could only be made by living organisms because of a special "vital force." They thought these compounds could not be made in a lab. But in 1828, a German chemist named Friedrich Wöhler did an important experiment that changed everything. He heated a simple chemical called ammonium cyanate, which is inorganic (not made by living things), and it turned into urea, a compound found in the urine of living organisms. This showed that organic compounds could be made in the lab without any living organism involved. Wöhler’s discovery opened the door for scientists to study and create many more organic compounds. Chemists started working with a wide range of carbon-based substances like alcohols, acids, dyes, and medicines. One important result of Wöhler’s work was a new focus on chemical structure. Scientists discovered that certain groups of atoms, called functional groups, determine how molecules behave. Chemists like Justus von Liebig and August Kekulé helped develop ideas about how atoms bond together in molecules. Kekulé, for example, suggested the famous ring shape of the benzene molecule in 1865.

In the 1800s, one of the biggest breakthroughs in chemistry came from a Russian scientist named Dmitri Mendeleev. In 1869, Mendeleev created the periodic table which completely changed how scientists understood the building blocks of matter. At that time, about 63 elements were known, but they seemed like a random list with no clear pattern. Mendeleev had a smart idea. He arranged the elements in rows and columns based on their atomic weights and how they reacted chemically. When he did this, he noticed a repeating pattern in their properties. He called this the “periodic law”. What made his table special was that he left blank spaces where he thought unknown elements would one day fit. He even predicted what these missing elements would be like, what their atomic weights would be and how they would behave. Later, scientists discovered elements like germanium, scandium, and gallium, and they turned out to be almost exactly as Mendeleev had predicted.

In the 1800s, chemistry made big leaps forward, especially in the areas of analysis and energy. One of the most exciting new tools was spectroscopy, which was developed in the 1850s by two scientists named Robert Bunsen and Gustav Kirchhoff. They discovered that when elements are heated or excited, they give off light in unique patterns, like fingerprints. These patterns, called spectral lines, helped scientists identify which elements were present in a substance just by looking at the light it gave off. Using this new technique, Bunsen and Kirchhoff found two new elements, cesium in 1860 and rubidium in 1861, by their special spectral lines. Spectroscopy did not just help on Earth; it also helped scientists study stars. By looking at the light from stars, they could figure out what elements the stars were made of, even from millions of miles away. Spectroscopy started helping astronomers in the early 1800s. Scientists noticed that when sunlight passed through a special glass called a prism, it created a rainbow of colors, but with some dark lines missing. In 1802, W. H. Wollaston saw these dark lines, and in 1815, Joseph von Fraunhofer studied them more closely. These dark lines were called absorption lines, and they were very important. They showed that certain colors of light were being absorbed by gases in the Sun’s outer layers. This gave scientists their first clues about what the Sun was made of. Later, the same method helped astronomers figure out the chemical makeup of other stars, too. At the same time, chemists were also learning more about how energy works in chemical reactions. A scientist named Germain Hess came up with Hess’s Law, which says that the total energy change in a chemical reaction is the same, no matter how many steps it takes. Later, James Prescott Joule made another big discovery. He showed that heat and mechanical energy (like moving parts) are really just different forms of the same thing. His famous experiment with a paddle wheel helped prove this. These ideas became part of the first law of thermodynamics, which says that energy cannot be created or destroyed, it can only change form.

The Industrial Revolution in the 1800s brought big changes to the world, and chemistry played a major role in making that happen. One of the biggest breakthroughs was in steelmaking. In the 1850s, Henry Bessemer invented a process to turn melted iron into strong steel by blowing air through it to remove unwanted materials. This Bessemer process made steel much cheaper and easier to produce. As a result, steel was used to build railroads, ships, bridges, and buildings all over the world. At the same time, chemistry helped create synthetic dyes. In 1856, a young chemist named William Henry Perkin was trying to make medicine but accidentally created a bright purple dye called mauveine. This dye was the first of its kind and made colorful clothing affordable for many people. Perkin’s discovery started a new industry, and soon many companies were making different kinds of synthetic dyes for clothes and fabrics. Explosives were another area where chemistry made a big impact. Chemists like Ascanio Sobrero and Alfred Nobel developed powerful materials such as nitroglycerin and dynamite. These explosives were used in mining, building tunnels, and even in war. Nobel’s inventions made blasting safer and more effective. He later created the Nobel Prizes to honor great achievements in science and other fields. Chemistry also helped farmers by improving fertilizers. Scientists like Justus von Liebig discovered that plants need certain minerals to grow well. This led to the creation of artificial fertilizers like superphosphates and ammonium salts, which helped crops grow faster and better. These fertilizers supported a growing population and helped feed more people. Finally, chemistry changed medicine. Scientists learned how to take useful chemicals from plants and make them in labs. Important medicines like aspirin, morphine, and quinine were produced in large amounts, making them more available to people around the world. This helped save lives and treat diseases more effectively.

During the 1800s, chemistry became a more organized and respected science. One of the biggest changes was that chemistry started to be taught seriously at universities. Before this time, most science was done by individuals working on their own. But now, schools in Europe and North America began to understand that experimental science, like chemistry, could help improve society and make countries stronger. Chemistry got its own professors (called university chairs) and special laboratories where students could learn both ideas and hands-on experiments. One of the most famous schools for this was the University of Giessen in Germany, where Justus von Liebig started a chemistry lab in the 1820s. His lab became a model for others around the world. Liebig believed students should learn by doing research and experiments, not just by listening to lectures. Many important chemists were trained there, and the idea of the "chemical laboratory" became common in schools. Outside of schools, scientific societies also helped chemistry grow. In 1841, the Chemical Society of London was founded. It gave chemists a place to share their work, honor great discoveries, and influence government decisions. Similar groups formed in other countries, like the Deutsche Chemische Gesellschaft in Germany. These groups helped chemists stay connected and work together. Another important part of this time was the rise of science journals. Chemists needed a way to share their discoveries with others. In 1832, Liebig started a journal called Liebigs Annalen der Chemie, where chemists could publish their findings. It was carefully reviewed by other scientists, which helped make the information trustworthy. As more journals were created, new discoveries spread faster and helped science move forward. As chemistry became more organized, it also became more of a professional career. Chemists were no longer just curious hobbyists or workers in factories, they were seen as trained professionals with special skills. Companies started building their own industrial labs and hiring chemists to help make products like medicine, fabric dyes, and metals. This helped turn chemistry into an important part of both science and industry.

In the 20th century, chemistry changed a lot because scientists made important discoveries about atoms and even smaller parts inside them. Before, people thought atoms were the smallest pieces of matter and could not be broken down. But in 1897, J.J. Thomson discovered the electron, a tiny negatively charged particle inside the atom. This showed that atoms were made of smaller parts. Thomson created the “plum pudding” model, imagining electrons like little raisins stuck inside a positively charged pudding. Not long after, in 1911, Ernest Rutherford did the famous gold foil experiment. He found out that the atom is not like a pudding but has a tiny, dense, positively charged center called the nucleus, with electrons moving around it mostly through empty space. In 1913, Niels Bohr improved this idea. He said electrons move in specific paths or shells around the nucleus. They can jump between these shells by gaining or losing energy. This idea helped explain why atoms give off certain colors of light, called spectral lines. However, Bohr’s model did not work well for bigger atoms, so scientists kept exploring. In the 1920s and 1930s, a new field called quantum mechanics was created. Erwin Schrödinger suggested that electrons behave like waves, and their positions can only be described by probabilities, not exact locations. Werner Heisenberg added that we cannot know both an electron’s exact position and speed at the same time. This is called the Uncertainty Principle. These ideas came together into the modern quantum mechanical model of the atom, which is the foundation of chemistry today. It helps explain not only how atoms look and behave but also why elements are arranged in the periodic table, how atoms stick together in chemical bonds, and the shapes of molecules.

In 1913, Henry Moseley used X-rays to study atoms and discovered that an element’s place in the periodic table should be based on its atomic number (the number of protons in its nucleus), not its atomic weight. This helped fix problems in the old version of the table and made it more accurate. Moseley’s work also helped scientists find missing elements by spotting gaps in the sequence of atomic numbers. At the same time, scientists were learning about radioactivity. In 1896, Henri Becquerel discovered that uranium could give off invisible rays without any outside energy. Later, Marie and Pierre Curie studied this further and discovered new radioactive elements like polonium and radium. These elements gave off energy because their atoms were unstable and could break down on their own. This showed that atoms were not unchangeable after all. These discoveries led to a new field called nuclear chemistry, which focuses on the reactions that happen in an atom’s nucleus. In the 1930s, scientists like Otto Hahn, Fritz Strassmann, Lise Meitner, and Otto Frisch discovered nuclear fission, a process where atoms like uranium split into smaller parts and release a huge amount of energy. This discovery had a huge impact. During World War II, the U.S. used nuclear fission to build the atomic bomb in a secret project called the Manhattan Project. These bombs caused massive destruction and changed the world forever. After the war, people also began using nuclear fission to make electricity in nuclear power plants. Later, scientists studied nuclear fusion, the reaction that powers the sun. Fusion could give us cleaner and safer energy, but we are still working on how to control it on Earth.

Another important breakthrough in 20th-century chemistry was the rise of physical chemistry. Physical chemistry used the principles of physics to understand matter. In the United States, an early supporter of this field was Ira Remsen, who helped improve science education by promoting hands-on experiments in chemistry classes. This helped train a new generation of scientists who were both skilled and curious. One of the most important figures in physical chemistry was Gilbert N. Lewis. He came up with the idea that atoms bond by sharing pairs of electrons. He also created the Lewis dot structure, a simple way to show how atoms are connected. His work helped people understand things like covalent bonds (where atoms share electrons), acids and bases, and chemical energy. Later, in the 1930s, Linus Pauling took these ideas even further by using quantum mechanics to explain chemical bonds. He introduced the concept of hybridization, which helped explain the shapes of molecules, like the four-cornered tetrahedral shape of methane. Pauling also created the electronegativity scale, which shows how strongly atoms attract electrons when they bond. Pauling’s impact went beyond theory. He was also a leader in using tools like X-ray crystallography and spectroscopy to figure out the exact 3D shapes of molecules. These tools became especially important in biochemistry. Pauling used them to study proteins and discovered their basic structures, such as the alpha helix and beta sheet. His work helped start the field of structural biology, which looks at how the shape of a molecule affects what it does in the body.

In the 20th century, organic chemistry, grew very quickly and made a huge impact on the world. One of the biggest changes was that chemists invented new ways to build complicated molecules with great care and precision. These new methods, like the Grignard reaction or Wittig reaction, gave scientists powerful tools to create all kinds of useful chemicals, including medicines and materials. One important part of this progress was the rise of polymer chemistry, which led to the invention of new materials called plastics. In 1935, a chemist named Wallace Carothers at DuPont created nylon, the first completely man-made fiber. This showed that large, chain-like molecules (called polymers) could be designed to have special properties, like strength or flexibility. After nylon, scientists quickly made other important materials, such as polyethylene, polystyrene, PVC (polyvinyl chloride), Teflon, and polyester. These plastics changed everyday life. They were used in packaging, clothing, cars, buildings, and much more. At the same time, pharmaceutical chemistry, the science of making medicines, grew rapidly. In the early 1900s, chemists had already made useful drugs like aspirin and barbiturates, but the discovery of penicillin in 1928 by Alexander Fleming changed medicine forever. Penicillin could fight deadly bacterial infections, and its mass production helped save countless lives, especially during World War II. After that came sulfa drugs, the first widely used antibiotics, which helped treat many infections even before penicillin was common. Later in the century, scientists made even more important medicines, including antiviral drugs for diseases like HIV/AIDS, chemotherapy drugs to treat cancer, and medications for mental health and brain disorders. New advancements in stereochemistry and chiral synthesis made medicines safer and more effective. In the final decades of the century, techniques like combinatorial chemistry, high-speed drug testing, and computer-aided drug design helped scientists discover new medicines much faster.

In the middle of the 20th century, chemistry began to focus more on understanding the molecules that make up living things. One of the most important discoveries during this time was the structure of DNA, made by James Watson and Francis Crick in 1953. They used X-ray images taken by Rosalind Franklin and base-pairing rules discovered by Erwin Chargaff to figure out that DNA is shaped like a double helix, two strands twisted around each other. These strands are held together by base pairs. Adenine pairs with thymine, and guanine pairs with cytosine. This discovery helped connect chemistry with biology and gave rise to a new field called biochemistry, which studies how chemicals work inside living things. Scientists began to study important molecules like proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and nucleic acids in more detail. They used special tools like X-ray crystallography, NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance), and mass spectrometry to see the shapes and structures of these molecules. Researchers also started to understand how enzymes speed up chemical reactions in the body, how cells communicate, and how metabolism works to give us energy. This new knowledge helped create another field called molecular biology, which focuses on how genes work and how cells use DNA to make proteins. In the 1970s, scientists developed ways to cut and paste DNA, creating a powerful technique called recombinant DNA technology. This let them move genes from one organism to another, helping launch the field of genetic engineering. Later, in the 21st century, scientists created an even more precise gene-editing tool called CRISPR-Cas9, which allows for direct changes to DNA. These discoveries changed many areas of life. In medicine, they led to new drugs, gene therapies, and personalized treatments based on a person’s DNA. In farming, they helped create genetically modified organisms (GMOs) that grow better and resist pests. In science, they gave researchers powerful tools to explore how life works, including how we inherit traits and how species evolve.

In the 20th century, analytical chemistry changed a lot because of new and powerful tools that helped scientists study chemicals more carefully and accurately. Before this time, scientists mostly used older methods called "wet chemistry," which involved mixing chemicals, making them change color, or forming solids to find out what was in a sample. These methods worked okay but were not precise enough for the harder problems chemists faced in fields like organic chemistry, biochemistry, and materials science. One big step forward was the invention of the mass spectrometer. This tool measures the mass and charge of tiny particles called ions. Scientists like Francis Aston and Arthur Jeffrey Dempster helped improve mass spectrometry, which became super useful for finding out the weights of molecules, discovering different forms of atoms (isotopes), and identifying unknown chemicals. Mass spectrometry is so sensitive it can detect even tiny amounts of substances, down to billionths or trillionths of a gram. Another important tool was nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, first shown in the 1940s and widely used by the 1950s and 1960s. NMR lets chemists study the magnetic properties of atoms like hydrogen and carbon in molecules. This helps them understand the exact structure of molecules, how atoms bond, and how molecules move around in liquids. Later, more advanced versions of NMR allowed even deeper study of complex molecules, especially in drug research and organic chemistry. X-ray crystallography also became very important during the 20th century. This technique uses X-rays to find the three-dimensional shapes of molecules with amazing detail. At first, it was used on simple crystals, but later scientists could use it to study big molecules like vitamins, hormones, and proteins. For example, Rosalind Franklin’s X-ray images helped explain the famous double-helix structure of DNA. Over time, X-ray crystallography helped scientists learn about many complicated biological molecules, which is very important for understanding how our bodies work and for making new medicines. Other helpful tools include infrared spectroscopy, which helps identify parts of molecules by measuring vibrations, and ultraviolet-visible (UV-Vis) spectrophotometry, which helps chemists watch chemical reactions and study certain types of molecules. Together, these instruments made it possible for chemists to study chemicals in ways they never could before, speeding up discoveries and helping create new materials, medicines, and technologies.

By the late 20th century, the chemical industry got much bigger, including not only old areas like medicine and dyes but also new ones like petrochemicals (chemicals made from oil), agrochemicals (chemicals for farming), and advanced materials. One big change came from petrochemistry. Scientists learned how to turn crude oil into many useful chemicals. These chemicals were then used to make plastics, synthetic rubber, and solvents. These new materials changed everyday things like packaging, buildings, cars, and many other products. Another very important invention was the Haber process (also called the Haber-Bosch process). It was developed in the early 1900s by Fritz Haber and later made into a big industrial method by Carl Bosch. This process uses high pressure, high temperature, and a special iron catalyst to turn nitrogen gas from the air and hydrogen gas into ammonia (NH₃). Ammonia is a key ingredient in nitrogen fertilizers. The Haber process had a huge impact on farming. It allowed factories to make nitrogen fertilizers in large amounts, which helped farmers grow much more food. This helped feed the rapidly growing world population and played a big role in the Green Revolution, a time when farming became much more productive. Today, more than half of the people on Earth depend on food grown with fertilizers made using the Haber process. Without it, natural soil would not have enough nitrogen to grow enough food for everyone.

In the field of energy, chemists made big progress in creating new ways to produce cleaner and better power, so people would not have to rely so much on fossil fuels like oil and coal. One important invention was the fuel cell, which changes chemical energy directly into electricity using reactions between hydrogen and oxygen. Although the idea of fuel cells started way back in 1839 with Sir William Grove, it was not until the mid-1900s that fuel cells became practical. In the 1960s, companies like General Electric built hydrogen-oxygen fuel cells to power NASA’s spacecraft because they were reliable and clean. Later, in the 1990s and 2000s, fuel cells became important for clean energy cars and power stations. Chemists worked on making better catalysts, materials like platinum, that helped fuel cells work faster and last longer. At the same time, batteries got much better thanks to advances in chemistry and materials science. Early batteries, such as the lead-acid battery invented in 1859, were heavy and did not store much energy. Nickel-cadmium batteries, made in the early 1900s, could be recharged but had problems like toxicity and losing capacity over time. A big breakthrough happened in the 1980s when John B. Goodenough and his team created the lithium cobalt oxide cathode, which led to the lithium-ion battery. Sony started selling these batteries in 1991. Lithium-ion batteries are lightweight and hold a lot of energy, which changed portable devices like laptops and smartphones. They also helped make electric cars better, allowing them to travel longer distances and pushing more people toward cleaner transportation. Chemists also played a big role in solar energy by improving solar panels that turn sunlight directly into electricity. The first practical silicon solar cell was made in 1954 by Bell Labs scientists Daryl Chapin, Calvin Fuller, and Gerald Pearson. This showed that solar energy could work well, although it was expensive at first. Over the years, chemists and materials scientists worked on making solar cells cheaper and more efficient by improving the materials inside them.

Beyond energy, materials science helped create many important inventions in fields like electronics, space travel, and computers. One big discovery was semiconductors, like silicon and germanium. These materials made it possible to invent the transistor in 1947 at Bell Labs by scientists John Bardeen, Walter Brattain, and William Shockley. Transistors replaced bulky vacuum tubes and made electronic devices smaller, faster, and more reliable. This invention became the building block for modern computers, phones, and other technology. In the 1980s, scientists Georg Bednorz and K. Alex Müller discovered high-temperature superconductors. These materials are used in powerful magnets for MRI machines and particle accelerators and could someday help build more efficient power systems. Chemists also worked on composite materials, which are made by combining two or more substances to make something stronger or better. For example, carbon fiber reinforced plastics and advanced ceramics are light but very strong and can resist heat and corrosion. These materials are used to build airplanes that use less fuel, safer and lighter cars, and even parts for rockets and spacecraft.

Even though the 20th century brought amazing discoveries in chemistry, it also caused serious problems for people and the planet. One major wake-up call came in 1962, when scientist and writer Rachel Carson published a book called Silent Spring. In it, she warned about the dangers of using pesticides like DDT without understanding the harm they could do. These chemicals were killing birds, harming wildlife, and even making people sick. Her book helped spark the environmental movement, leading to the banning of DDT in many countries and the creation of environmental protection laws and agencies. But that was not the only concern. Chemistry was also used in ways that hurt people, especially during wars. In World War I, mustard gas was used as a weapon. In the Vietnam War, chemicals like Agent Orange were sprayed to destroy forests, but they also harmed soldiers and civilians. These tragedies led to international agreements like the Chemical Weapons Convention in 1993, which aimed to stop countries from using chemistry to make weapons. Factories also caused pollution by releasing toxic chemicals into the air, water, and soil. This included things like heavy metals, greenhouse gases, and chlorinated hydrocarbons. Problems like acid rain, holes in the ozone layer from CFCs, and huge amounts of plastic waste showed that chemical innovation could have long-term effects on the Earth. These issues taught scientists and leaders that chemistry should be used more responsibly to protect both people and the environment.

Chemistry in the 21st century has continued to grow and improve in exciting ways. One of the biggest changes is the use of computers to model and predict chemical reactions. This area is called computational chemistry. It lets scientists create virtual experiments and watch how atoms and molecules behave without needing to do everything in a real lab. This saves time, money, and materials. A special method called Density Functional Theory (DFT) helps chemists understand how molecules are built, how they react, and how much energy they need. In the past, these tools could only handle small, simple molecules, but now they can work with much larger and more realistic ones. This is very useful in designing new medicines, materials, and catalysts. In 2013, three scientists, Martin Karplus, Michael Levitt, and Arieh Warshel, won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their work in combining different types of modeling. They found a way to blend quantum mechanics with classical physics to study big, complex systems like enzymes. Another exciting development is called ultrafast laser spectroscopy. This technique uses femtosecond laser pulses (that is one quadrillionth of a second) to take snapshots of chemical reactions as they happen. It is like watching atoms and molecules moving, bonding, and changing in real time. This helps scientists better understand what is happening during reactions, including how bonds break, electrons move, and energy flows.

Scientists now use amazing tools like atomic force microscopes (AFM), scanning tunneling microscopes (STM), and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to look at atoms and molecules on surfaces. These tools are very important for creating things like better catalysts, tiny sensors, and nanomaterials that help clean up pollution. Scientists can also use special tools like optical tweezers to measure the forces on just one molecule at a time. Another field is nanochemistry. Chemists work with materials that are only a few nanometers wide. These materials, like quantum dots and nanoparticles, have special properties that can be used in solar panels, tiny computer chips, and targeted drug delivery that helps treat diseases more precisely. Scientists are designing better batteries, fuel cells, and machines that split water into hydrogen and oxygen, which could help us use clean energy. In biophysical chemistry, scientists combine chemistry with biology and computer science. They study how proteins fold, how enzymes work, and how cell membranes behave. Tools like cryogenic electron microscopes (cryo-EM) and NMR machines help them see the shapes of molecules, which is very helpful in fighting diseases and creating new medicines.

In the 21st century, analytical chemistry has become much more advanced and important in many areas of science and everyday life. One big improvement has been in mass spectrometry (MS), a tool that helps scientists figure out what different chemicals are and how much of each is present. In the past, MS was mostly used for small molecules. Today, it can study large molecules, complicated mixtures, and even single cells. Modern versions, like tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) and high-resolution machines such as time-of-flight (TOF) and orbitrap analyzers, are incredibly sensitive. They can detect tiny amounts of a substance, as little as one part in a trillion. These tools are used in areas like medicine, drug testing, studying proteins and cells, and checking for pollution in the environment. Another big part of analytical chemistry is chromatography, which helps separate mixtures. The most common types are gas chromatography (GC), high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), and the newer ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC). UPLC, developed in the early 2000s, works faster and gives clearer results than older methods. Often, chromatography is combined with mass spectrometry to make hyphenated techniques like LC-MS/MS or GC-MS. These powerful tools can separate and identify thousands of substances in just one experiment, which is very useful in things like medical testing, making new medicines, and checking food safety. A big trend in the 21st century is making scientific tools smaller and more portable. This is called miniaturization. One exciting result of this is the creation of lab-on-a-chip and microfluidic devices. These tiny tools can do complex chemical tests on a small chip, using only tiny drops of liquid. Because they are small and easy to carry, these devices can be used outside of a regular lab, like at a patient’s bedside, in the field, or in places with few resources. They can give fast results, which is very helpful in emergencies or remote areas. These tools are used for many things, such as checking blood sugar for people with diabetes, testing for diseases, like COVID-19 or the flu, finding toxins in water or the environment, and analyzing drugs in crime investigations.

Today, analytical chemistry works closely with data science. Modern science tools create huge amounts of data, and chemists need better computer programs to help understand it all. They use things like statistics, machine learning, and pattern recognition to find useful information in the data. This helps chemists in detecting pollution in the air, water, or soil, even at tiny amounts (less than one part per billion). It also helps them find illegal drugs or chemicals in crime scenes. It also helps in tracking new pollutants like microplastics and PFAS, which used to be hard to measure. Using special tools like ICP-MS, chemists can find heavy metals (like lead or mercury) in people or the environment In medicine, analytical chemistry helps create and test new medicines. Chemists make sure drugs are pure, safe, and work the way they should. They also check that medicines stay good over time. Groups like the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) and EMA (European Medicines Agency) use these tests to decide if a medicine can be sold.

Biochemistry in the 21st century has grown really fast. One of the biggest achievements was the Human Genome Project, finished in 2003. Scientists were able to read the entire DNA sequence of humans for the first time. This helped researchers learn more about how genes work. How they are turned on and off, and how they make proteins. Scientists have also sequenced the DNA of many other living things, like tiny bacteria, helpful plants like Arabidopsis, and fruit flies. This helped them compare genes across species and better understand how life evolved and functions. One of the most powerful tools in today’s biochemistry is called CRISPR-Cas9. Discovered in 2012 by Emmanuelle Charpentier and Jennifer Doudna, CRISPR lets scientists edit DNA quickly and accurately. It has changed the way we do genetic engineering. With CRISPR, we could fix genetic diseases, improve crops, and study what different genes do in living things Another important area is proteomics, the study of proteins. Using mass spectrometry, scientists can now identify thousands of proteins in a sample and study how they are changed or interact with each other. This helps us understand how cells work on a very detailed level. Tools like cryogenic electron microscopes (cryo-EM) allow scientists to actually see large molecules and protein machines in 3D, almost down to the atom. This technology was so important that it won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2017.

One important area is called metabolomics, which is the study of tiny molecules (called metabolites) in cells and tissues. These molecules help us see what's really happening inside living things. Scientists now combine information from genomics (DNA), transcriptomics (RNA), proteomics (proteins), and metabolomics to get a complete picture of how cells work. This big-picture approach is called systems biology. It helps scientists understand complex diseases like cancer, diabetes, and Alzheimer’s by looking at how everything in a cell connects and works together. Biochemistry also helps in drug discovery and personalized medicine. Using computer modeling and new tools, scientists can design medicines that match a person’s specific needs. A field called pharmacogenomics studies how people’s genes affect the way they respond to medicine. This helps doctors choose the right drug and the right dose for each person. Another interesting area is synthetic biology. This is when scientists engineer living cells to do new jobs, like making biofuels, biodegradable plastics, or even new medicines. They do this by reprogramming cells with carefully chosen DNA instructions. In agriculture, biochemists are helping to create GMO (genetically modified organisms) and gene-edited crops that are healthier, more nutritious, and more resistant to pests, diseases, and climate change. By studying plant biochemistry, scientists are finding ways to help plants grow better and use water and nutrients more efficiently. Biochemistry is also key in solving global health problems. One example was the creation of mRNA vaccines for COVID-19. These vaccines use molecules that tell our cells to make a harmless part of the virus, helping the immune system learn how to fight it. Scientists are now working on similar vaccines for other diseases like flu, HIV, and even cancer.

In the 21st century, chemistry has also become very important in helping us create better and cleaner ways to store and use energy. One big area of progress is rechargeable batteries. Lithium-ion batteries, which first came out in the 1990s, have gotten much better over the years. Today, they are used in many things like smartphones, laptops, and electric cars. Chemists have made these batteries safer and more powerful by creating better materials for the battery parts. Some of these materials include lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO₄) and nickel manganese cobalt (NMC). Scientists are also working on new types of batteries, like lithium-sulfur, solid-state, and sodium-ion batteries. These may be cheaper, safer, and last longer, which could help even more people use clean energy. Another exciting technology is the fuel cell. Fuel cells make electricity by combining hydrogen and oxygen, and the only thing they give off is water, so they do not pollute the air. This makes them a great option for clean cars. One type, called a PEM fuel cell, is especially useful. Chemists are working on better and cheaper catalysts, which are materials that help the fuel cell work faster. One challenge with fuel cells is how to store hydrogen safely and easily. Scientists are exploring special materials, like metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and solid–state hydrides, that can hold hydrogen in a compact and safe way.

Chemists are also leading the way in improving solar energy. The most common solar panels today are made from silicon, but scientists are working on new materials that could make solar power cheaper, lighter, and more flexible. One interesting material is called a perovskite. In 2009, perovskite solar cells could only turn about 4% of sunlight into electricity. By the early 2020s, that number had jumped to over 25%. Perovskites are cheap to make and can be used on bendable surfaces, but they have some problems. They do not last very long, and they contain lead, which can be harmful. Chemists are working to fix these issues. Other types of solar panels include dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and organic solar cells, which can be see-through or flexible. These new types of solar cells could be used in windows or on clothing. Another interesting area is called photocatalysis. This means using sunlight to make chemical reactions happen. Scientists are developing materials like titanium dioxide mixed with tiny amounts of certain metals, that can use sunlight to split water into hydrogen and oxygen or turn carbon dioxide into useful fuels like methanol or methane. This is similar to how plants do photosynthesis, and scientists call their version artificial photosynthesis. Chemists are also helping to make green hydrogen, a clean fuel, using a method called electrolysis. This process splits water using electricity, and it works even better when chemists add catalysts that help speed up the reaction. Chemists are also working on ways to capture carbon dioxide (CO₂) from the air or from factories. They are designing new materials like amine-based liquids, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), and porous carbons that can trap CO₂. Once captured, the CO₂ can be turned into fuels, plastics, or even medicines, helping to reduce pollution and fight climate change.

Chemistry is also helping to create new materials. One example is nanomaterials. These are materials made at an incredibly small scale. Chemists can now make nanoparticles, nanotubes, and nanowires with exact shapes and sizes. This has led to discoveries like carbon nanotubes and graphene, which are super strong and great at conducting electricity and heat. These materials are now being used in batteries, tiny sensors, and advanced electronics. Another new type of material are called smart materials. These materials can change when something around them changes like temperature, light, or electric signals. For example, some materials can “remember” a shape and return to it after being bent. Others can heal themselves after getting damaged. Smart materials are used in things like robotics, medical devices, and spacecraft. In medicine, special smart gels can deliver medicine exactly when and where it is needed or help new tissue grow. Polymers, which are long chains of molecules, have also improved. Chemists can now make biodegradable polymers that break down safely or design polymers for 3D printing, medicine, and even to act like proteins or DNA. Chemists can now use machine learning and computer simulations to test and find the best materials faster than ever before. Programs like the Materials Genome Initiative help scientists go from new idea to real product more quickly. Chemists are also designing electronic and photonic materials for things like flexible phone screens, glowing displays (OLEDs), and even quantum computers. Tiny particles called quantum dots are used in colorful TVs and medical imaging. And in the race to build quantum computers, special materials are helping create more stable and powerful qubits.

In the 21st century, chemistry faces many big and complicated challenges. One of the most serious is climate change. To help stop global warming, chemists are working to create cleaner energy sources. These include better solar panels, fuel cells, and batteries that do not rely on fossil fuels. But making these technologies affordable, safe, and easy to use on a large scale is still a tough problem. Another goal is to find ways to capture carbon dioxide, a major greenhouse gas, and turn it into useful fuels or chemicals. Right now, that process uses a lot of energy and is not very efficient. Green chemistry is another important focus. Many chemical industries today use toxic substances and create a lot of waste. Chemists are now trying to design cleaner ways to make products using renewable resources, safer materials, and less energy. This shift is difficult, especially when it comes to changing how big factories operate, but it is necessary for a more sustainable future. Plastic pollution is also a major concern. Plastics are everywhere, from packaging to clothes, but they do not break down easily and often end up in oceans and soil. Chemists are working to invent biodegradable and recyclable plastics that still work well but do not harm the planet. They're also trying to find better ways to remove microplastics and other plastic waste from the environment. In the world of medicine, chemists are helping to fight antibiotic resistance and new diseases. Bacteria are becoming harder to kill. There have not been many new antibiotics in recent years. Chemists must design new drugs and ways to deliver them more effectively. There is also growing interest in personalized medicine, where treatments are made to match a person’s genes. Water shortages and polluted water are big problems in many parts of the world. Chemists are developing new ways to clean water using less energy. They are also making better sensors to detect pollutants, like pesticides and heavy metals, in the water, soil, and air. Many high-tech devices, like smartphones and electric cars, need special materials such as lithium, cobalt, and rare earth elements. But mining these materials can harm the environment, and supplies are limited. Chemists are trying to find safer ways to extract these elements, reuse them, or even replace them with better alternatives.

There are several types of chemistry. Analytical chemistry looks at which chemicals are in things. For example, looking at how much arsenic is in food. Organic chemistry looks at things that have carbon in them. For example, making acetylene. Inorganic chemistry looks at things that do not have carbon in them. One example is making an integrated circuit. Theoretical chemistry tries to explain chemical data with mathematics and computers.

A large area of chemistry is polymer chemistry. This looks at plastics. One example is making nylon. Because plastics are made of carbon, polymer chemistry is part of organic chemistry. Another area is biochemistry. This looks at the chemistry of living things. An example would be seeing how arsenic poisons people. Biochemistry is also part of organic chemistry. There are many other small branches of chemistry.

Matter is anything that has mass and takes up space. This means it fills up some amount of room, even if we cannot always see it. Everything around us, from tiny grains of sand to huge planets and stars, is made of matter. Even things like air or steam, which seem invisible or light, are still matter because they are made of tiny particles that have mass and take up space. We can notice matter in many ways. Some things, like a rock or a cup of water, are easy to see and touch. Other things, like the air in a room or the gas in a balloon, are harder to notice, but they are still there. You can feel them when the wind blows or when a balloon gets bigger. Matter is really important in science, especially in chemistry and physics, because it helps us understand what everything is made of and how it behaves. All matter is made up of atoms and molecules, which are tiny building blocks.

Matter can exist in different states, or forms, depending on how its tiny particles are arranged and how much energy they have. The three most common states are solid, liquid, and gas. In a solid, the particles are packed closely together in a fixed pattern. They do not move around much, which is why solids have a definite shape and volume. For example, a rock or a pencil keeps its shape unless something forces it to change. In a liquid, the particles are still close, but they are not in a set pattern. They can slide past each other, which lets liquids flow and take the shape of their container. However, liquids still keep the same volume. A cup of water stays the same amount, whether it is in a glass or a bowl. In a gas, the particles are spread far apart and move very fast. Gases do not have a fixed shape or volume. They will spread out to fill any space they are in, like air in a balloon. Gases can also be compressed or squished into a smaller space. Besides these three, there are also other, more unusual states of matter. One is plasma, which is made of super-energized particles with electric charges. Plasma is found in things like stars and lightning. Another rare state is called a Bose–Einstein condensate (BEC). It happens only at very, very cold temperatures close to absolute zero. In this state, particles move so slowly they start to act like one single particle instead of many.

Matter can be grouped into two main types based on what it's made of: pure substances and mixtures. Pure substances are made of only one kind of material and have the same properties throughout. They always have the same makeup, no matter where you find them. Pure substances can be either elements or compounds. Elements are the simplest type of pure substance. They cannot be broken down into anything simpler using normal chemical methods. Each element is made of just one kind of atom. Examples include oxygen (O₂), hydrogen (H₂), and iron (Fe). There are over 100 known elements, and they are all listed in the periodic table. Compounds are also pure substances, but they are made of two or more different elements that are chemically bonded together in a fixed ratio. This means the elements combine in a specific way to form a new substance. Some examples are water (H₂O), carbon dioxide (CO₂), and salt (NaCl). In a compound, the elements lose their individual properties and form something completely new.

Mixtures are made when two or more substances are physically combined, not chemically joined. This means each part of the mixture keeps its own properties, and you can often separate them using simple methods like filtering, boiling, or picking them apart. Mixtures come in two main types: homogeneous and heterogeneous. A homogeneous mixture (also called a solution) looks the same all the way through. The different parts are evenly mixed, and you cannot see or easily separate them. For example, when salt dissolves in water, it becomes a solution. You cannot see the salt anymore, but it is still there. Another example is air, which is a mixture of gases. A heterogeneous mixture looks different in different parts. The substances are not evenly mixed, and you can often see and separate the different parts. Examples include a salad, sand and iron filings, or oil and water. In these mixtures, the parts stay separate and can be picked out or separated by hand or simple tools.

The properties of matter help us understand how different substances act, react, and change in various situations. These properties are usually divided into two main types: physical properties and chemical properties. Physical properties are things we can see, measure, or feel without changing what the substance is made of. These include things like color, smell, taste, melting point, boiling point, density, hardness, electrical conductivity, and solubility (how well something dissolves). For example, water boils at 100°C and freezes at 0°C. One special thing about physical properties is that they do not change the substance. You can measure them many times, and the substance stays the same. For instance, if you melt ice, it turns into liquid water, but it is still H₂O. That means it’s a physical change, not a chemical one, and it can be reversed by freezing the water again. Some physical properties depend on how much of the substance you have. These are called extensive properties, like mass and volume. Others stay the same no matter how much you have. These are called intensive properties, like density and boiling point.

Chemical properties describe how a substance can change into something completely new. Unlike physical properties, which can be seen or measured without changing the substance, chemical properties can only be observed when a chemical reaction happens. These reactions change the substance's molecular or atomic structure, meaning it becomes a different substance. Some common chemical properties include flammability (how easily something burns), reactivity with acids or bases, rusting of iron, tarnishing of silver, and the ability to decompose or oxidize. For example, when wood burns, it reacts with oxygen in the air and turns into ash, carbon dioxide, water vapor, and heat. This is a chemical change, and the fact that wood can burn is a chemical property. Another example is iron rusting. When iron is exposed to air and moisture, it reacts to form rust, which is a new substance with different properties.

The idea of atoms goes all the way back to around 400 BCE, when ancient Greek thinkers like Democritus and Leucippus came up with the idea that all matter is made of tiny, invisible particles. They called these particles "atomos," which means "uncuttable" or "indivisible." Democritus believed that atoms had different shapes and sizes and moved through empty space, combining in different ways to make everything we see. However, this idea was just a guess. It was not based on experiments or evidence. Another famous philosopher, Aristotle, had a different idea. He believed that everything was made of just four elements: earth, water, air, and fire. Because Aristotle was very popular and influential, people accepted his ideas for almost 2,000 years, and the atom theory was mostly forgotten. That changed in the early 1800s, when an English scientist named John Dalton brought the idea of atoms back. In 1803, Dalton proposed the first modern atomic theory. He said that all matter is made of atoms, and that atoms cannot be created or destroyed. He also said that all atoms of the same element are exactly the same, and that chemical reactions happen when atoms are rearranged. Dalton’s ideas were based on experiments, especially from studying how elements combine in fixed amounts. But, Dalton thought atoms were just solid spheres like a ball with no parts inside.

As scientists built better tools and did more experiments, they began to learn much more about what was inside an atom. In 1897, a scientist named J.J. Thomson discovered the electron by using a special tube called a cathode ray tube. This showed that atoms are not solid and indivisible after all. Thomson came up with the "plum pudding model," where he imagined the atom as a ball of positive charge with negative electrons scattered inside it, like raisins in a pudding. But in 1911, Ernest Rutherford did a famous experiment with gold foil that changed this idea. He found that most of the atom is empty space, and that the positive charge is packed into a tiny, dense center called the nucleus. This led to the nuclear model of the atom, where electrons orbit around a central nucleus. However, this model still did not explain why the electrons did not just crash into the nucleus. Then in 1913, Niels Bohr improved Rutherford’s model by using ideas from quantum theory. Bohr said that electrons move in fixed energy levels or shells around the nucleus. He also said that electrons can jump from one level to another by gaining or losing energy. Bohr’s model worked well for explaining the behavior of hydrogen, the simplest atom, but it did not work as well for bigger atoms. In the 1920s, scientists created an even better model using quantum mechanics. Scientists like Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg, and Max Born showed that electrons do not move in perfect orbits. Instead, they exist in areas called electron clouds or orbitals, which are regions where electrons are likely to be found. This modern model of the atom is the most accurate one we have today and helps explain how atoms behave in chemistry and physics.

An atom is the smallest unit of matter. It is the basic building block that makes up everything around us. At the center of every atom is the nucleus, a tiny, dense part that contains two types of particles: protons and neutrons. Protons have a positive charge, while neutrons have no charge, they are neutral. The number of protons in an atom’s nucleus is called the atomic number, and it tells us what element the atom is. For example, all hydrogen atoms have one proton, and all oxygen atoms have eight protons. The mass number of an atom is the total number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus. Because protons and neutrons are both heavy (compared to electrons), almost all of the atom’s mass is in the nucleus, even though it is very small. Outside the nucleus is where the electrons are found. Electrons are much smaller and have a negative charge. In older models, scientists thought electrons moved in set paths around the nucleus, like planets orbiting the sun. But today, we know from quantum mechanics that electrons move in regions called orbitals or electron clouds. These are areas where electrons are most likely to be found, but their exact position cannot be known for sure. Electrons are also arranged in energy levels or shells around the nucleus. Each level can hold only a certain number of electrons. Atoms are electrically neutral when they have the same number of protons and electrons. But sometimes, atoms can gain or lose electrons, which changes their overall charge. When an atom loses electrons, it becomes a positively charged ion, called a cation. When an atom gains electrons, it becomes a negatively charged ion, called an anion. Also, atoms of the same element can have different numbers of neutrons. These are called isotopes. Even though isotopes have the same number of protons and act the same in chemical reactions, their different numbers of neutrons make them have slightly different masses. Some isotopes are stable, while others can break down over time, releasing energy.

The electron configuration of an atom is the way its electrons are arranged in different energy levels and areas around the nucleus. This arrangement is very important because it helps determine how the atom will react with other atoms and form chemical bonds. In today’s model of the atom, called the quantum mechanical model, electrons do not travel in neat circles around the nucleus like planets around the sun. Instead, they move around in areas called orbitals, which are regions where there is a high chance of finding an electron. These orbitals are grouped into energy levels, also called shells, which are labeled with numbers like 1, 2, 3, and so on. Each energy level has one or more subshells, which are labeled as s, p, d, and f. The first energy level (1) has only an s subshell. The second level (2) has s and p subshells. The third level (3) has s, p, and d, and so on. Each orbital can hold up to two electrons. The Aufbau principle helps scientists understand how electrons fill the space around an atom’s nucleus. According to this rule, electrons always fill the lowest energy orbitals first before moving to higher ones. The order in which electrons fill these orbitals goes like this: 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, and so on. This order is based on the energy levels of the orbitals, and sometimes it can seem a bit out of order. For example, 4s fills before 3d because 4s has a lower energy level than 3d. There are also other important rules to remember when talking about electron configuration. Pauli exclusion principle says that only two electrons can fit into the same orbital, and they must spin in opposite directions. Hund’s rules says that when electrons go into orbitals that have the same energy (like three 2p orbitals), they will first go in one at a time with the same spin. Only after each orbital has one electron will they start to pair up. This helps reduce repulsion between electrons. We use a special way to write electron configurations. For example, the configuration for a carbon atom, which has 6 electrons, is: 1s² 2s² 2p². This means carbon has 2 electrons in the 1s orbital, 2 in the 2s, and 2 in the 2p. For bigger elements, we often use noble gas shorthand to save time. This means we start with the symbol of the nearest noble gas (like neon or argon) in brackets, and then continue from there. For example, sodium has 11 electrons. Instead of writing out everything, we can write: [Ne] 3s¹. Here, [Ne] stands for the first 10 electrons (1s² 2s² 2p⁶), and the 11th electron is in the 3s orbital. The valence electrons, or the electrons in the outermost shell, are very important. They decide how an atom behaves in chemical reactions, how it bonds with other atoms and what kind of compounds it can form.

A long time ago, people only knew about a few natural elements like gold, silver, copper, and iron. As science progressed, especially in the 1600s and 1700s, scientists started discovering more elements and learning about chemical reactions. In the late 1700s, a scientist named Antoine Lavoisier made one of the first lists of elements. He also suggested that elements were basic substances that could not be broken down into anything simpler. By the early 1800s, more elements had been discovered, and scientists began to see patterns in their properties. The big breakthrough came in 1869 when a Russian chemist named Dmitri Mendeleev created a version of the periodic table. He arranged the 63 known elements by increasing atomic mass and grouped elements with similar properties into columns. What was really amazing about Mendeleev’s table was that he left spaces for elements that had not been discovered yet and predicted what their properties would be. When scientists later discovered elements like gallium, scandium, and germanium, their properties matched Mendeleev’s predictions, which made his table even more accepted. Although there were some problems with his system, like elements that did not fit perfectly by mass, Mendeleev’s table helped scientists understand the relationships between different elements. In the early 1900s, Henry Moseley improved the table by arranging elements by atomic number, which solved many of the problems. He showed that elements’ properties depend on the number of protons in their nucleus. This led to the modern periodic law, which says that elements’ properties change in a regular pattern based on their atomic number. Since then, the periodic table has grown to include over 100 elements, including many that are made in labs. It has also become more complex with the addition of new groups of elements like noble gases, transition metals, and lanthanides and actinides (the f-block elements).

The periodic table is a special chart that shows all the known chemical elements in a very organized way. It is arranged based on each element’s atomic number (how many protons it has), how its electrons are set up, and how it behaves in chemical reactions. The table is built to match how atoms work, especially how electrons move around the nucleus. This setup helps scientists understand how each element will act during chemical changes. The table has rows called periods and columns called groups or families. Periods go from left to right and are numbered from 1 to 7. Each period shows how many energy levels, or electron shells, the atoms have. As you move across a period, each element gets one more proton and one more electron, and they go into the same energy level. This changes things like the size of the atom and how strongly it attracts electrons. Groups go up and down and are numbered from 1 to 18. Elements in the same group have the same number of valence electrons. These are the electrons in the outer shell of the atom. Because of this, elements in the same group act in similar ways. For example, Group 1 is called the alkali metals (like lithium and sodium). They all have one valence electron and are very reactive, especially with water. Group 17 is the halogens (like fluorine and chlorine). They have seven valence electrons and are also very reactive. Group 18 is the noble gases (like helium and neon). They have full outer shells of electrons and do not react much with other elements.

The periodic table is also split into four big sections called blocks. The s, p, d, and f blocks. These blocks are based on how electrons fill up different parts of an atom, called orbitals. The s-block includes Groups 1 and 2, plus hydrogen and helium. In these elements, the s orbitals are being filled with electrons. The p-block includes Groups 13 to 18. These elements are filling up their p orbitals. The s-block and p-blocks together make up most of the main group elements, which include both metals and nonmetals. The d-block is in the middle of the table and includes Groups 3 to 12. These are the transition metals. They are special because they can form different types of charged ions and complex compounds. The f-block is at the bottom of the table and includes the lanthanides and actinides. These elements are filling their f orbitals. Even though they are placed separately to keep the table neat, they actually belong in the 6th and 7th rows (periods). The periodic table also shows trends, or patterns, in the properties of elements. Atomic radius (the size of an atom) gets smaller across a period from left to right because the nucleus pulls electrons in tighter. But it gets larger going down a group because more electron shells are added. Electronegativity (how strongly an atom attracts electrons) usually increases across a period and decreases down a group. Ionization energy (the energy needed to remove an electron) follows a similar pattern. It increases across a period and decreases down a group.

The basic unit of an element is called an atom. An atom is the smallest building block that you can cut an element into without the element breaking down (turning into a lighter element, for example through nuclear fission or radioactive decay). A chemical compound is a substance made up of two or more elements. In a compound, two or more atoms are joined to form a molecule. The tiniest speck of dust or drop of liquid, that one can see is made up of many millions or billions of these molecules. Mixtures are substances where chemicals are mixed but not reacted. An example would be mixing sand and salt. This can be undone again to produce salt and sand separately. Chemical compounds are changed by a chemical reaction. An example would be heating sodium bicarbonate, common baking soda. It will make water, carbon dioxide, and sodium carbonate. This reaction cannot be undone.

One very important concept in chemistry is that different atoms interact with one another in very specific proportions. For example, two hydrogen atoms interacting with one oxygen atom lead to the water molecule, H2O. This relationship is known as the "Law of constant proportions" and leads to the idea of "stoichiometry", a term that refers to the ratios of different atoms in chemical compounds. For example, in water, there are always exactly 2 hydrogen atoms to 1 oxygen atom. In carbon dioxide, there are exactly 2 oxygen atoms for 1 carbon atom. These relationships are described using chemical formulas such as H2O (two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom) and CO2 (one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms).

Because atoms of different elements react with one another in very specific proportions but atoms of different elements have different weights, chemists often describe the number of different elements and compounds in terms of the number of "moles". A "mole" of any element contains the same number of atoms: 602,214,150,000,000,000,000,000 atoms. The atomic mass of an element can be used to see how much of the element makes a mole. For example, the atomic mass of copper is about 63.55. That means about 63.55 grams of copper metal has a mole of atoms. The atomic mass of chlorine is about 35.45. That means 35.45 grams of chlorine has a mole of atoms in it.

Moles can be used to see how many molecules are in chemical compounds, too. Copper(II) chloride is an example. CuCl2 is its chemical formula. There is one copper atom (63.55) and two chlorine atoms (35.45 · 2 = 70.90). Add all the molar masses of the elements together to get the molar mass of the chemical compound (63.55 + 70.90 = 134.45). That means in 134.45 grams of copper(II) chloride, there is one mole of copper(II) chloride molecules. This concept is used to calculate how much chemicals are needed in a chemical reaction if no reactants (chemicals that are reacted) should be left. If too much reactant is used, there will be some reactants left in the chemical reaction.

Acids and bases are a common type of chemical. Using the simplest definitions, acids add  ions when in water, and bases add  ions when in water. Acids can react with bases: the  takes the extra hydrogen from  to make an extra water molecule, . The other parts of the acid and base make a salt.

An example would be reacting hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH). Hydrochloric acid releases H+ and Cl- ions in water. The base releases Na+ and OH- ions. The H+ and the OH- react to make water. There is a solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) left. Sodium chloride is a salt.

This definition of acids and bases, called the Arrhenius acid-base theory, is not used by modern chemists. It is too oversimplified for what really happens in water, and cannot describe anything dissolved in another solvent like ammonia. Instead, chemists use the Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory and Lewis acid-base theory, which are more complicated but more useful in chemistry. Instead of looking at reactions in water, these theories focus on hydrogen ions and pairs of electrons.

Chemistry is very useful in everyday life and makes up the foundation of many branches of science. Most objects are made by chemists (people who do chemistry). Chemists are constantly working to find new and useful substances. Chemists make new drugs and materials like paints that we use every day.

Many chemicals are harmless, but there are some chemicals that are dangerous. For example, mercury(II) chloride is very . Chromates can cause cancer. Tin(II) chloride pollutes water easily. Hydrochloric acid can cause bad burns. Some chemicals like hydrogen can explode or catch fire. To stay safe, chemists experiment with chemicals in a chemical lab. They use special equipment to keep the chemicals contained when they do reactions. They also wear special clothing to stay safe. The chemicals used in medicines and in products like bleach have been tested to make sure they are safe if used correctly.

A country is a distinct territory with defined borders, boundaries, people and government. Most countries are sovereign states while others make up one part of a larger state. The people that live in a country are referred to as a nation. The government that runs the country is called the state.

The people who live in a country are referred to as a nation. The government that runs the country is called the state.

There is no universally-accepted answer as to how many countries in the world there actually are. The minimum answer is 195, the number recognized by the United Nations, which has 193 members.

This can be developed on even further by adding the constituent countries of the United Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom of Denmark. which could add anywhere from three to eleven more countries.

There are multiple organisations, which have their own lists of countries. For example, the Travellers Century Club recognizes 330 countries as of January 2022.

Palestine is often classified as a country. However, there is an ongoing dispute over its independence with Israel.

There are a number of disputed areas that have declared independence from their parent state and receive limited recognition such as Kosovo, Transnistria, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, Kurdistan, Chechnya, Tibet, Balochistan, and Somaliland. They are just some of the many examples of territories with limited to no recognition that are sometimes classed as countries.

There is a lot of controversy surrounding the above examples and quite often, any of those territories may be counted as countries based purely on opinion. If all of the above were added the list of United Nations members, there could be anything up to 211 countries.

There are, however, many more territories with unique political circumstances that could also be counted.

Depending on how loosely the dictionary definition for the word country is used there could be many more than 193 countries in the world. The matter is purely subjective depending on varying opinions.

"Constituent country" is a term sometimes used, usually by official institutions, in contexts in which a number of countries are part of a sovereign state. The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has used the term referring to the former Yugoslavia, and European institutions like the Council of Europe often use it in reference to the European Union.

A disputed territory is a territory whose sovereignty is jealously desired by two or more countries. Usually, the administration of the territory is carried out by one of the countries that claims sovereignty, and the other country does not recognize the sovereignty over the territory of the other country. This does not usually happen in land or sea areas such as Antarctica on which no country has effective or total control.

The areas of Arunachal Pradesh, Paracel Islands, and Spratly Islands, all in Asia, are examples of disputed territories in the world.

A nation state is a sovereign country in which most citizens are somewhat homogeneous in terms of culture, religion, language, ethnicity, etc.

A city has many buildings and streets. It has houses, hotels, condominiums, and apartments for many people to live in, shops where they may buy things, places for people to work, and a government to run the city and keep law and order in the city. People live in cities because it is easy for them to find and do everything they want there. A city usually has a "city center" where government and business occur and suburbs where people live outside the center. Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth, Darwin, New York, Los Angeles, London, Paris, Berlin, Tokyo, and other cities.

No rule is used worldwide to decide why some places are called "city," and other places are called "town."

In American English, people often call all places where many people live cities. (See below: Size of cities )

The sizes of cities can be very different. This depends on the type of city. Cities built hundreds of years ago and which have not changed much are much smaller than modern cities. There are two main reasons. One reason is that old cities often have a city wall, and most of the city is inside it. Another important reason is that the streets in old cities are often narrow. If the city got too big, it was hard for a cart carrying food to get to the marketplace. People in cities need food, and the food always has to come from outside the city.

Cities that were on a river like London could grow much bigger than cities that were on a mountain like Siena in Italy, because the river made a transport route for carrying food and other goods, as well as for transporting people. London has been changing continually for hundreds of years, while Siena, a significant city in the 1300s, has changed very little in 700 years.

Modern cities with modern transport systems can grow very large, because the streets are wide enough for cars, buses, and trucks, and there are often railway lines.

In the US, the word "city" is often used for towns that are not very big. When the first European people went to America, they named "city" to new places. They hoped the places would be great cities in the future. For example, Salt Lake City was the name given to a village of 148 people. When they started building the town, they made street plans and called it Great Salt Lake City (for the nearby Great Salt Lake). Now, 150 years later, it really is a big city.

Los Angeles, which sounds like a single city, is really made of a number of cities which over the years have become amalgamated. It now covers a huge area which goes by the name of Los Angeles. The city is governed by a Common Council only since 1948.

In modern times many cities have grown bigger and bigger. The whole area is often called a  "metropolis"  and usually includes several ancient small towns and villages. The metropolis of London includes London, Westminster, and many old villages such as Notting Hill, Southwark, Richmond, Greenwich, etc. The part that is officially known as the "City of London" only takes up one square mile. The rest is known as "Greater London". Many other cities have grown in the same way. In general speech, it is all a city. But, confusingly, that includes the City of London.

Modern cities have many problems. Not everyone has jobs in the cities and they often get money by begging or by crime. Automobiles, factories, and waste create a lot of pollution that makes people sick. Roads are crowded and traffic is slow. The cause of all this is population growth.

Historically, a big problem with cities was the water supply, which periodically got contaminated. This problem was mostly fixed by Joseph Bazalgette. His work creating the sewer system in London led to more cities using a similar system. This led to cleaner cities overall. Many places in the world still don't use a sewer system for many reasons, such as financial struggles.

Urban history is history of civilization. The first cities were made in ancient times, as soon as people began to create civilizations. The oldest city on Earth is probably Catal Huyuk, which existed from 7500 to 6500BC.  Famous ancient cities which fell to ruins included Babylon, Troy, Mycenae and Mohenjo-daro.

Benares in northern India is one among the ancient cities which has a history of more than 3000 years. Other cities that have existed since ancient times are Athens in Greece, Rome and Volterra in Italy, Alexandria in Egypt.

In Europe in the Middle Ages, being a city was a special privilege, granted by nobility. Cities that fall into this category, usually had (or still have) city walls. This shows that security was one pf the problems of a city. The people who lived in the city were privileged over those who did not. Medieval cities that still have walls include Carcassonne in France, Tehran in Iran, Toledo in Spain, and York and Canterbury in England.

People in a city live close together, so they cannot grow all their own food or gather their own water or energy. People also create waste and need a place to put it. Modern cities have infrastructure to solve these problems. Pipes carry running water, and power lines carry electricity. Sewers take away the dirty water and human waste (see Bazelguette). Most cities collect garbage to take it to a landfill, burn it, or recycle it.

Transport is any way of getting from one place to another. Cities have roads which are used by automobiles (including trucks), buses, motorcycles, bicycles, and pedestrians (people walking). Some cities have trains and larger cities have airports. Many people in cities travel to work each day, which is called commuting.

Houses and apartments are common places to live in cities. Great numbers of people in developing countries (and developed countries, in the past) live in slums. A slum is poorly built housing, without clean water, where people live very close together. Buildings are usually taller in the city center, and some cities have skyscrapers.

City streets can be shaped like a grid, or as a "wheel and spokes": a set of rings and lines coming out from the center. Streets in some older cities like London are arranged at random, without a pattern. The design of cities is a subject called urban planning. One area of the city might have only shops, and another area might have only factories. Cities have parks, and other public areas like city squares.

Cities in the US are usually very-left leaning. The best examples of these would be New York, New York, and Washington, D.C. For example, in Louisiana, the only Democratic delegate in US Congress who is a Democrat was elected from a district comprising in New Orleans. Below is a list of states and the major city/cities that provide much of the liberal support in them :

These cities have more than 10 million people and can be called megacities:

A dictionary is a type of book which explains the meanings of words or, more precisely, lexemes. The words are arranged in alphabetical order so that they can be found quickly. The word "dictionary" comes from the Latin "dictio" ("saying").

There are several types of dictionaries: dictionaries which explain words and how they are used, dictionaries which translate words from one language to another, dictionaries of biography which tell about famous people, technical dictionaries which explain the meanings of technical words or words connected to a particular subject (sometimes called a thesaurus). Some of these come close to being an encyclopedia, but an encyclopedia gives a lot of extra information about things (knowledge) and does not explain the use of the language. An encyclopedic dictionary gives less information about the topic than a real encyclopedia does, but more than a simple dictionary.

Dictionaries which explain what words mean will give a clear "definition" of the word (e.g. hippopotamus : a hoofed mammal with thick skin, large mouth and short legs that lives in rivers and lakes of Africa.)

A big dictionary will also give more information about the word. It will explain how it is pronounced. Usually the International Phonetic Alphabet is used for this. It will explain how the word is used. This is not a problem for a word like "hippopotamus", but a word like "put" has so many different meanings that a large dictionary may have a whole page or more to explain how it can be used. It will also explain the origin of the word (e.g. Greek "hippos" horse and "potamus" river).

A dictionary may also give the form of the word in different tenses, plural form etc.

There are also dictionaries which translate words into foreign languages. Often one volume (one book) will translate both ways; for example, half the book might be translating from English to Dutch and the other half from Dutch to English.

When using a dictionary to find out how to say something in another language one has to be careful to choose the right word. A word like "right" has two basic meanings in English: 1) "correct", and 2) the opposite of "left". Other languages  have different words for these different meanings, but they have homonyms of their own. A word like "put" has many meanings. A good dictionary will have a large list of these meanings to help people find the word they want. In many languages, for example, the word “put” will be different according to whether something is being put onto something (e.g. a table) or into something (e.g. a cupboard).

Dictionaries need to be updated frequently because of the way language changes. New words are often brought into a language (e.g. lots of computer terms) or words change their meanings (e.g. "gay" or "cool"). In this sense, the most famous English Dictionary is the Oxford English Dictionary (or OED). Words are always being added to the OED. They are never taken out even if they are obsolete (not used any more). The OED can be accessed online (with a subscription).

A government is a group of people that have the power to rule in a territory, according to the administrative law. This territory may be a country, a state or province within a country, or a region. There are many types of government, such as democratic, parliamentary, presidential, federal or unitary

The most common type of government in the Western world is called democracy. In democracies, people in a country can vote during elections for representatives or political parties that they prefer. The people in democracies can elect representatives who will sit on legislatures such as the Parliament or Congress. Political parties are organizations of people with similar ideas about how a country or region should be governed. Different political parties have different ideas about how the government should handle different problems. Democracy is the government of the people, by the people and for the people.

However, many countries have forms of democracy which limit freedom of choice by the voters. One of the most common ways is to limit which parties can stand for parliament, or limit the parties' access to mass media such as television. Another way is to rig (unfairly manipulate or interfere with) the voting system by removing votes from opposition voters and substituting votes for the party in power. Few countries are textbook (classic, paradigmatic) democracies, and the differences between them has been much studied.

A monarchy is a government ruled by a king, queen, emperor or empress who inherits their position from their family, which is often called the "royal family." There are two types of monarchies: absolute monarchies and constitutional monarchies. In an absolute monarchy, the ruler has no limits on their wishes or powers. In a constitutional monarchy a ruler's powers are limited by a document called a constitution.

In modern times, monarchies still exist in Great Britain and the Commonwealth of Nations, the Netherlands, Spain, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and Thailand, along with several other countries. A monarch may have one of several titles: King or Queen, Empress or Empress, or Emir.

An aristocracy is a government run by the people of a ruling class, usually people who come from wealthy families with a particular set of values, or people who come from a particular place. A person who rules in an aristocracy is an aristocrat. Aristocracy is different from nobility, in that nobility means that one bloodline would rule, whereas an aristocracy would mean that a few or many bloodlines would rule, or that rulers be chosen in a different manner.

Under a dictatorship, the government is run by one person who has all the power over the people in a country.  A dictatorship may also be called one-man rule or autocracy. Plato called it tyranny.

Originally, the Roman Republic made dictators to lead during time of war. The Roman dictators (and Greek tyrants) were not always cruel or unkind, but they did hold power all by themselves, rather than sharing power with the people. Roman dictators only held power for a short period of time.

In modern times, a dictator's rule is not stopped by any laws, constitutions, or other social and political institutions, and can last many years or even decades. After leaving the Spanish Empire, many countries in Latin America were dictatorships. World War II was partly a war between dictators, and later new countries in Asia and Africa also were ruled by dictators.

An oligarchy is a government ruled by a small group of powerful people. These people may spread power equally or not equally. More so a different version of a monarchy, where everyone makes decisions together instead of one person making them all or telling people what to do, such as in a Dictatorship. An oligarchy is different from a true democracy because very few people are given the chance to change things. An oligarchy does not have to be hereditary or passed down from father to son.

An oligarchy does not have one clear ruler, but several powerful people. Some past examples of oligarchy are the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Apartheid South Africa. A fictional example is the dystopian society of Oceania in the book Nineteen Eighty-Four. Some critics of representative democracy think of the United States as an oligarchy. Robert Michel's Iron Law of Oligarchy says all democratic organizations become oligarchies. This view is shared by anarchists and some libertarians. An oligarchy may have a leader in the ruling group.

The simplest idea of government is those who rule over  and land. This may be as small as a community or village or as big as a continent (like Australia).

The people who rule can allow others to own land. It is a  by government that gives this right in the way that laws describe. Some think they have the right to hold land without government permission. This view is called libertarianism. Others think they can do without government. This view is called anarchism.

Almost every place on Earth is connected to one and only one government. Places without government are where people follow traditions instead of government rules, small border disputed areas and the continent of Antarctica, because almost no people live there. For every other place on Earth there is a government that claims 'sovereign control' over it. The word "sovereign" is old and means "control by a King" (sovereign). Governments of villages, cities, counties and other communities are subordinate to the government of the state or province where they exist, and then to that of the country.

It is from Kings and feudalism that modern governments and nation states came. The capital of a country, for instance, is where the King kept his assets. From this we get the modern idea of capital in economics. A government may  trade as well as to rule over land.

Governments also control people and decide things about what morality to accept or punish. In  many countries, there are strict rules about sexual intercourse and drugs which are part of law and offenders are punished for disobeying them.

Tax is how government is paid for in most countries. People who buy, sell, import, invest, own a house or land, or earn money are made to pay some of the money to a government.

There are many theories of how to organize government better. These are called theories of civics. Many people think leaders must be elected by some kind of democracy. That way, they can be replaced at election. Many governments are not a democracy but other forms in which only a few people have power.

There are many theories of how to run a government better, and keep people from hurting each other. These theories are part of politics.

An island is a piece of land that is surrounded by a body of water such as a lake, river, sea or ocean. Islands are smaller than continents. Although there are many Islands that are surrounded by fresh water, the vast majority of them are surrounded by oceans.

Greenland and Australia are huge islands, but they are built of continental rock, and the latter is generally considered a continent. The most ancient part of continental rock is far older and chemically more complex than the rock of the sea floor.

The heart of continents is their cratons, which are the most ancient and stable parts of the Earth's crust. In the cratons are all the rare elements needed for electronic equipment. They were swept up as the Sun moved through areas where supernovae had exploded. The rare elements we need were all got indirectly from supernovae explosions. The Sun's energy  comes from turning hydrogen into helium.

There are some islands which do have rare elements, and that is a sign that they were once part of a large supercontinent. So Great Britain was once part of a supercontinent. The oldest rocks are 2,700 million years old, and include many rare elements only found in cratons. Britain is a snapped-off piece of the Old Red Sandstone continent, now known as Laurasia.

Other islands that were formed from the ocean floor, as Japan, and Hawaii were, lack most of the rare elements. Japan has for many years since WWII imported iron ore from Australia. Its seizing of Manchukuo (~Manchuria) and the infamous attack on Pearl Harbour no doubt had many reasons. Lack of raw materials was one of these  Now it looks  for potential in its nearby deep-sea muds.

Language is the normal way humans communicate. Only humans use language, though other animals communicate through other means. The study of language is called linguistics.

Human language has syntax, a set of rules for connecting words together to make statements and questions. Language can also be changed, by adding new words, for example, to describe new things. Other animals may inherit a set of calls which have preset functions.

Language may be done by speech or by writing or by moving the hands to make signs. It follows that language is not just any way of communicating. Even some human communication is not language: see non-verbal communication. Humans also use language for thinking.

UNESCO says that 2,500 languages are at risk of becoming extinct.

All languages share certain things which separate them from all other kinds of communication.

The capacity to learn and use language is inherited. Normally, all humans are born with this capability. Which language is learned by a child depends on which language is spoken by the child's community. The capacity is inherited, but the particular language is learned.

Children have a special period, from about 18 months to about four years, which is critical for learning the language. If this is seriously disrupted, then their language skills will be damaged. Older people learn differently, so they seldom learn a second language as well as they learn their native language.

Mathematics and computer science use created languages called formal languages (like computer programming languages), but these may or may not be 'true' languages. Mathematics itself is seen as a language by many. Some people consider musical notation to be a way of writing the musical language.

Chinese is the language with the most native speakers in the world, but it is not really a language. It is a close family of dialects, some of which are as different as Romance languages are from one another.

The Russian language is one of the largest Slavic languages ever spoken.

English is often called "the international language", or lingua franca. It is the main second language of the world and the international language of science, travel, technology, business, diplomacy, and entertainment. French had a similar status until the 20th century, and other languages had it at other times.

Some languages are spoken only by closed ethnic groups such as Romani, which is an Indo-Aryan language spoken only by Roma.

Some languages are made up so that a lot of people around the world can learn them, without the new languages being tied to any specific country or place. These are called constructed languages, or conlangs. One of the most popular of these languages is Esperanto, which is sometimes called "La Internacia Lingvo," or "The International Language." Another of these languages is called Volapük, which was popular about a hundred years ago but is much less popular now. It has mostly been replaced by languages like Esperanto, Interlingua, and Ido. Dialects are basically other versions of a language. For example, Hoffish is a dialect of Swedish.

Part of the reason that Volapük became unpopular is that some sounds are difficult for people who speak Spanish or English, two of the most widely spoken languages in the world.

Humans started using language, at the latest, 135 000 years ago, according to research (published in 2025).

Law is a set of rules made by a particular place or authority to keep society safe and peaceful.

Courts or police help to make sure these rules are followed. They can punish people who break the laws, for example by making them pay a fine or by sending them to jail. In ancient societies, leaders wrote laws that told people how they should live, work and do business with each other. In most countries today, laws are written and voted on by groups of politicians in a legislature, such as a parliament or congress, elected (chosen) by the governed peoples. Many countries today have a constitution that sets out the basic structure of that society, while other laws deal with more detailed matters. People in a society are generally free to do anything that is legal (allowed by law). An activity is illegal if it breaks a law or does not follow the laws.

A legal code is a written code of laws that are enforced. This may deal with things like police, courts, or punishments. A lawyer, jurist or attorney is a professional who studies and argues the rules of law. In the United States, there are two kinds of attorneys - "transactional" attorneys who write contracts and "litigators" who go to court. In the United Kingdom, these professionals are called solicitors and barristers respectively.

The Rule of Law is the law which says that government can only legally use its power in a way the government and the people agree on. It limits the powers a government has, as agreed in a country's constitution. The Rule of Law prevents dictatorship and protects the rights of the people. When leaders enforce the legal code honestly, even on themselves and their friends, this is an example of the rule of law being followed. "The rule of law", wrote the ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle in 350 BC, "is better than the rule of any individual."

Culture is usually a major source of the principles behind many laws, and people also tend to trust the ideas based on family and social habits. In many countries throughout history, religion and religious books like the Vedas, Bible or the Koran have been a major source of law.

Civil law is the legal system used in most countries around the world today. Civil law is based on legislation that is found in constitutions or statutes passed by government. The secondary part of civil law is the legal approaches that are part of custom. In civil law governments, judges do not generally have much power, and most of the laws and legal precedent are created by Members of Parliament.

Common law is based on the decisions made by judges in past court cases. It comes from England and it became part of almost every country that once belonged to the British Empire, except Malta, Scotland, the U.S. state of Louisiana, and the Canadian province of Quebec. It is also the predominant form of law in the United States, where many laws called statutes are written by Congress, but many more legal rules exist from the decisions of the courts. Common law had its beginnings in the Middle Ages, when King John was forced by his barons to sign a document called Magna Carta.

Religious law is law based on religious beliefs or books. Examples include the Jewish Halakha, Islamic Sharia, and Christian Canon law.

Until the 1700s, Sharia law was the main legal system throughout the Muslim world. In some Muslim countries such as Saudi Arabia and Iran, the whole legal systems still base their law on Sharia law. Islamic law is often criticised because it has harsh penalties for crimes. A serious criticism is the judgement of the European Court that "sharia is incompatible with the fundamental principles of democracy".

The Turkish Refah Party's sharia-based "plurality of legal systems, grounded on religion" was ruled to contravene the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. The Court decided Refah's plan would "do away with the State's role as the guarantor of individual rights and freedoms" and "infringe the principle of non-discrimination between individuals as regards their enjoyment of public freedoms, which is one of the fundamental principles of democracy".

The history of law is closely connected to the development of human civilizations. Ancient Egyptian law developed in 3000 BC. In 1760 BC King Hammurabi, took ancient Babylonian law and organized it, and had it chiselled in stone for the public to see in the marketplace. These laws became known as the Code of Hammurabi.

The Torah from the Old Testament is an old body of law. It was written around 1280 BC. It has moral rules such as the Ten Commandments, which tell people what things are not permitted. Sometimes people try to change the law. For example, if prostitution is illegal, they try to make it legal.

In democracies, the people in a country usually choose people called politicians to represent them in a legislature. Examples of legislatures include the Houses of Parliament in London, the Congress in Washington, D.C., the Bundestag in Berlin, the Duma in Moscow and the Assemblée nationale in Paris. Many legislatures have two chambers or houses, a 'lower house' and an 'upper house'. To pass legislation, a majority of Members of Parliament must vote for a bill in each house. The legislature is the branch of government that writes laws, and votes on whether they will be approved.

The judiciary is a group of judges who resolve people's disputes and determine whether people who are charged with crimes are guilty. In some places the judge does not find guilt or innocence but instead directs a jury, how to interpret facts from a legal perspective, but the jury determines the facts based on evidence presented to them and finds the guilt or innocence of the charged person.  Most countries of common law and civil law systems have a system of appeals courts, up to a supreme authority such as the Supreme Court. The highest courts usually have the power to remove laws that are unconstitutional (which go against the constitution).

The executive is the governing center of political authority. In most democratic countries, the executive is elected from people who are in the legislature. This group of elected people is called the cabinet. There may be a President which exists separately from the legislature.

The executive suggests new laws and deals with other countries. The executive usually controls the military, the police, and the bureaucracy. The executive selects ministers, or secretaries of state to control departments such as the health department or the department of justice.

In many jurisdictions the Head of State  takes a largely ceremonial role. This is the case in many Commonwealth nations where the Head of State, usually a Governor almost exclusively acts "on the advice" of the head of the Executive (e.g. the Prime Minister, First Minister or Premier). The primary legal role of the Head of State in these jurisdictions is to act as a check or balance against the Executive, as the Head of State has the rarely exercised power to dissolve the legislature, call elections and dismiss ministers.

The police enforce the criminal laws by arresting people suspected of breaking the law. Bureaucrats are the government workers and government organizations that do work for the government. Bureaucrats work within a system of rules, and they make their decisions in writing.

Lawyers are people who have learned about laws. Lawyers give people advice about their legal rights and duties and represent people in court. To become a lawyer, a person has to complete a two- or three-year university program at a law school and pass an entrance examination. Lawyers work in law firms, for the government, for companies, or by themselves.

Civil society is the people and groups that are not part of government that try to protect people against human rights abuses and try to protect freedom of speech and other individual rights. Organizations that are part of civil society include political parties, debating clubs, trade unions, human rights organizations, newspapers and charities.

"Corporations are among the organizations that use the legal system to further their goals.  Like the others, they use means such as campaign donations and advertising to persuade people that they are right.  Corporations also engage in commerce and make new things such as automobiles, vaporisers/e-cigarettes, and Unmanned aerial vehicles (i.e. "drones") that the old laws are not well equipped to deal with. Corporations also makes use of a set of rules and regulations to ensure their employees remain loyal to them (usually presented in a legal contract), and that any disobedience towards these rules are considered uncivilized and therefore given grounds for immediate dismissal.

A library is a place where many books are kept. Most libraries are public and let people take the books to use in their home. Most libraries let people borrow books for several weeks. Some belong to institutions, for example, companies, churches, schools, and universities.  The people who work in libraries are librarians. Librarians are people who take care of the library.

Other libraries keep famous or rare books. There are a few "Copyright libraries" which have a copy of every book which has been written in that country. Some libraries also have other things that people might like, such as magazines, music on CDs, or computers where people can use the Internet. In schools, they offer software to learn the alphabet and other things.With the spread of literacy, libraries have become essential tools for learning. Libraries are very important for the progress and development of a society. Libraries are collections of books and other informational materials, however a library can also be a collection of items or media. People come to libraries for reading, study or reference. Libraries contain a variety of materials. They contain printed materials, films, sound and video recordings, maps, photographs, computer software, online databases, and other media.

A library is not a bookstore (a store that sells books). Libraries and bookstores are two different things.

The prime purpose of a library is to provide access to knowledge and information. To fulfil this mission, libraries preserve a valuable record of culture. Then they pass down this to the coming generations. Therefore, they are an essential link between the past, present and future.

People use libraries to work. They also use library resources to learn about personal interests. Sometimes, they get recreational media such as films and music. Students use libraries to study.

Libraries help the students to develop good reading and study habits. Public officials use libraries for research and public issues. The libraries provide information and services that are essential for learning and progress.

Many places have a public library, where anybody can join if they live in the area. With a library card, people can borrow books and take them home for several weeks. It does not cost money to get a library card at most public libraries.

Books are kept on shelves in a special order so they are easy to find. Public libraries have lot of books on various topics including story books and many others. Many public libraries have books and CDs about learning English. Stories are kept in alphabetical order by the last name of the person who wrote them, the writer. Books about other things are often given a special number, that refers to what they are about. They are then put on the shelf in number order. One number system used by many libraries is the Dewey decimal system.

In rural areas books may be taken in a  bookmobile, or mobile library to remote places.

Many colleges and universities have large academic libraries.  These libraries are for the use of college students, professors, and researchers.  Academic libraries are used mainly for doing research like studying the solar system or how earthquakes happen.  These libraries do not have the same types of books you would find in a public library.  They usually do not have fiction books or books for children (unless they are being studied).  Academic libraries can have many books, sometimes more than a million.

Special libraries are those libraries that are not public libraries or academic libraries.  They are usually small.  Many times a special library holds books on a particular subject or even a special kind of book.  Some special libraries keep just old books or books by Shakespeare.  A special library can be owned by a business for use only by that business.  For example, Disney World in Orlando has its own library that is not open to the public but for the use of the people who work for the company.

A librarian is a person who works in a library. Librarians help people find books and information. They can teach people how to find books and use the library.  A professional librarian is a person who went to university to study library science.  They can earn the degree of  Master in Library Science.

The earliest known library was discovered in Iraq and belonged to the ancient civilization in Sumer.  They didn't use paper books but instead wrote everything on clay tablets using a style of writing called cuneiform.  These tablets are over 5,000 years old.  The Library of Alexandria, in Egypt, was the largest and most important library of the ancient world.  It was destroyed when the Romans conquered Egypt in 30 BC.  Rome’s first public library was established by Asinius Pollio who was a lieutenant of Julius Caesar.  Eventually Rome would build 28 public libraries within the city.  When the Roman Empire fell in 330 AD, many books went east to the city of Byzantium where a large library was built.  Other libraries were built in monasteries and public homes.

Libraries began to appear in many Islamic cities, where science and philosophy survived after the fall of the Roman Empire.  Christian monks and Islamic libraries exchanged books to copy.

COVID-19 pandemic has further changed how libraries operate in year 2020 and many of them around the world were faced with really hard choices as to which services to offer and which services to shut down for a limited time.

Mathematics is the study of numbers, shapes, and patterns and letters. The word comes from the Greek μάθημα (máthema), meaning "science, knowledge, or learning", and is sometimes shortened to math or maths.

Applied math is useful for solving problems in the real world. People working in business, science, engineering, and construction use mathematics.

Mathematics solves problems by using logic. One of the main tools of logic used by mathematicians is deduction. Deduction is a special way of thinking to discover and prove new truths using old truths. To a mathematician, the reason something is true (called a proof) is just as important as the fact that it is true, and this reason is often found using deduction. Using deduction is what makes mathematical thinking different from other kinds of scientific thinking, which might rely on experiments or on interviews.

Logic and reasoning are used by mathematicians to create general rules, which are an important part of mathematics. These rules leave out information that is not important so that a single rule can cover many situations. By finding general rules, mathematics solves many problems at the same time as these rules can be used on other problems. These rules can be called theorems (if they have been proven) or conjectures (if it is not known if they are true yet). Most mathematicians use non-logical and creative reasoning in order to find a logical proof.

Sometimes, mathematics finds and studies rules or ideas that we don't understand yet. Often in mathematics, ideas and rules are chosen because they are considered simple or neat. On the other hand, sometimes these ideas and rules are found in the real world after they are studied in mathematics; this has happened many times in the past. In general, studying the rules and ideas of mathematics can help us understand the world better. Some examples of math problems are addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, calculus, fractions and decimals. Algebra problems are solved by evaluating certain variables. A calculator answers every math problem in the four basic arithmetic operations.

These theorems and conjectures have interested mathematicians and amateurs alike:

These theorems and hypotheses have greatly changed mathematics:

These are a few conjectures that have been called "revolutionary":

There is no Nobel Prize in mathematics. Mathematicians can receive the Abel Prize and the Fields Medal for important works.

The Clay Mathematics Institute has said it will give one million dollars to anyone who solves one of the Millennium Prize Problems.

There are many tools used to do math or find answers to math problems.

Physics is the science of how things move in space and time and how the universe works. It studies matter and forces.

The word physics comes from the Greek word  or  meaning “nature”. Physics can also be defined as “that department of knowledge which relates to the order of nature, or, in other words, to the regular succession of events”.

Physics is very important in engineering and developing new technologies, such as aviation, electronics and weapons. One reason for starting the mathematical field of calculus was to help develop mechanics, a branch of physics.

Modern physics connects ideas about the four laws of symmetry and conservation of energy, momentum, charge, and parity.

Astronomy, now a part of physics, is the oldest natural science. In the past it was a part of “natural philosophy” with other fields of science, such as chemistry and biology. During the scientific revolution, these fields became separate, and physics became a distinct field of knowledge.

Astronomy is one of the oldest natural sciences. The Sumerians, and Ancient Egyptians studied the stars, mostly with a view to prediction and religion. The first Babylonian star maps date from about 1200 BC. That astronomical events are periodic also dates back to the Babylonians.  Their understanding was not scientific, but their observations influenced later astronomy. Much astronomy came from Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Ancient Egypt, and Ancient Greece. Astronomers from Egypt built monuments that showed how objects in the sky moved, and most of the names for the constellations in the Northern hemisphere came from Greek astronomers.

Natural philosophy started in Greece around 650 BC when a movement of philosophers replaced superstition with naturalism, which refuted the spiritual. Leucippus and his student Democritus suggested the idea of the atom around this period.

Islamic scholars continued to study Aristotelian physics during the Islamic Golden Age. One main contribution was to observational astronomy. Some, like Ibn Sahl, Al-Kindi, Ibn al-Haytham, Al-Farisi and Avicenna, worked on optics and vision. In The Book of Optics, Ibn al-Haytham rejected previous Greek ideas concerning vision and proposed a new theory. He studied how light enters the eye, and  developed the camera obscura. European scientists later built eyeglasses, magnifying glasses, telescopes, and cameras from this book.

Physics became a separate field of study after the scientific revolution. Galileo’s experiments helped to create classical physics. Although he did not invent the telescope, he used it when he looked into the night sky. He supported Copernicus’ idea that the Earth moved around the Sun (heliocentrism). He also investigated gravity. Isaac Newton used Galileo's ideas to create his three laws of motion and his law of universal gravitation.  Together these laws explained the motion of falling bodies near the earth and the motion of earth and planets around the sun.

In a couple centuries, the Industrial Revolution was in full swing and many more discoveries were made in many fields of science. The laws of classical physics are good enough to study objects that move much slower than the speed of light, and are not microscopic. When scientists first studied quantum mechanics, they had to create a new set of laws, which was the start of modern physics.

As scientists researched particles, they discovered what classical mechanics could not explain. Classical mechanics predicted that the speed of light varied, but experiments showed the speed of light stayed the same. This was predicted by Albert Einstein’s theory of special relativity. Einstein predicted that the speed of electromagnetic radiation through empty space would always be the same. His view of space-time replaced the ancient idea that space and time were quite separate things.

Max Planck came up with quantum mechanics to explain why metal releases electrons when you shine a light at it, and why matter emits radiation. Quantum mechanics applies for very small things like the electrons, protons, and neutrons that make up an atom. People like Werner Heisenberg, Erwin Schrödinger, and Paul Dirac continued to work on quantum mechanics and eventually we got the Standard Model.

Physics is the study of energy and matter in space and time and how they are related to each other. Physicists assume the existence of mass, length, time and electric current and then define (give the meaning of) all other physical quantities in terms of these basic units. Mass, length, time, and electric current are never defined but the standard units used to measure them are always defined. In the International System of Units (abbreviated SI from the French ), the kilogram is the basic unit of mass, the metre is the basic unit of length, the second is the basic unit of time, and the ampere is the basic unit of electric current. In addition to these four units, there are three other ones: the mole, which is the unit of the quantity of matter, the candela which measures the luminous intensity (the power of lighting) and the kelvin, the unit of temperature.

Physics studies how things move, and the forces that make them move. For example, velocity and acceleration are used by physics to show how things move. Also, physicists study the forces of gravity, electricity, magnetism and the forces that hold things together.

Physics studies very large things, and very small things. For instance, physicists can study stars, planets and galaxies but could also study small pieces of matter, such as atoms and electrons. They may also study sound, light and other waves. They can examine energy, heat and radioactivity, and even space and time.

Physics helps people understand how objects move, and  how they change form, how they make noise, how hot or cold they will be, and what they are made of at the smallest level. Physics is the branch of science that deals with properties of matter and energy along with the interaction between them.

Physics may also study theoretical things, like Hawking Radiation (predicted by the British physicist Stephen Hawking), or String Theory. String theory is a theory that says the basic parts of The Universe are not point-like particles, but rather tiny, one-dimensional vibrating “strings” of energy. Different modes of vibration of these strings correspond to the different elementary particles and forces we observe, much like different notes played on a guitar string produce different sounds.

Physics is a quantitative science because it is based on measuring with numbers. Mathematics is used in physics to make models that try to predict what will happen in nature. These predictions are compared to the way the real world works. Physicists are always working to make their models of the world better.

Classical mechanics contains major topics such as Newton's laws of motion, Lagrangian mechanics, Hamiltonian mechanics, kinematics, statics, dynamics, chaos theory, acoustics, fluid dynamics, continuum mechanics. Classical mechanics is all about forces acting on a body in nature, balancing forces, maintaining equilibrium state, etc.

Astrophysics applies physics and chemistry principles to understand celestial objects and the universe, studying what stars, galaxies, and planets are, not just where they are. It explores topics from stellar life cycles and black holes to dark matter and the Big Bang, using tools like spectroscopy (analyzing light) and mathematical modeling to explain phenomena like redshift (the universe’s expansion) and cosmic microwave background radiation.

Electromagnetism is study of charges on a particular body. It contains subtopics such as Electrostatics, electrodynamics, electricity, magnetism, magnetostatics, Maxwell’s equations, optics.

Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics are related with temperature. It includes main topics such as Heat engine, kinetic theory.  It uses terms such as heat (𝑄), work (𝑊), and internal energy (𝑈). First law of thermodynamics gives us the relation them by the following equation (Δ𝑈 = 𝑄 − 𝑊)

Quantum mechanics is the study of particle at the atomic level taking into consideration the atomic model.  It includes subtopics Path integral formulation, scattering theory, Schrödinger equation, quantum field theory, quantum statistical mechanics.

Physics is the science of matter and how matter interacts. Matter is any physical material in the universe. Everything is made of matter. Physics is used to describe the physical universe around us, and to predict how it will behave.

Physics is the science concerned with the discovery and characterization of the universal laws which govern matter, movement and forces, and space and time, and other features of the natural world.

The sweep of physics is broad, from the smallest components of matter and the forces that hold it together, to galaxies and even larger things. There are only four forces that appear to operate over this whole range. However, even these four forces (gravity, electromagnetism, the weak force associated with radioactivity, and the strong force which holds protons and neutrons in an atom together) are believed to be different parts of a single force.

Physics is mainly focused on the goal of making ever simpler, more general, and more accurate rules that define the character and behavior of matter and space itself.

One of the major goals of physics is making theories that apply to everything in the universe. In other words, physics can be viewed as the study of those universal laws which define, at the most basic level possible, the behavior of the physical universe.

Physics uses the scientific method. That is, data from experiments and observations are collected. Theories which attempt to explain these data are produced. Physics uses these theories to not only describe physical phenomena, but to model physical systems and predict how these physical systems will behave. Physicists then compare these predictions to observations or experimental evidence to show whether the theory is right or wrong.

The theories that are well supported by data and are especially simple and general are sometimes called scientific laws. Of course, all theories, including those known as laws, can be replaced by more accurate and more general laws, when a disagreement with data is found.

Physics is more quantitative than most other sciences. That is, many of the observations in physics may be represented in the form of numerical measurements. Most of the theories in physics use mathematics to express their principles. Most of the predictions from these theories are numerical. This is because of the areas which physics has addressed work better with quantitative approaches than other areas. Sciences also tend to become more quantitative with time as they become more highly developed, and physics is one of the oldest sciences.

Classical physics normally includes the fields of mechanics, optics, electricity, magnetism, acoustics and thermodynamics. Modern physics is a term normally used to cover fields which rely on quantum theory, including quantum mechanics, atomic physics, nuclear physics, particle physics and condensed matter physics, as well as the more modern fields of general and special relativity, but these last two are often considered fields of classical physics as they do not rely on quantum theory. Although this difference can be found in older writings, it is of little new interest as quantum effects are now understood to be of importance even in fields that before were called classical.

There are many ways to study physics, and many different kinds of activities in physics. The two main types of activities are the collection of data, and the development of theories.

Some subfields of physics can be studied by experiment. For example, Galileo Galilei invented kinematics by making experiments and studying the data. Experimental physics focuses mainly on an empirical approach. Some experiments are done to explore nature, and other experiments are performed to produce data to compare with the predictions of theories.

Some other fields in physics like astrophysics and geophysics are mostly observational sciences because most of their data has to be collected passively instead of through experimentation. Galileo, for example, could only look at Jupiter and discover that it has moons. However, observational programs in these fields use many of the same tools and technology that are used in the experimental subfields of physics.

Theoretical physics often uses quantitative approaches to develop the theories that attempt to explain the data. In this way, theoretical physicists often use tools from mathematics. Theoretical physics often can involve creating quantitative predictions of physical theories, and comparing these predictions quantitatively with data. Theoretical physics sometimes creates models of physical systems before data is available to test and support these models.

These two main activities in physics, data collection, theory production and testing, use many different skills. This has led to a lot of specialization in physics, and the introduction, development and use of tools from other fields. For example, theoretical physicists use mathematics and numerical analysis and statistics and probability and computer software in their work. Experimental physicists develop instruments and techniques for collecting data, using engineering and computer technology and many other fields of technology. Often the tools from these other areas are not quite appropriate for the needs of physics, and need to be changed or more advanced versions have to be made.

It is frequent for new physics to be discovered if experimental physicists do an experiment that current theories cannot explain, or for theoretical physicists to generate theories which can then be put to the test by experimental physicists.

Experimental physics, engineering and technology are related. Experiments often need specialized tools such as particle accelerators, lasers, and important industrial applications such as transistors and magnetic resonance imaging have come from applied research.

Police are a group of people whose job is to enforce laws, help with emergencies, solve crimes and protect property. A person who carries out this duty is known as a police officer.

They work out of a police station. Police are trained in first aid and , because police officers are often one of the first people to get to a place where people are sick or injured, such as a car accident, or a fire.

A police agency may be called a police force, police department, police service, constabulary, civil guard or protective service. A gendarmerie is a police force that is part of the military, although its members rarely do actual military work.

Most police forces in the United States name themselves as "[Place] Police Department", such as New York City Police Department. State police forces are usually known as either "[State] Highway Patrol" or "[State] State Police". In the United Kingdom, most are "[Place] Police" or "[Place] Constabulary". In Canada and other English-speaking countries, "[Place] Police Service" is common. Ireland's police are called the Garda Síochána.

A law enforcement agency is any agency that enforces the law.  In the United States, some law enforcement agencies are not called police forces but carry out similar work, such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations. One common type is a sheriff's office (also sheriff's department), an agency that is led by a sheriff.

Those who carry out policing duties are known as police officers. They may also be known as policemen or constables.

The police have different powers to help them do their job. These powers are different in different countries. Most police officers have the power to arrest people, search people, and search houses/properties. They sometimes carry  such as guns, batons, tasers, or pepper spray. The area where police officers can use these powers is called their jurisdiction. If officers are outside of their jurisdiction, another police force with jurisdiction can then use their powers.

Most police departments have officers in two main groups: a "patrol" group with officers who wear uniforms, and a "detective" group with officers who wear normal clothing.

Not all countries use the same words to describe these groups. In the United Kingdom, for example, patrol officers form the "uniform branch", while detectives work within the CID ("Criminal Investigation Department"). Also in the United Kingdom, not all police officers are armed, these police officers form an "Armed Response Unit" which comes under other names in different constabularies, in the Metropolitan Police Service, it falls under SFC (Specialist Firearms Command) which all MET Armed Police fall under

Police uniforms, equipment and methods vary depending on the country. In some places, groups of police train for special jobs such as dealing with riots or dealing with highly dangerous criminals.

Different countries have different ways of organizing their police. Some countries like South Africa, Ireland and New Zealand have just one police force. Other countries have more than one. France has two police forces, one for cities and another for rural areas. Chile also has two, one for patrol and another for investigations.

Some countries have two or more levels of police forces. For example, most policing in Australia is carried out by the six state police forces, but there is also the Australian Federal Police who police the whole country. Germany has a similar system. The United Kingdom and Switzerland have many local police forces and several national agencies, but no actual national police force. In Canada, local governments can choose to either run their own police force or give the job to a bigger one. So most Canadian cities have their own police, while most rural areas are policed by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, which is also the national police.

The United States has over 17,000 law enforcement agencies. Many areas have four levels of law enforcement agencies. For example, Los Angeles has the Los Angeles Police Department but there are many other agencies that can work in the city. This includes the county-level Los Angeles Sheriff's Department, the state-level California Highway Patrol and over 100 federal (or national) law enforcement agencies.

Worldwide, police are a small percentage of the number of people they serve. On average there are 303.3 police officers per 100,000 people.

In most countries, police officers carry guns during their normal duties. In the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Ireland and a few other countries, most police officers do not carry guns. Officers may also carry pepper spray, electric shock weapons (such as tasers), and batons for defense. Police officers also carry handcuffs to detain suspects.

Officers communicate using radio devices. The radios can on the uniform and in the patrol vehicle.

Peace is a time without any fights or wars. In a larger sense, peace (or peacefulness) can mean a state of harmony, quiet or calm that is not disturbed by anything at all, like a still pond with no ripples.

Many people and organizations want peace. One organization that was set up to bring peace among the nations and try to make war a thing of the past was the League of Nations after World War I.  When it did not stop World War II, it was replaced by the United Nations which tries to make the world peaceful. This means that if any member is attacked or invaded by another country without attacking that country first, the other members will come to help the country that was attacked first. This idea was used by the United Nations to defend both South Korea and Kuwait when they were attacked.

Martin Luther King, Jr. wrote in a letter he sent from the Birmingham jail that, "True peace is not merely the absence of tension: it is the presence of justice." In other words, Real peace is more than just problems being gone: there must be fairness to have peace.

Alfred Nobel created an annual award, the Nobel Peace Prize, for the person who had done the most to bring peace to the world.

Buddhists think that peace can be gotten once all suffering ends.To get rid of suffering and get this peace, many try to follow a set of teachings called the Four Noble Truths

Jews and Christians believe that true peace comes from a personal relationship with God. Jesus Christ (also called the "Prince of Peace" in the Book of Isaiah) said: "Peace I leave with you; my peace I give you. I do not give to you as the world gives. Do not let your hearts be troubled and do not be afraid." ()

Muslims follow Prophet Muhammad who teaches them that peace is the glue that holds communities together and sustains the world.

Inner peace (or peace of mind) refers to a state of being mentally and spiritually at peace, with enough knowledge and understanding to keep oneself strong in the face of stress. Being "at peace" is considered by many to be healthy and the opposite of being stressed or anxious. Peace of mind is generally associated with bliss and happiness.

Peace of mind, serenity, and calmness are descriptions of a disposition free from the effects of stress. In some cultures, inner peace is considered a state of consciousness or enlightenment that may be cultivated by various forms of training, such as prayer, meditation, Tai chi chuan or yoga, for example. Many spiritual practices refer to this peace as an experience of knowing oneself.

A movement that seeks to get ideals such as the ending of a particular war, minimize inter-human violence in a particular place or type of situation, often linked to the goal of achieving world peace. Means to achieve these ends usually include advocacy of pacifism, non-violent resistance, conscientious objector, diplomacy, boycotts, moral purchasing, supporting anti-war political candidates, demonstrations, and lobbying to create legislation on human rights or of international law.

Many different theories of "peace" exist in the world of peace studies, which involves the study of conflict transformation. The definition of "peace" can vary with religion, culture, or subject of study.

Peace is a state of balance and understanding in oneself and between others, where respect is gained by the acceptance of differences, tolerance persists, conflicts are resolved through dialog, people's rights are respected and their voices are heard, and everyone is at their highest point of serenity without social tension.

A river is a stream of water that flows through a channel on the surface of the ground. The passage where the river flows is called the riverbed and the earth on each side is called a riverbank. A river begins on high ground or in hills or mountains and flows down from the high ground to the lower ground, because of gravity. A river begins as a small stream and gets bigger the farther it flows.

The start of a river is called the source or head water. The part of the river that is near the source is called a 'young' river. A young river is often in a V-shaped river bed, and flows quickly downhill over stones, and around big rocks. Young rivers often have lots of small waterfalls and rapids. As the rivers travel downhill they begin to erode the ground taking small bits of soft rock and soil.

The middle part of a river is called a mature river. A mature river makes a riverbed that is U-shaped. It might be very deep and run fast. It sweeps over small rocks and boulders, and makes big turns around hills and mountains. It is much wider than a young river, but not as wide as an old river. To cross over a mature river, people use bridges. Many cities and towns are built on the banks of mature rivers. Many farms that keep animals such as dairy cows, horses and sheep are along mature rivers because the animals can drink from the river every day.

A river usually ends by flowing into an ocean, a lake or a bigger river. The place where the river flows out into a bigger body of water is called the 'mouth' of the river.

As a river flows towards its mouth, the countryside around the river often changes from hilly to flat. As it flows over the flat land the river becomes wider and slower. A wide slow river is called an 'old river'. An old river often floods across the land after there is lots of rain at the headwaters. An old river slowly builds up its banks on either side; the high banks are called levees. An old river often meanders (twists and turns), and sometimes, after a flood, it leaves lakes behind which are called ox-bows or billabongs. Old rivers are the most useful type of river for growing crops. Corn, rice, fruit, cotton, hay, tobacco and sugar are some of the crops that are grown near old rivers.

The shape of the mouth depends on the conditions of the sea where it flows. If there is a strong tide where the river meets the sea, the river forms an estuary. An estuary is a wide, funnel-like mouth of the river. The fresh water of the river mixes slowly with the salt water, becoming brackish water – somewhat salty water. Many kinds of fish, clams, molluscs and other sealife live at estuaries. Many of the world's largest cities and harbours are at estuaries.

Where a river flows out to the sea, it sometimes flows very slowly through sandy or muddy land, making lots of little islands as it flows. The main stream of the river gets broken into many parts that spread out into a triangle shape like the Greek letter delta. When this happens, it is called the delta of the river. Deltas are often places that are not good for towns or farms but are very good for birds and other wildlife and fishing. Deltas are often made into wildlife reserves. Not all rivers have deltas. There are deltas on the Nile River, the Amazon River, the Mekong River, the Mississippi River and the Danube River.

Some rivers flow underground through caves. Underground rivers form in places where there are lots of cracks in the rocks above, so that in rainy weather, the water runs downs and collects in small underground streams. Sometimes the underground water trickles or gushes out of the ground to form a small spring of water. In other places, where there are caves, the small underground streams run together to form a river. The river can sometimes run through deep wide underground caverns. While many underground rivers flow gently, some underground rivers flow fast and have rapids, particularly after heavy rain. Many underground rivers flow out through a cave mouth to become an ordinary river.

The water in rivers is "fresh water" that has come from rain, snow and from underground streams. It can usually be drunk safely by people unless it is too dirty because of mud or human pollution. People and animals need fresh water to drink, so they often live by the side of a river.

Science is what we do to find out about the natural world. There are different kinds of science. Natural sciences study nature and the physical world. They include biology, chemistry, geology, astronomy, and physics. Social sciences study people and how societies work. They include, psychology, sociology, and economics. Applied sciences use the things we learn from science to solve problems. They include, engineering and medicine. Science uses mathematics, computer science and logic, which are sometimes called "formal sciences". Science makes observations and experiments. Science produces correct facts, scientific laws, and theories. 'Science' also refers to the large amount of knowledge that has been found using this process.

Research uses the scientific method. Scientific research uses hypotheses based on ideas or earlier knowledge, which can be categorized through different topics. Then those hypotheses are tested by experiments. People who study and research science and try to find out everything about it are called scientists. Scientists study things by looking at them very carefully, by measuring them, and by doing experiments and tests. Scientists try to  why things act the way they do, and predict what will happen.

The history of science is thousands of years old. The beginnings of modern science can be found in ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia (around 3000–1200 BCE). They developed early ideas in math, astronomy, and medicine. They influenced the Greeks, who tried to explain what happened in our world using natural causes. Later, during India’s Golden Age, more progress was made. This included the creation of the Hindu–Arabic number system.

After the Western Roman Empire fell during the Early Middle Ages (400–1000 CE), scientific progress in Europe slowed down. But progress started up again during certain periods. In the Islamic world, scholars kept, studied, and made Greek science better during the Islamic Golden Age. Later, when the Byzantine Empire got weaker, its scholars took Greek books to Western Europe, helping start the Renaissance.

From the 10th to 13th centuries, Europe re-learned Greek and Islamic science. This helped cause the scientific revolution in the 16th century. Science began to change a lot. New discoveries removed old ideas. The scientific method became more important. By the 19th century, science became more professional and organized. Instead of calling it “natural philosophy”, it was called “natural science”.

The history of the word “science” and the terms used in science tell us a lot about how the subject has changed over time and what it means in different cultures and philosophies. The word “science” comes from the Latin word “scientia,” which means “knowledge.” That word came from the verb “scire,” which means “to know.” In ancient Rome, scientia just meant any kind of knowledge you could get through learning or experience. It included many subjects like philosophy, speaking (rhetoric), and math. But back then, it did not mean what we now think of as science. In ancient Greece, a similar idea was called “epistēmē” (ἐπιστήμη). Philosophers like Aristotle and Plato used this word to mean knowledge that could be proven through reason. They saw it as different from “doxa,” which meant opinion, something that might not be true or could change.

The meaning of “science” started to change during the Scientific Revolution in the 1500s and 1600s. During this time, famous thinkers like Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler, Francis Bacon, and Isaac Newton began to create a new way of learning about the world. They used observation, experiments, and math to find answers. This method helped form the basis of what we now call modern science. Back then, people did not call it “science”, they called it “natural philosophy”, especially when studying the physical world like motion, planets, or light. The word “scientist” was not even invented until 1834. A man named William Whewell, who studied the history and philosophy of science, came up with it. He suggested “scientist” in a book review to describe someone who studies the natural world in a careful, organized way, just like the word “artist” describes someone who creates art.

Science words (or scientific terms) have changed and grown over time, just like science itself. In the past, many science terms came from Greek and Latin, because those were the main languages used by educated people in Europe for many centuries. For example, the word “biology” comes from the Greek words bios (which means “life”) and logos (which means “study”), so biology means “the study of life.” The word “physics” comes from the Greek word physis, meaning “nature.” “Chemistry” likely comes from the Arabic word al-kīmiyāʾ, which has roots in ancient Egyptian and Greek (Hellenistic) alchemy, a practice that tried to change substances and discover how materials work.

Scientific terms are very important because they help scientists be precise (use exact meanings), communicate clearly, and organize ideas and information. Each area of science has its own set of special words to describe things it studies. For example, in physics, words like “momentum,” “entropy,” and “quantum” have very specific meanings that are different from how they are used in everyday language. In biology, scientists name living things using a system called Linnaean binomial nomenclature. This system gives each organism a Latin name made of two parts: the genus and species. For example, humans are called Homo sapiens. Having standardized scientific words is important for making sure experiments can be repeated correctly (replicability), letting scientists check each other’s work (peer review), and helping scientists from all over the world work together, even if they speak different languages.

Many words used in science today come from the history and culture of the time when they were first used. Some scientific terms actually started out as jokes, creative ideas, or simple descriptions, but they became official because people started using them so much. For example, the term “Big Bang” was first used by astronomer Fred Hoyle in a radio broadcast in 1949. He did not believe in the Big Bang theory and actually used the name to make fun of it. But, the name caught on and is now the main word we use for how the universe began. Another example is the word “quark,” which is used for tiny particles that make up protons and neutrons. Physicist Murray Gell-Mann chose this word from a line in a book called Finnegans Wake by James Joyce. This shows how creativity and language play a role in science.

Scientific words often come from metaphors or comparisons to help people understand complex ideas. For example, the word “cell” in biology was first used by Robert Hooke in 1665. When he looked at cork under a microscope, he saw tiny box-like spaces that reminded him of the small rooms (cells) where monks lived. That is how the name “cell” was born. In computer science, the word “virus” is used to describe a program that can copy itself and infect other programs, just like real viruses do in the human body. Scientists used this name because it helped people understand how these harmful programs behave. These examples show that scientific words often come from real-world ideas, and they help us understand new or difficult concepts by connecting them to things we already know.

The language used in science is always changing to become more fair, clear, and inclusive. In the past, many scientific terms were based on ideas that focused too much on humans, Europe, or one gender. Over time, scientists have worked to replace these words with ones that are more neutral and accurate. For example, in astronomy, the word “planet” was officially redefined in 2006 by the International Astronomical Union (IAU). Because of this change, Pluto was no longer called a full planet, but instead a dwarf planet, which caused a lot of debate. In everyday science language, people now often say “human” instead of “man”, and “humankind” instead of “mankind”. These changes help make science feel more welcoming to everyone, no matter their background or identity.

As science keeps moving forward, new inventions and discoveries also bring new words. For example, scientists discovered CRISPR, a tool that can edit genes. The word CRISPR is an acronym (a short word made from initials) for “Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats.” It shows how scientists create short terms to explain big, complex ideas. New fields like machine learning, artificial intelligence (AI), and quantum computing are also creating new words. These words need to be defined very clearly, so scientists from different areas can understand each other and work together without confusion.

The period of prehistoric science includes the Palaeolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic ages, which lasted from about 2.5 million years ago to around 3000 BCE. Even though these early efforts were not "science" the way we know it today, they showed careful observation, experiments, and the start of organized thinking. One of the first and most important forms of early science was making stone tools. It started with a human ancestor called Homo habilis and continued through different prehistoric cultures like the Acheulean, Mousterian, and Upper Paleolithic. People made tools like hand axes, scrapers, awls (used for poking holes), and spear tips. To do this, they had to understand how stones break, what kinds of rocks work best, and how to hit them with the right amount of force. Archaeologists (scientists who study ancient human history) have found evidence that these early humans learned by trial and error, and they shared their knowledge with others. Over time, they improved their tools to make them stronger and more useful. This kind of hands-on learning and passing down of skills is one of the earliest examples of using science to solve problems, especially in understanding materials and how to use them, what we now call materials science.

Early humans also showed basic knowledge of astronomy, the study of the sky. This can be seen in archaeological discoveries like the Blanchard bone (around 30,000 BCE) and the Lascaux Cave paintings (around 17,000 BCE). These objects and drawings may show that early people were watching the Moon’s phases or recognizing star groups like the Pleiades constellation. One of the earliest sky-watching structures is the Nabta Playa stone circle in southern Egypt, built around 6000 BCE. It is one of the oldest known examples of people using megaliths (large stones) to line up with the summer solstice sunrise, the longest day of the year. It may also have helped track seasonal rains, which were very important for survival in that dry area. These structures show that early people spent years carefully watching the sky, noticing patterns, and trying to predict natural cycles, like when rain or seasons would come. This was an early step toward the science of astronomy.

Another major scientific step happened during the Neolithic Revolution, around 10,000 BCE, when humans started farming. This time period was extremely important because people learned to grow plants and raise animals. They had to understand soil, water, and weather patterns to grow food successfully. Early farmers in places like the Fertile Crescent (in the Middle East), China’s Yellow River valley, and Mesoamerica (Central America) grew crops like wheat, barley, millet, rice, and maize (corn). They watched how these plants grew over many generations and chose the ones with the best traits, like more food, better taste, or the ability to survive without much water. This careful choosing is the beginning of genetics (even though they did not know that word), and their work helped people settle down, build villages, and eventually start civilizations. These farming skills are the beginning of what we now call agricultural science.

Even though prehistoric people did not write things down, they still had surprisingly advanced medical knowledge. One of the most amazing examples is trepanation, a kind of surgery where people removed parts of the skull. Scientists have found skulls from as far back as 7000 BCE in Europe, Africa, and South America that show signs of this surgery, and some of the skulls even show healing, which means people survived the operation. This suggests that early humans had basic knowledge of the body, special tools, and may have used natural medicines, like herbs, to reduce pain or stop infection. Another example is Ötzi the Iceman, a frozen body found in the Alps from around 3300 BCE. His body had tattoos that lined up with places used in acupuncture, a method of healing still used today. He was also carrying a medicinal fungus called Fomitopsis betulina, which may have been used to fight infection.

People in prehistoric times also began using math and measurement. They made tools like tally sticks to help them count. One of the oldest is the Lebombo bone from about 35,000 BCE, and another is the Ishango bone from around 20,000 BCE. These bones have carved marks that might show number patterns, multiples, or even prime numbers. Some scientists think they may also have tracked lunar cycles (the phases of the moon). Later, in places like Mesopotamia and the Indus Valley, early people started using standard measurements. They needed these for storing grain, trading goods, and building things. They created systems to measure volume and weight, which helped them with farming, business, and early forms of engineering.

In prehistoric times, early people showed amazing skills in building large stone structures, which we now call megalithic architecture. One of the oldest examples is Göbekli Tepe, built around 9600 BCE in what is now Turkey. It has huge stone pillars carved with animals, arranged in circles. These stones are very heavy, and moving and placing them would have taken many people working together, using simple tools and their understanding of leverage (how to move heavy things using force and angles). They probably also used basic measuring tools to plan where to put the stones. Other examples, like Stonehenge in England (about 3000 BCE) and the stone lines at Carnac in France, show that people in different places had similar building knowledge. These projects needed not just strength, but also careful planning, measuring, and even watching the sky to line up stones with seasons or sunrise points. This shows early knowledge of engineering and astronomy.

Early humans were also smart about taking care of the environment. They used fire in helpful ways. For example, Australian Aboriginals practiced something called fire-stick farming. They burned certain areas on purpose to help new plants grow, bring animals to the area, and make the land easier to manage. In the Andes Mountains (in South America), ancient farming communities built terraces (step-like farms on hills) and irrigation systems to control water. This helped them farm on steep land and stop soil from washing away. These people understood how to manage natural resources, like water and soil, in ways that are similar to today’s ideas of sustainability (protecting the environment while meeting human needs).

People also started to create ways to record and share information. Early forms of writing included cave art, petroglyphs (pictures carved in rock), and tokens (small clay objects used for counting). In Mesopotamia, around 8000 BCE, people used clay tokens to keep track of food and goods. Over time, this system turned into writing, known as cuneiform. Writing allowed people to store knowledge, like farm records and star charts, and pass it on to future generations. This step, moving from oral traditions (speaking stories and knowledge) to writing things down, helped humans build on knowledge over time. It was the beginning of being able to record science and discoveries so they would not be forgotten.

Ancient science was the early scientific knowledge and inventions created by some of the first civilizations in places like Mesopotamia, Egypt, the Indus Valley, ancient China, and Mesoamerica (Central America). This period lasted from around 3000 BCE to 600 BCE. In Mesopotamia, one of the first places where civilization began, science was used in areas like farming, government, and astronomy. The Sumerians and Babylonians created number systems, including one based on 60 (sexagesimal). This is why we still use 60 minutes in an hour and 360 degrees in a circle today. They were also great at studying the sky. On clay tablets written in cuneiform writing, they recorded things like star charts, calendars, and math problems. Babylonian astronomers carefully watched the Moon and planets, and used math to predict eclipses (when the Moon or Sun is covered) and planet alignments. One of their most important discoveries was the Metonic cycle, which is a 19-year cycle where the Moon’s phases happen on the same days of the calendar again.

Ancient Egyptian science was closely tied to farming, timekeeping, and building large monuments. The Egyptians created a 365-day calendar by watching the star Sirius (which they called Sopdet). Every year, Sirius rose in the sky just before the Nile River flooded. This was a very important event that made the soil good for growing crops. To prepare for this, the Egyptians had to be good at measuring the sky and water levels. They also used science to build huge structures like the pyramids. These amazing buildings needed careful planning, geometry (math involving shapes), and knowledge of materials and surveying (measuring land). Egyptian engineers were skilled at all of these things. A famous document called the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus, written around 1650 BCE, shows that Egyptian students learned math such as fractions, areas, volumes, and ratios.

The Indus Valley Civilization (around 2600 to 1900 BCE) also had amazing science and technology, even though we still do not fully understand it because their writing system has not been decoded yet. Cities like Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa were built in neat grid patterns, had advanced drainage systems, and used standard sizes for things like weights and bricks. At a site called Lothal, scientists found a dockyard, which shows that people there understood how tides worked and how to build for the sea. The use of uniform bricks and measuring tools also shows they had organized production and possibly government systems to manage it. All of this points to high-level technical knowledge and careful planning.

In ancient China, science grew together with philosophy and government. People studied nature because they wanted to understand it better and use that knowledge to rule wisely. One early book called the I Ching (also called the Book of Changes) was written by at least the late 2nd millennium BCE. It used patterns and binary logic (ideas based on two choices, like yes/no or dark/light) to explain natural cycles and how the universe worked. By the time of the Zhou Dynasty (around 1046–256 BCE), Chinese scientists had invented many useful tools and ideas. They created early earthquake detectors (called seismographs), studied the stars (astronomy), used plants as medicine (herbal medicine), and learned how to work with metals and chemicals (metallurgy). They also made a complex calendar based on both the Moon’s phases and solar seasons. This calendar used a 60-part cycle (called the sexagenary cycle) and showed that they had a very advanced way of measuring time using math. The Chinese were also experts in bronze casting, making tools and objects out of melted metal. They made alloys (mixtures of metals) that had the same recipe every time, using careful control of heat and basic understanding of chemistry.

In Mesoamerica, the Olmec (around 1500–400 BCE) and later the Maya made amazing discoveries in astronomy, math, and building. The Maya used a base-20 number system (instead of base-10 like we use). They invented long count calendars that could track time for thousands of years. They watched the sky carefully and recorded things like the movements of Venus, eclipses, solstices, and planet alignments. Some of this information was written in books called codices, like the Dresden Codex. The Maya used these observations to plan religious festivals, decide when to plant crops, and even schedule political events. They built pyramids and temples that lined up perfectly with events in the sky. They were constantly watching the sky and collecting data, just like modern scientists.

In all of these ancient civilizations, medicine was based on practical experience and observation, even though it was often connected to religion or spiritual beliefs. In Ancient Egypt, a medical text called the Edwin Smith Papyrus (written around 1600 BCE) showed that Egyptian doctors had a logical and scientific approach to treating injuries. It includes detailed instructions for doing surgery and describes how to treat injuries to the head, spine, and arms or legs. It even gave predictions (called prognosis) about how serious the injuries were and what might happen to the patient, depending on where the injury was. In Mesopotamia, doctors used a book called the Diagnostic Handbook by a man named Esagil-kin-apli (around 1069 BCE). This book helped doctors figure out what was wrong with a patient by looking at their symptoms, then choosing treatments. These treatments might include herbal medicine, chants or prayers, and physical treatments like bandages or surgeries. In Ancient China, a book called the Shennong Bencaojing (written in the first millennium BCE) listed hundreds of medicinal herbs and their effects on the body. This book became the base of Traditional Chinese Medicine. It showed how Chinese doctors tested herbs, classified their properties, and wrote down their results, which helped build knowledge over many generations.

These early sciences also depended on good recordkeeping, which allowed people to share and pass on knowledge over time. Each civilization created its own writing system, including cuneiform in Mesopotamia, hieroglyphs in Egypt, oracle bone script in China, and Maya script in Mesoamerica. These writing systems helped people write down important information, like star charts and astronomy, math tables, medical recipes, and instructions for building things Because this knowledge was written down, it could be passed from one generation to the next, even if science back then was usually done by priests, scribes, or royal advisors, not scientists like we think of today.

Classical science started in ancient Greece, especially in a city called Miletus. There, early thinkers like Thales (around 624–546 BCE) tried to explain how the world works without using stories about gods or magic. Thales believed that water was the basic substance that everything came from. This idea started a new way of thinking called natural philosophy, which focused on finding natural causes for things we observe in the world. After Thales, other thinkers from Miletus also had big ideas. Anaximander said everything came from something called the apeiron (which means “the boundless” or unlimited). Anaximenes thought air was the most important element.

Another important thinker was Pythagoras (around 570–495 BCE). He believed that numbers and math were the true key to understanding the universe. His school studied geometry, music, and numbers. They discovered that when strings of certain lengths were plucked, they made sounds that matched simple number ratios. This showed a connection between music and math, and supported the idea that the whole universe had a kind of mathematical harmony, a concept called the “music of the spheres.” In medicine, a famous Greek named Hippocrates (around 460–370 BCE) made big changes. He said that illness was not caused by angry gods or magic, but by natural causes like diet, environment, and the balance of fluids in the body. He taught doctors to carefully observe patients, keep records, and study the effects of things like climate and food on health. Hippocrates also created the four-humor theory, which said the body had four fluids: blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. People believed for many centuries that staying healthy meant keeping these in balance. He also introduced ethical rules for doctors, such as those in the Hippocratic Oath, which is still remembered today. Because of Hippocrates, medicine became more scientific and professional.

Aristotle (384–322 BCE) was one of the most important thinkers in ancient science. He was a student of Plato and later became the teacher of Alexander the Great. Aristotle wrote about many subjects, including biology, physics, astronomy, psychology, and logic. In biology, Aristotle studied sea animals and did some of the first dissections (cutting open bodies to learn how they work). He grouped animals by their physical traits, which helped create early classification systems. In physics and astronomy, he believed the Earth was at the center of the universe (geocentric model), and that everything in the sky moved in perfect circles made of a special substance called aether. He thought the heavens were unchanging, unlike Earth, which was made of earth, water, air, and fire, things that could decay and change. Aristotle also created a famous way of thinking about why things happen, called the four causes. The material cause was what something is made of, the formal cause was the shape or structure of the thing, the efficient cause was what caused it to happen, and the final cause was its purpose or goal.

One of Aristotle’s students, Theophrastus (around 371–287 BCE), took these ideas further, especially in plant science. He wrote books like Enquiry into Plants and On the Causes of Plants, where he tried to classify and describe plants in a clear and organized way. He noticed details like where plants grow, how they reproduce, and how people use them. He divided plants into groups like trees, shrubs, and herbs, and because of his work, he is known as the “father of botany”. His ideas about plants were so good that scientists still read them over a thousand years later. After Alexander the Great died, Greek science continued to grow during the Hellenistic period (323–31 BCE). One of the most famous centers of learning was Alexandria, in Egypt. It had a huge library, scholars from many cultures, and support from powerful leaders. One of the most important scientists there was Euclid (around 300 BCE). He wrote a book called The Elements, which organized everything known about geometry into 13 books. He proved shapes and math rules using logic and step-by-step thinking. This method, called the axiomatic method, became the model for how scientists and mathematicians would work for thousands of years.

Archimedes of Syracuse (about 287–212 BCE) was a brilliant ancient scientist and inventor. He made important discoveries in physics, engineering, and math. One of his most famous ideas is called Archimedes' principle. It says that when you put something in water (or another liquid), the liquid pushes up on it with a force equal to the weight of the liquid the object pushes out of the way. This explains why some things float and others sink. Archimedes also studied levers, pulleys, and other machines, helping to create the basic rules of mechanical engineering. He figured out how to calculate the area and volume of different shapes and came up with a very good estimate for the number pi (π).

Eratosthenes (about 276–194 BCE) was the head librarian at the Library of Alexandria, one of the greatest learning centers of the ancient world. He was good at math, astronomy, and geography, and used these skills to measure the size of the Earth very accurately. He did this by comparing shadows in two cities at the same time during the summer solstice (the longest day of the year). He also invented a system of latitude and longitude to map locations, just like the grid system used in maps today. Eratosthenes tried to create a map of the entire known world. Aristarchus of Samos (about 310–230 BCE) was an early astronomer who had a bold idea: the Sun is at the center of the solar system, not the Earth. This idea is called the heliocentric model. At the time, most people believed the Earth was at the center, so his theory was not accepted, partly because they did not have strong telescopes or enough evidence. Even though his idea was ignored back then, his work later inspired scientists like Copernicus, who helped start the modern understanding of the solar system.

Claudius Ptolemy (about 100–170 CE) lived in Roman Egypt and was a famous ancient astronomer and scientist. He believed that the Earth was at the center of the universe, and he wrote a big book called the Almagest, where he explained this idea using a model called the geocentric model. To explain how the Sun, Moon, and planets move in the sky, he used epicycles, deferents, and equants, complicated ways of showing orbits that looked like circles within circles. Even though this model was wrong (we now know the Sun is at the center), Ptolemy’s system worked well for making predictions and was used for over 1,400 years. Ptolemy did not just study space, he also worked on optics (how light and vision work), maps, and music. He even wrote about astrology.

The Romans were more focused on practical science than on theories. They were great engineers and used science to build things like aqueducts (which carried water), roads, bridges, and concrete buildings. They understood how water flows, how to balance weight, and how to use strong building materials. A Roman engineer named Vitruvius wrote a book called De Architectura in the 1st century BCE, where he talked about architecture, human body proportions, and machines. He combined art and science to show how buildings should look beautiful but also work well. In medicine, a Roman doctor named Galen (around 129–200 CE) became very important. He studied how the body works by examining animals, learning about organs, bones, and how diseases spread. He believed in the four humors (like Hippocrates) and thought that keeping these in balance kept people healthy. Galen’s medical ideas were used in Europe and the Islamic world for many hundreds of years.

Science during the Islamic Golden Age (from about the 8th to the 14th century CE) was one of the most creative and important times in history. During this period, Muslim scholars made huge advances in astronomy, math, medicine, physics, chemistry, geography, and engineering. This progress happened because of several things which included leaders supported science, especially the Abbasid caliphs who helped fund research and learning. Books from Greece, India, Persia, and China were translated into Arabic, allowing people to learn from many different cultures, and Islamic culture encouraged learning (called ‘ilm in Arabic) and logical thinking. One of the most important places during this time was the House of Wisdom (Bayt al-Hikma) in Baghdad, created by Caliph Harun al-Rashid and expanded by his son Al-Ma'mun. It was a major center where scholars gathered to translate, study, and improve scientific knowledge. They translated famous works from Greek, Persian, and Indian scientists, like Aristotle, Galen, Euclid, and Ptolemy, into Arabic. One key figure was Hunayn ibn Ishaq, who translated over 100 medical books.

In astronomy, Muslim scientists made many improvements to older models from Greece and India. Al-Battani (also known as Albatenius, around 858–929 CE) carefully studied the Sun and calculated the length of the year as 365.2422 days, almost exactly what is known today. Al-Zarqali (also called Arzachel) made the Toledan Tables, which helped European scientists and even influenced Copernicus hundreds of years later. Al-Tusi (1201–1274 CE), working at the Maragheh observatory, invented a math model called the Tusi couple, which helped improve future ideas about how planets move. Muslim astronomers also built observatories (places to study the stars) in cities like Baghdad, Maragheh, Samarkand, and Shiraz. They invented tools like the astrolabe, sextant, and spherical instruments to measure stars and planets very precisely. These tools were used to find the correct times for prayer, determine the direction of Mecca (Qibla), and create Islamic calendars.

In the field of mathematics, Islamic scholars made major breakthroughs, especially in algebra, arithmetic, geometry, and trigonometry. One important mathematician, Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (around 780–850 CE), wrote a book called Al-Kitab al-Mukhtasar fi Hisab al-Jabr wal-Muqabala. This book laid the foundation for algebra. The word "algebra" actually comes from al-jabr, meaning "completion." Al-Khwarizmi also created step-by-step ways to solve quadratic equations and methods for doing calculations. In fact, the word “algorithm” comes from his name. Another scholar, Omar Khayyam (1048–1131), figured out how to solve cubic equations using geometry. Al-Kashi (died 1429) calculated the number pi to 16 decimal places and improved the way decimal numbers were used, something very important for modern math. In trigonometry, scientists like Al-Biruni and Nasir al-Din al-Tusi made accurate tables for sine, cosine, and tangent, helping to turn trigonometry into its own branch of mathematics.

In medicine, Islamic scientists made great progress by using ideas from ancient Greek thinkers and combining them with careful observation and testing. A famous doctor named Al-Razi (also known as Rhazes, 854–925) wrote a huge 25-volume medical book called Kitab al-Hawi. He was the first to clearly tell the difference between smallpox and measles and believed in learning through watching and testing patients. Another well-known doctor, Ibn Sina (also called Avicenna, 980–1037), combined medical knowledge from Greece, Persia, and India in his book The Canon of Medicine. This book was used as a guide in both Europe and the Islamic world for more than 600 years. He introduced important medical ideas like testing medicines, using quarantine to stop diseases from spreading, checking a patient’s pulse, and understanding how infections work. Muslim doctors also invented surgical tools, used antiseptics to stop infections, and developed special treatments for eye problems. One doctor, Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili, even invented a syringe to remove cataracts from the eye.

In the study of light and physics, Ibn al-Haytham (also called Alhazen, 965–1040) made discoveries that helped shape modern science. In his book Book of Optics, he showed that the Greek idea of vision, where light was thought to come out of the eyes, was wrong. He explained that light bounces off objects and goes into the eye, and he correctly described how the retina and lens work. Ibn al-Haytham tested his ideas with experiments using things like mirrors, lenses, and a camera obscura (an early version of a camera). He believed in forming hypotheses, testing them, and repeating experiments. These are ideas that are important to the modern scientific method. He also studied motion, mechanics, and inertia, and his work influenced later scientists in Europe, like Roger Bacon and Kepler.

In early Islamic times, chemistry was called alchemy, and Muslim scientists made big discoveries while trying to understand how materials change. One of the most important alchemists was Jabir ibn Hayyan (also called Geber), who lived in the 8th century. He wrote hundreds of books about how to heat, purify, and mix substances using methods like distillation and crystallization. He even described how to make aqua regia, a powerful acid that can dissolve gold. Jabir believed in testing ideas through careful experiments and recording results, which helped move alchemy closer to real, practical chemistry. He also used special lab tools like alembics (for distilling liquids), crucibles (for heating substances), and furnaces, helping to shape the way modern chemistry labs would work.

Muslim scientists also made great progress in geography, which is the study of the Earth and how it is measured. They traveled, observed nature, and made better maps. A brilliant scholar named Al-Biruni (973–1048) used math and trigonometry to measure the size of the Earth from the top of a mountain, and his answer was very close to what we know today. He also collected the exact locations (latitude and longitude) of over 600 cities and even suggested that the Earth spins, hundreds of years before scientists in Europe did. Another scholar, Al-Khwarizmi, corrected mistakes in older maps from the Greek scientist Ptolemy. Later, Al-Idrisi made a famous world map in 1154 for a European king, using knowledge from Arab traders, sailors, and explorers.

Islamic scientists also made amazing progress in engineering and building machines. They designed clever devices like early robots (called automata), water clocks, and machines that used water and air to move. In the 9th century, three brothers known as the Banu Musa wrote The Book of Ingenious Devices, which described over 100 inventions using gears, valves, and tubes called siphons. Later, a brilliant inventor named Al-Jazari (1136–1206) built fancy water clocks, mechanical toys that could be programmed to move, and one of the first crankshafts, a tool still used in engines today. These machines were not just for show; they were used in palaces, public fountains, and farming systems to help people in everyday life.

To spread knowledge, the Islamic world created many places for learning. These included schools called madrasas, hospitals known as bimaristans, libraries, and observatories where people could study the stars. Famous schools like the Nezamiyeh in Baghdad, Al-Qarawiyyin in Fez (Morocco), and Al-Azhar in Cairo became major centers for science and education. Scholars traveled from place to place, shared ideas, and copied books so they could be studied in different parts of the world. From Spain and North Africa all the way to Central Asia and India, science and learning were an important part of Islamic culture.

During the early Middle Ages (around the 5th to 10th centuries), science in Western Europe slowed down after the fall of the Western Roman Empire. Many ancient books and ideas were at risk of being lost. Luckily, monks in monasteries helped save this knowledge by copying old texts written in Latin. These included the works of famous thinkers like Aristotle, Pliny the Elder, Galen, and Boethius. One important scholar from this time was Isidore of Seville (around 560–636), who tried to collect and organize all human knowledge into one big book called Etymologiae. People at the time believed that studying nature helped them better understand God’s creation. Even though science was limited during this period, learning started to improve under Charlemagne (who ruled from 768–814). He supported education and helped start cathedral schools, which taught subjects like math, geometry, music, and astronomy (called the quadrivium), along with grammar, logic, and writing (the trivium).

Between the 11th and 13th centuries, science in Europe came back to life thanks to a big effort to translate ancient books. In places like Spain, Sicily, and parts of the Middle East, European scholars came in contact with the Islamic world and the Byzantine Empire. From them, they got access to many old Greek and Roman ideas, now improved by Arabic scholars. Translators like Gerard of Cremona worked hard to turn important Arabic and Greek books by Aristotle, Avicenna, Alhazen, and Galen into Latin so more people in Europe could understand them. These books taught about astronomy, medicine, math, and optics. This sparked the rise of universities in cities like Bologna, Paris, Oxford, and Salamanca. A new way of thinking called scholasticism became popular. Scholastic thinkers like Thomas Aquinas mixed Greek philosophy with Christian beliefs, and others like Albertus Magnus and Roger Bacon encouraged people to observe nature and do experiments to learn how the world works.

By the 14th century, some smart thinkers in Europe were starting to question old ideas about how things move. Two of these thinkers, Nicole Oresme and Jean Buridan, worked at the University of Paris and had new ideas about physics. Jean Buridan came up with a theory called impetus, which was an early idea similar to what we now call inertia. He said that once something is moving, it can keep moving on its own. It does not need to be pushed forever. This was a big change from the old belief (by Aristotle) that something had to keep being pushed to keep moving. Nicole Oresme did not agree with the old idea that Earth was the center of the universe (geocentric model). He also used graphs to show how things move, which was an early step toward kinematics, the study of motion.

The Renaissance (from the 1300s to the 1600s) was a time when science began to change a lot. People started to focus more on observing nature, doing experiments, and re-reading old science texts from ancient Greece. Scholars like Leonardo Bruni and Marsilio Ficino helped translate these important works so others could study them in more depth. One of the most famous Renaissance thinkers was Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519). He is known for being a "universal man", or someone who could do many things well. He was an amazing artist, but he also studied anatomy (the human body), how water flows, and how machines work. Leonardo dissected human bodies and made some of the most accurate drawings of muscles, bones, and the heart for his time. He figured out many things about how the vascular system (blood vessels) and body parts worked, even though he never published his findings while he was alive.

A big moment in astronomy happened with a scientist named Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543). He suggested a heliocentric model of the universe, which means that the Sun is at the center, not the Earth. This idea was published in his book On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres. In his model, Earth spins every day and goes around the Sun once a year. At the time, most people believed the Ptolemaic model, which said Earth was the center of everything. Even though Copernicus kept some old ideas like epicycles (small loops in orbits), his model was a huge change and led to a new way of thinking about the universe. Another important astronomer was Tycho Brahe (1546–1601). He did not use a telescope, but he made very careful observations of the stars and planets using special instruments. His data was extremely accurate and helped later scientists understand how the planets move.

Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), who used Tycho’s data, discovered three laws of planetary motion. He showed that planets do not move in perfect circles, but in elliptical orbits (oval-shaped). He also found that planets move faster when they are closer to the Sun. Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) combined experiments and astronomy. He used one of the first telescopes to look at the sky and made amazing discoveries. He saw craters on the Moon, sunspots, the phases of Venus, and moons orbiting Jupiter. All these things disproved the old idea that everything revolved around Earth and helped support Copernicus’s heliocentric model. Galileo also studied how objects fall, how pendulums swing, and how things move through the air. He showed that the laws of nature follow math rules, and we can understand them by doing experiments. In 1632, he wrote a book called Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems that supported heliocentrism. Because of this, he got in trouble with the Catholic Church, which still believed Earth was the center of the universe. Galileo was put on trial and spent the rest of his life under house arrest.

During the Renaissance, there were huge changes in medicine and anatomy (the study of the human body). A scientist named Andreas Vesalius (1514–1564) made a big breakthrough by dissecting real human bodies and studying them carefully. Before this, people mostly followed the ideas of an ancient doctor named Galen, but Vesalius found that Galen had made many mistakes because he studied animals, not humans. Vesalius wrote a book called De humani corporis fabrica (which means On the Fabric of the Human Body), where he corrected hundreds of errors and showed that anatomy should be based on direct observation. This helped make anatomy a real science based on what doctors could see and study for themselves. Later, another important doctor named William Harvey (1578–1657) discovered how blood moves through the body. He showed that the heart pumps blood in a circle, a system called circulation, which was very different from the old idea that blood came from the liver and just moved back and forth. Harvey proved this through experiments and live animal dissection (called vivisection). His work helped change medicine from just guessing and theory to something based on evidence and real body functions.

In math and physics, the Renaissance also saw big advances. A man named Simon Stevin (1548–1620) came up with decimal fractions, which made it easier to do math with numbers. For example, instead of writing 1/10 or 1/100, people could now write 0.1 or 0.01, something used all the time today. René Descartes (1596–1650), a French thinker, invented analytic geometry, which connected algebra with shapes and space. This helped scientists describe the world more clearly using equations. Another important figure was Francis Bacon (1561–1626). He believed science should be based on observation and experiments, not just guessing or using old books. In his book Novum Organum, he explained how scientists should use inductive reasoning, starting with observations and then finding general rules. His ideas became the philosophy of science and influenced many future scientists. Finally, Isaac Newton (1642–1727) brought together the work of earlier scientists like Kepler, Galileo, and Descartes. In the early 1700s, he created a complete system of physics and astronomy that explained how planets move and how objects fall on Earth. His work marked the end of the Renaissance and the start of the Scientific Revolution, a time when modern science truly began.

The Enlightenment was greatly influenced by the ideas of the Scientific Revolution, especially the work of Isaac Newton (1642–1727). In 1687, Newton wrote a book called Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica, where he explained the laws of motion and the law of universal gravitation. He showed that the same force that makes an apple fall also keeps the Moon in orbit around the Earth. Newton also explained that planets move in elliptical (oval-shaped) paths because of gravity. He invented calculus (at the same time as another scientist named Gottfried Leibniz) to help describe things that change, like speed and movement. His experiments with light proved that white light is made up of many colors.

Because of Newton, many Enlightenment thinkers started to use math and science to understand more than just space or motion. In chemistry, Robert Boyle (1627–1691) was an important figure. In his book The Sceptical Chymist (1661), he rejected old ideas from Aristotle and alchemy and introduced new scientific ideas about matter. He discovered Boyle’s Law, which says that when you make a gas container smaller, the pressure goes up (as long as the temperature stays the same). This showed that gases behave in ways that can be measured and predicted. Boyle also believed that science should be based on careful experiments that could be repeated. The move from alchemy (an early, unscientific form of chemistry) to modern chemistry was led by Antoine Lavoisier (1743–1794), who is often called the “father of modern chemistry.” Lavoisier discovered and named the elements oxygen and hydrogen, and he proved that the old phlogiston theory (which said things burned by releasing a strange substance) was wrong. He showed that in a chemical reaction, the total mass stays the same, which is now known as the law of conservation of mass. Lavoisier also created a clear system for naming chemicals, which helped scientists better organize and classify the elements.

In biology and anatomy, scientists during the Enlightenment started to focus more on how living things are organized. Carl Linnaeus (1707–1778) invented the system we still use today for naming living things, called binomial nomenclature. He gave each plant or animal two names, a genus and a species. This helped scientists all over the world talk about the same organisms clearly and consistently. His book, Systema Naturae, first published in 1735, listed and organized thousands of plants and animals and became the foundation of modern taxonomy, the science of classification. At the same time, scientists were learning more about how the human body works. Albrecht von Haller studied things like how nerves work, how muscles move, and how the heart beats. Through experiments, he helped people understand how parts of the body function automatically, without us thinking about them. This was a big step forward in the science of physiology.

During the Enlightenment, astronomy made big advances thanks to better telescopes and the growth of observatories. Edmond Halley (1656–1742) used Newton’s laws to predict when a certain comet would come back. He was right, and that comet is now named Halley's Comet. This showed that gravity could explain how objects move in space. Later, William Herschel (1738–1822) discovered a new planet, Uranus, in 1781. He also found over 2,500 objects in the night sky, like nebulae (clouds of gas and dust) and star clusters. He built some of the biggest telescopes of his time. His work helped scientists realize that the universe is much bigger than just the Milky Way galaxy. Astronomy became more professional, with major observatories in cities like Greenwich, Paris, and Berlin. These places also helped improve navigation, which was important for travel and trade.

Scientific institutions were very important during the Enlightenment. The Royal Society of London (founded in 1660) and the French Academy of Sciences (founded in 1666) brought scientists together to share ideas. They published journals, like Philosophical Transactions, that explained experiments, new discoveries, and theories. These groups helped make science more organized, trustworthy, and easy to understand by others. They also started the idea of peer review, where other scientists check your work. As more people learned to read and write, science started to spread outside of just schools and universities. Salons, coffeehouses, and public lectures became places where people talked about science. Scientists were no longer just private thinkers, they became public figures who shared their knowledge with everyone.

During the Enlightenment, medicine improved because doctors started focusing more on observing patients and learning through hospital training. One important doctor, Giovanni Battista Morgagni (1682–1771), helped create modern diagnosis by showing that symptoms were linked to specific organs, not just to old ideas like imbalances of body fluids. This helped doctors understand that diseases could be traced to problems in certain parts of the body. Another key figure was Edward Jenner (1749–1823), who made the first successful vaccine. He noticed that people who got cowpox did not catch smallpox, a deadly disease. He tested this idea and proved that cowpox could protect people. In 1798, he published his results, starting the science of immunology and vaccination.

During this time, science became more separate from religion and was seen as a way to improve society. Famous thinkers like Denis Diderot, Voltaire, and Jean le Rond d’Alembert believed that science and reason could free people’s minds and make the world better. They worked on a big project called the Encyclopédie (1751–1772), which was like an early encyclopedia. It collected all known scientific and technical knowledge into one place and made it easier for people to learn about how things work, from optics and anatomy to mining and tools. Engineering and technology also made huge progress. James Watt made important changes to the steam engine in the 1760s and 1770s by adding a separate condenser, which made the engine much more efficient. His improvements helped power factories and machines, leading to the Industrial Revolution.

During the 1800s, science made big changes, especially in how we understand heat, energy, electricity, and atoms. In the study of heat and energy, thermodynamics, scientists created the laws of thermodynamics. These laws helped people understand how steam engines work and how to make them more efficient. In 1824, a scientist named Sadi Carnot came up with the idea of the Carnot cycle, which showed that an engine’s efficiency depends on the temperature difference between where the heat comes from and where it goes. This idea helped lead to the second law of thermodynamics, which explains how energy spreads out. Later, Rudolf Clausius introduced the idea of entropy, which measures how energy becomes more disordered over time. Scientists William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) and James Prescott Joule created the first law of thermodynamics, which says that energy cannot be created or destroyed, only changed from one form to another.

In electricity and magnetism, scientists discovered that these two forces are connected. Michael Faraday, in the 1830s and 1840s, did experiments that showed how moving magnets can create electricity, a process called electromagnetic induction. This discovery is what makes electric generators and transformers work. Faraday also came up with the idea of fields, which are invisible areas where electric or magnetic forces can act. Later, in the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell built on Faraday’s work and wrote four equations, called Maxwell's equations, that explain how electric and magnetic fields move and interact. These equations also predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves, which led to the invention of things like radios, TVs, and wireless communication.

At the beginning of the century, John Dalton brought back the idea of atomic theory. He said that every element (like oxygen or iron) is made up of its own kind of atom, and these atoms combine in fixed amounts to make compounds (like water or carbon dioxide). His ideas helped explain important chemistry rules, like the law of multiple proportions, which says that elements always combine in certain number patterns. Later, in 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev created the periodic table. He arranged the elements in order by atomic mass and grouped them by chemical properties. Mendeleev’s table was so smart that it even predicted new elements, like gallium and germanium, before they were discovered. When scientists later found these elements and they matched his predictions, it showed that the periodic law was a powerful way to understand and organize chemistry.

Meanwhile, biology was also changing in a major way. In 1859, Charles Darwin published a book called On the Origin of Species. In it, he explained his theory of evolution by natural selection. Darwin said that living things change over time. These changes happen because of small differences that are passed from parents to offspring. If a trait helps an organism survive and have more babies, that trait becomes more common over generations. This is how new species can form. Darwin got many of his ideas by observing animals and plants during his long trip on the ship HMS Beagle. He was also influenced by Thomas Malthus, who wrote about how populations grow, and Charles Lyell, who studied how the Earth changes slowly over time. Darwin’s theory replaced older ideas that species never change. It gave scientists a new way to understand life, one that was based on evidence, change, and history. It also started many important discussions about science, religion, and philosophy.

At the same time as other big discoveries in the 1800s, scientists also developed the cell theory, which says that all living things are made of cells, and that the cell is the basic unit of life. This idea was first introduced in the 1830s by Matthias Schleiden and Theodor Schwann. Later, Rudolf Virchow added that all cells come from other cells, which he summed up in the Latin phrase "omnis cellula e cellula". The invention and improvement of the light microscope helped scientists look more closely at cells. They were able to discover important parts inside cells, like the nucleus, mitochondria, and other tiny structures called organelles. These discoveries helped build the foundation for molecular biology and genetics, which study how cells work and how traits are passed down.

In medicine, the 1800s were a turning point as it began to become more scientific. This progress was made thanks to new knowledge in disease research, germs, surgery, and public health. One of the most important scientists was Louis Pasteur. He showed that tiny organisms (microbes) can cause disease and spoil food. This idea became known as the germ theory of disease. Pasteur proved that germs do not just appear out of nowhere (a belief called spontaneous generation). He also invented vaccines for rabies and anthrax, and created pasteurization, a method to heat food and drinks to kill harmful microbes and keep them from spoiling. Another important scientist was Robert Koch. He discovered the specific bacteria that cause tuberculosis, cholera, and anthrax. Koch also created new lab methods, like using agar plates to grow bacteria and staining techniques to make microbes easier to see under a microscope. He developed Koch’s postulates, a set of rules that scientists use to prove that a certain germ causes a specific disease.

In the 1840s, doctors began using anesthesia, like ether and chloroform, to perform pain-free surgeries. This was a huge breakthrough because it allowed surgeons to do more complex operations without hurting the patient. Around the same time, Joseph Lister started using carbolic acid (also called phenol) to clean wounds and tools, which greatly reduced the number of people who died from infections after surgery. His work helped start the use of antiseptic techniques in hospitals and led to the modern idea of clean, germ-free medical care. Because of these changes, hospitals became places of real healing and science, not just places where the sick were kept. At the same time, big cities were facing many diseases due to crowding and pollution from the Industrial Revolution. This led to early public health reforms. One important figure was Florence Nightingale, who worked during the Crimean War. She pushed for clean hospitals, better nursing, and proper training, which helped improve medical care all over the world.

In the study of geology, scientists began to understand that Earth is very old, much older than people once believed. Charles Lyell wrote a famous book called Principles of Geology (1830–1833), where he explained that natural processes like erosion (wearing down of land) and sedimentation (building up of layers) happen slowly and steadily over a long time. This idea is called uniformitarianism. Lyell’s work was important because it challenged the biblical view that Earth was only a few thousand years old. It also gave Charles Darwin the long time span needed for his theory of evolution to work. Other areas of geology, like stratigraphy (studying rock layers) and fossil correlation (matching fossils to different layers), helped scientists piece together Earth’s history. Studies in mineralogy (minerals) and paleontology (fossils) also helped explain what the Earth is made of and what life used to be like.

During the 19th century, people began to study human behavior and society in a more scientific way. This was the beginning of the social sciences. A thinker named Auguste Comte came up with the idea of positivism, which said that we should study society using facts and observations, just like scientists study nature. This led to the creation of sociology, a field that tries to understand how things like cities, factories, and social classes affect people’s lives. In economics, early ideas from Adam Smith were built upon by other thinkers like David Ricardo, Thomas Malthus, and John Stuart Mill. They used math and statistics to study how money, jobs, and resources are shared in society.

At the same time, science became more organized in every area. Countries created national science academies and professional journals where scientists could publish and share their discoveries. Universities and research institutes trained new scientists, and governments or private groups started to fund science projects. Science also became something the public could enjoy and learn about. Museums and big events like the Great Exhibition of 1851 in London showed off new inventions and discoveries, proving that science was important for progress. Some amazing inventions of the time included the telegraph (for long-distance communication), the steamship, the electric light, and photography. These changes showed how science could improve daily life and move society forward.

At the start of the 20th century, scientists realized that the old ideas of physics (called classical mechanics) could not fully explain how very small things (like atoms) or very large things (like galaxies) work. This led to the birth of modern physics. In 1905, a young scientist named Albert Einstein wrote four important papers that changed science forever. One of these introduced the special theory of relativity, which showed that time and space are not fixed. Instead, time can slow down and lengths can shrink when objects move very fast, close to the speed of light. He also came up with the famous equation E = mc², showing that mass and energy are two forms of the same thing. Later, in 1915, Einstein created the general theory of relativity, which explained gravity in a new way. Instead of thinking of gravity as a pulling force, he said that mass bends spacetime, and this bending is what is felt as gravity. This idea helped scientists understand things like black holes, gravitational lensing (how light bends around stars), and how the universe is expanding.

At the same time, a different kind of physics called quantum mechanics was being developed to understand how things work at the level of atoms and tiny particles. In 1900, Max Planck said that energy comes in small amounts, called quanta. Niels Bohr created a model of the atom where electrons move in specific orbits, helping to explain how atoms give off light. Werner Heisenberg and Bohr developed the Copenhagen interpretation, which included the uncertainty principle. This says we cannot know exactly where a particle is and how fast it is moving at the same time. Erwin Schrödinger came up with wave mechanics, which showed how particles can also act like waves. Paul Dirac combined quantum theory with Einstein’s ideas and predicted the existence of antimatter. These discoveries helped create many modern technologies, like semiconductors (used in computers), lasers, nuclear power, and even the new field of quantum computing.

In the 20th century, a new area of science called nuclear physics became very important and had a big impact on the world. It started when Henri Becquerel discovered radioactivity, and Marie and Pierre Curie studied it further. They learned how atoms can break apart in a process called atomic decay. In 1938, scientists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann discovered something called nuclear fission, which is when the nucleus of an atom splits, releasing a huge amount of energy. Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch explained how it worked. This discovery led to the creation of the Manhattan Project, a secret program where scientists like Enrico Fermi and J. Robert Oppenheimer developed the first atomic bomb, which was used in World War II in 1945. But nuclear physics was not just used for weapons. It also led to the development of nuclear power plants, which generate electricity, and medical technologies like PET scans (used to see inside the body) and radiation therapy (used to treat cancer).

Meanwhile, in biology, scientists began to understand how traits are passed from parents to children. This started with the rediscovery of Gregor Mendel’s laws of inheritance, which led to the science of genetics. In 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick, using X-ray images from Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins, discovered the double helix structure of DNA. This showed how genetic information is stored in the sequence of nucleotides (the building blocks of DNA). This discovery led to molecular biology, which helped scientists understand how genes make proteins and how certain diseases are caused by genetic problems. Later, a huge international project called the Human Genome Project finished in 2003. Scientists mapped out all the DNA in a human, which includes over 3 billion base pairs and more than 20,000 genes. This started the field of genomics, and helped create new ways to study and treat diseases through personalized medicine and bioinformatics (the use of computers in biology).

Biotechnology in the late 1900s and early 2000s gave scientists amazing new tools to work with DNA and genes. These included Recombinant DNA technology which lets scientists combine DNA from different sources. PCR (polymerase chain reaction) is a method to quickly make millions of copies of a piece of DNA. CRISPR-Cas9, on the other hand, is a tool that lets scientists edit genes very precisely, like using scissors to cut and change DNA. These tools are now used in many ways. To create genetically modified crops, make medicines like insulin, perform gene therapy to treat diseases, and do quick and accurate disease testing. In medicine, a huge breakthrough came in 1928, when Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin, the first antibiotic. This completely changed how bacterial infections were treated and saved millions of lives. Later, vaccines were developed for deadly diseases like polio, measles, and HPV. More recently, mRNA vaccines (like some COVID-19 vaccines) have helped fight new diseases and protect public health around the world.

At the same time, information technology and computer science became a big part of science and everyday life. During World War II, the first electronic computers, ENIAC and Colossus, were built. Alan Turing created early ideas about how computers work and also helped crack secret codes during the war. In 1947, three scientists at Bell Labs, Bardeen, Brattain, and Shockley, invented the transistor, a tiny part that made it possible to build smaller and faster electronic devices. This led to the microprocessor and started the digital revolution. Later, scientists created the internet, which began as a government project called ARPANET. The internet grew into a huge, worldwide system that allows people to communicate, learn, shop, and share information.

Space science made huge leaps forward in the 20th century as humans began to explore beyond Earth for the first time. In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1, the first artificial satellite. Then, in 1961, Yuri Gagarin became the first human in space. One of the biggest milestones came in 1969, when NASA’s Apollo Program sent Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin to the Moon, making them the first people to walk on the Moon. Robots also helped us explore space. The Voyager probes, launched in 1977, sent back amazing information about the outer planets and are still traveling through interstellar space (the space between stars). In 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope was launched into orbit. It took detailed pictures of galaxies, nebulae, and supernovae, helping scientists learn more about the expanding universe. In the 21st century, space exploration has kept growing. NASA’s Mars rovers explore the Red Planet. Space telescopes like Kepler and TESS search for exoplanets (planets around other stars). Private companies like SpaceX and Blue Origin are working on things like Mars missions and even space tourism.

At the same time, climate and environmental science became very important. Back in 1896, scientist Svante Arrhenius said that carbon dioxide (CO₂) in the air could raise Earth’s temperature. This is called the greenhouse effect. By the late 1900s, scientists had strong evidence that human activities, like burning fossil fuels, were changing the climate. They got this data from things like ice cores, satellites, and ocean studies. Today, scientists around the world work together through groups like the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to study climate change and warn about its dangers. They say it is urgent to reduce CO₂ emissions to protect the planet. To help with this, we now use tools like climate models, remote sensing (using satellites to study Earth), and renewable energy (like solar and wind power) to fight climate change and find better ways to live sustainably.

Neuroscience and cognitive science are the sciences that study the brain and how we think, feel, and make decisions. In recent years, scientists have made big discoveries thanks to new brain scanning tools like fMRI and PET scans, which show real-time images of brain activity. These tools helped researchers find out that the prefrontal cortex (the front part of the brain) is important for decision-making, and the amygdala (a small part deep in the brain) helps process emotions like fear and anger. Today, scientists are trying to map all the connections in the brain. This is called connectomics. Also, brain-computer interfaces have been developed. These allow people who are paralyzed to move robotic arms or prosthetic limbs using only their brain signals. At the same time, fields like artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning, which used to be mostly theory, are now real tools. They help with things like voice assistants, face recognition, medical diagnoses, and self-driving cars.

In the 21st century, scientists from different fields began working together more closely, creating powerful new areas of research. These include nanotechnology (the science of building tiny machines and materials at the scale of atoms and molecules), synthetic biology (designing and creating new living systems, such as bacteria that produce medicine), quantum information science (using the strange laws of quantum physics to make ultra-powerful computers), and systems biology (studying how all the parts of a living system work together). One of the biggest science projects of this century was at CERN, where scientists used the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), a huge machine that smashes particles together, to discover the Higgs boson in 2012. This particle helps explain how other particles get mass and is a key part of the Standard Model of physics. Scientists are also still trying to solve big mysteries like dark matter, dark energy, and how to unite quantum physics with gravity, which could lead to a unified theory of everything in the universe.

Natural sciences are a major area of science that focuses on understanding the natural world. Scientists in this field study how things in nature work by watching carefully, doing experiments, and creating models or theories. These models help explain why things happen and can even predict what might happen next. Natural sciences depend on evidence that can be seen, measured, and repeated. Scientists use the scientific method, which means they make guesses (called hypotheses), test them through experiments, and change their ideas if the results do not match. This process helps make sure that scientific conclusions are as accurate as possible.

There are several main areas of natural science, including physics, chemistry, biology, earth sciences, and astronomy. Each area focuses on different parts of nature, but they often work together in today’s research. Physics is the study of matter, energy, and the forces that affect them. Physicists explore everything from the tiniest particles, like electrons and quarks, to giant objects like stars and galaxies. They use different theories depending on the scale. Quantum mechanics for tiny particles and general relativity for huge cosmic objects. Physics has led to important laws and ideas that help explain the universe, such as Newton's laws of motion, the laws of thermodynamics, Maxwell's equations for electricity and magnetism, and the Standard Model, which organizes the basic building blocks of matter.

Chemistry is often called the central science because it connects physics and biology. It focuses on what matter is made of, how it is structured, how it behaves, and how it changes during reactions. Chemists study atoms and molecules to understand how they bond together, break apart, and move energy during chemical changes. Chemistry is divided into different areas. Organic chemistry studies compounds that contain carbon (like living things do). Inorganic chemistry looks at compounds without carbon. Physical chemistry explores how chemistry and physics work together. Analytical chemistry focuses on measuring and identifying substances. Biochemistry applies chemistry to biological systems like cells and DNA. Because of chemistry, there are drugs, plastics, batteries, fertilizers, and many other useful materials and tools.

Biology is the science of living things. It explores how organisms are built, how they work, how they grow, where they come from, and how they change over time. Biology includes many branches, such as cell biology (which studies the basic units of life, cells), genetics (which looks at heredity and DNA), ecology (which studies how organisms interact with each other and the environment), evolutionary biology (which looks at how life has changed over millions of years), and molecular biology (which focuses on life at the smallest scales, like proteins and genes). Biologists use tools like microscopes, DNA sequencing, and gene editing to explore life. Biology is important in health, farming, nature protection, and biotechnology, helping us make vaccines, improve crops, and protect endangered species.

Earth sciences, also called geosciences, are the sciences that study the Earth and everything that affects it. This includes the solid ground, the atmosphere (air and weather), the hydrosphere (water and oceans), and the biosphere (all living things). Earth scientists use ideas from physics, chemistry, and biology to understand how Earth’s systems work together. Earth sciences include geology, which looks at the layers of the Earth, rocks, and the history of the planet; meteorology, which studies weather and the atmosphere; oceanography, which focuses on oceans and sea life; and climatology, which examines long-term climate patterns and how they change. These studies are important for learning about natural disasters like earthquakes, volcanoes, and hurricanes, and for helping us manage natural resources and protect the environment.

Astronomy is the science that studies space, planets, stars, galaxies, and the universe. Astronomers observe the sky using telescopes and use theories and math to understand what they see. Modern astronomy is closely connected to physics, especially in a branch called astrophysics, which uses physical laws to explain how space objects behave. Astronomy has helped us discover just how huge the universe is and that there are other solar systems beyond our own. Scientists study amazing objects in space like black holes, neutron stars, and dark matter, a mysterious substance that we cannot see directly. Astronomy also helps us explore big questions, like where the universe came from, how it has changed over time, and what might happen to it in the future.

The natural sciences all use similar methods to learn about the world. First, scientists use empirical observation, which means they carefully collect data using tools or by studying things in nature. They also do experiments, where they test ideas in controlled settings to see what happens. Another method is mathematical modeling, where scientists use math and computers to describe and predict how things work. To make sure results are trustworthy, scientists follow rules like peer review (where other experts check their work), reproducibility (so others can repeat the experiment), and falsifiability (the idea that scientific claims must be testable and could be proven wrong). Scientists use numbers and statistics to support their conclusions with solid, unbiased evidence.

Today, the natural sciences often combine different subjects to solve big problems. These mixed areas are called interdisciplinary fields, like biophysics (biology + physics), astrochemistry (astronomy + chemistry), geobiology (geology + biology), and climate science (which combines many fields). These new fields help scientists understand complex challenges, such as climate change, disease outbreaks, clean energy, and space exploration. For example, studying the climate means using knowledge from physics, chemistry, biology, and computer modeling. Scientists in astrobiology use ideas from space science, chemistry, and biology to search for life on other planets.

The natural sciences have led to amazing technology and discoveries that have changed our lives. Physics helped create nuclear energy, computers, and electronics. Chemistry made new medicines, better farming products, and useful materials like plastics. Biology and medicine led to vaccines, treatments for genetic diseases, and ways to grow or repair body parts. Earth science helps us predict natural disasters and take care of the environment. Astronomy has led to better telescopes, cameras, and even new ways to process big data. Finally, the natural sciences are very important for education, government, and solving world problems. Understanding science helps people make smart choices about things like global warming, health, and new technology. Governments use science to make rules, spend money wisely, and protect people and nature. Many big science projects, like CERN (which studies tiny particles), the IPCC (which studies climate change), or the Human Genome Project (which mapped all human genes), show how countries and scientists work together around the world to learn and make progress.

Empiricism is a basic idea in science. It says that we learn things by using our senses, like seeing, hearing, or measuring, not just by guessing or following tradition. Instead of relying only on what people believe or think is true, science depends on what we can actually observe, test, and measure. This is why scientists use special tools like telescopes, microscopes, and sensors, to help them see things that are too small, too far, or otherwise invisible to the human eye. For example, when scientists look for planets outside our solar system, called exoplanets, they cannot see the planets directly. Instead, they look at tiny changes in the brightness of a star. If the star gets a little dimmer at regular times, it might mean a planet is passing in front of it. This method is based on careful observation, which is what empiricism is all about.

Empiricism also means that scientific results should be reproducible. This means that if someone does an experiment again, they should get the same results. A good example is Gregor Mendel’s pea plant experiments, where he discovered how traits are passed down from parents to offspring. Scientists were able to repeat his work and get the same patterns, showing that the results were reliable. The idea of empiricism was supported by philosophers like John Locke, who believed that people are not born with knowledge. Instead, he said the mind starts out like a blank slate, and everything we learn comes from experience. This idea is different from rationalism, which says we are born with certain ideas or that we can learn everything through logic alone. In science, empiricism helps make sure our knowledge is based on real-world evidence.

Empirical methods in science are not just about watching things happen, they also include doing careful experiments to test ideas. These experiments are done in a controlled way to help scientists figure out which things cause certain results. For example, when Alexander Fleming saw that a certain type of mold killed bacteria, it was not enough just to notice it. Scientists had to do more experiments to prove that the mold, later called Penicillium notatum, could really fight infections. This led to the discovery of penicillin, an important medicine. This kind of testing is how scientists confirm what works and what does not. Galileo also used experiments with ramps (inclined planes) to show that objects do not need a force to keep moving, which went against the old ideas from Aristotle. In more recent times, scientists used special detectors at LIGO to find gravitational waves, tiny ripples in space predicted by Einstein’s theory of general relativity 100 years earlier. This discovery was another example of how scientists use careful observation and testing to confirm or disprove scientific theories. Empirical methods are also used in big, complex areas like climate science. Scientists collect information from things like ice cores, satellites, and even tree rings to learn about Earth’s climate over time. These different sources of data help build models to understand and predict how the planet is changing.

Even though empiricism, the idea that knowledge comes from observation and experience, is a key part of science, it is not always simple. One challenge is deciding what counts as a valid observation and how to understand what we see. Sometimes, what scientists notice or pay attention to depends on the theories they already believe in. This idea is called “theory-laden observation.” Philosopher Thomas Kuhn explained that scientists often use models or ideas they already have to decide what to look for and how to explain it. For example, early astronomers had trouble understanding why planets sometimes seemed to move backward in the sky (called retrograde motion) until they used models like the Ptolemaic system or the later Copernican model, which helped them interpret what they were seeing. In some parts of science, such as quantum physics, things get even harder. Scientists cannot always observe tiny particles directly. Instead, they have to use mathematical models and experiments to figure out what is happening. Phenomena like quantum entanglement or wavefunction collapse are known through indirect evidence and complex data. In the social sciences (like psychology or sociology), empiricism works a bit differently. Scientists use tools like surveys, interviews, and experiments with people to gather data. But this kind of research can have its own problems. For example, people might give answers they think are expected (this is called social desirability bias), or they might act differently because they know they are being watched (called the Hawthorne effect or observer bias).

Rationality and logic are very important in science. They help scientists make sure their ideas make sense, their theories fit together, and their conclusions are based on good reasoning. Rational thinking in science means using reason carefully. Scientists use it to come up with ideas (called hypotheses), to plan experiments, to understand results, and to compare different explanations. This helps make sure that conclusions come from real evidence, not just guesses. Logic gives rules for how to go from one idea to another. It helps scientists check if their arguments are valid. For example, in biology, if all mammals are warm-blooded and whales are mammals, then whales must be warm-blooded. This is a basic kind of logical thinking called deductive reasoning. Science also uses the rule of non-contradiction. This means something cannot be both true and not true at the same time. For example, a chemical cannot both contain and not contain the same element under the same conditions. This helps scientists make clear and reliable chemical models. There are also formal types of logic, like propositional logic, predicate logic, and modal logic. These are used in areas like computer science, artificial intelligence, and mathematical biology. They help scientists build computer programs, design experiments, and understand complex systems.

Logic and rational thinking are important in science not just to support good ideas, but also to find mistakes, hidden problems, or wrong assumptions in scientific theories. In physics, the discovery of quantum mechanics made scientists question old ideas. For example, classical physics said that objects behave in clear, predictable ways (called determinism) and that things far apart cannot affect each other instantly (called locality). But quantum mechanics showed that very small particles often behave in strange and random ways, so scientists had to use new kinds of logic to understand them. There is also a big problem between two important theories: general relativity and quantum field theory. Relativity explains how big things like planets and galaxies work, while quantum theory explains tiny particles. But the two theories do not fully agree with each other. This has led scientists to search for a new theory that combines both, such as string theory or loop quantum gravity. Science often uses a method called hypothetico-deductive reasoning. This means scientists start with a theory, then use logic to make predictions that can be tested. If experiments agree with the prediction, the theory is stronger. If not, the theory may need to change. For example, we know that antibiotics kill bacteria, not viruses. This logical idea helps doctors avoid giving antibiotics for viral infections, which helps prevent antibiotic resistance. In social sciences, logic is also important. Game theory is a tool that uses logic and reasoning to study how people make choices in situations where others are also making decisions. It helps explain things like voting, diplomacy between countries, and even how governments sell licenses for things like radio frequencies. Game theory helps people make better decisions by thinking logically about the actions of others.

Scientific thinking also includes the idea of parsimony, which is often called Occam's Razor. This idea says that if there are different explanations for something, the simplest one that still explains the facts should be chosen. This rule helps scientists choose the best theories in many fields, such as biology and climate science. For example, a long time ago, people believed that the Earth was at the center of the universe (the geocentric model). But this model needed many complicated parts, like epicycles, to explain how planets moved. Later, Copernicus suggested that the Sun was at the center instead (the heliocentric model). This simpler idea explained the same facts more easily, so it became the better choice. In brain science, a new idea called the Bayesian brain hypothesis says that the brain works by using probability to update what it believes. This means the brain uses logic and evidence, like a smart guesser. This idea is also used in computer fields like robotics and machine learning. Logic is also very important in doing science in a fair and careful way. For example, decision theory is a part of logic that helps scientists decide how to run medical studies. It helps them think clearly about risks, benefits, and what is unknown when testing new treatments.

Today, "science" usually refers to a way of pursuing knowledge, not just the knowledge itself. It is mainly about the phenomena of the material world. The Greek works into Western Europe from the 6th to 7th century B.C. revived "Philosophy". In the 17th and 18th centuries scientists increasingly sought to formulate knowledge in terms of laws of nature such as Newton's laws of motion. And during the 19th century, the word "science" became more and more associated with the scientific method itself. It was seen as a way to study the natural world, including physics, chemistry, geology and biology.

It was also in the 19th century that the term scientist was created by William Whewell. He meant it to tell the difference between those who looked for knowledge on nature from those who looked for other types of knowledge.

The scientific method is the name given to the methods used by scientists to find knowledge. The main s of the scientific method are:

A famous example of science in action was the expedition led by Arthur Eddington to Principe Island in Africa in 1919. He went there to record where the stars were around the Sun during a solar eclipse. The observation of where the stars were shown that the apparent star positions close to the Sun were changed. In effect, the light passing the Sun was pulled towards the Sun by gravitation. This confirmed predictions of gravitational lensing made by Albert Einstein in the general theory of relativity, published in 1915. Eddington's observations were considered to be the first solid proof in favour of Einstein's theory.

Discoveries in fundamental science can be world-changing. For example:

The philosophy of science is a subject that looks closely at how science works and what it really means. It asks big questions like: How do we know something is true in science? How do scientific ideas change over time? Can science truly be objective? People who study the philosophy of science try to understand the methods scientists use, the rules they follow, and how their discoveries affect the world. This field connects to other areas of philosophy, such as epistemology (the study of knowledge), metaphysics (the study of what exists), ethics, and logic. It also looks at how science is actually done in both natural sciences (like physics and biology) and social sciences (like psychology and sociology).

One of the biggest questions in the philosophy of science is called the demarcation problem. This means trying to figure out what counts as real science and what does not, like pseudoscience, which pretends to be scientific but doesn't follow the same rules. A famous philosopher named Karl Popper said that real science should be falsifiable. This means a scientific idea must make clear predictions that could be proven wrong with evidence. For example, Einstein’s theory of general relativity predicted that light would bend during a solar eclipse. Scientists tested this and confirmed it, showing the theory was falsifiable. On the other hand, Popper criticized things like Freud’s psychoanalysis, which tried to explain human behavior in ways that could not really be tested or proven wrong, because it could twist its explanations to fit any situation. Some later philosophers, like Imre Lakatos and Paul Feyerabend, said that science is not always so simple. They pointed out that many great scientific ideas started out as vague or hard to test. So, the question of what counts as real science is still debated, and there may not be one easy answer.

Scientific realism and anti-realism are two different ways of thinking about what science is really doing. People who support scientific realism, like Hilary Putnam and Richard Boyd, believe that scientific theories describe the world as it actually is, even the parts we cannot see, like electrons or black holes. They argue that science works so well, like making accurate predictions and helping us build amazing technology, because its ideas are mostly true, or at least close to the truth. On the other side, anti-realists, like Bas van Fraassen, believe something different. They say the job of science is not to find the absolute truth, but to come up with ideas and models that correctly predict what we can observe. This is called empirical adequacy. For example, in quantum mechanics (the science of very tiny particles), the math can predict things very well, but different scientists have totally different beliefs about what is really happening. Some realists believe in things like the Many-worlds Interpretation, while anti-realists prefer ideas like the Copenhagen Interpretation, which focus only on what we can measure and see.

Another big idea in the philosophy of science is how science explains things. One early idea was the deductive-nomological model, created by Carl Hempel. He said that to explain something scientifically, you had to show how it follows from general laws and starting conditions. For example, explaining why a planet moves in an ellipse (oval shape) using Newton's laws of gravity and motion. But not everyone agreed with this model. Some philosophers thought it did not explain things in everyday life or in complicated sciences like biology. So, newer thinkers, like Nancy Cartwright and James Woodward, introduced different ways to explain things, especially using causes and mechanisms. In this newer view, a good explanation tells us how something works step by step. For instance, if we want to explain how the heart pumps blood, we do not just give a law, we show how parts like pacemaker cells, ion channels, and muscle fibers all work together to make the heart beat. This kind of explanation is especially useful in subjects like neuroscience and medicine, where understanding the parts and how they interact is key.

One big question in the philosophy of science is called the problem of induction. This idea was first brought up by a philosopher named David Hume in the 1700s. He asked: How do we really know that what happened in the past will keep happening in the future? For example, we believe the sun will rise tomorrow because it has always done so. But Hume pointed out that we do not have a perfect reason to believe that, just past experience. Science often depends on these kinds of patterns, but there is no absolute proof that they will always hold true. Later on, a philosopher named Nelson Goodman added to this puzzle. He showed that it is not always easy to decide which patterns are meaningful. He created a strange example using the color “grue,” which means something is green before a certain time and blue after. This example showed that choosing which patterns to trust is harder than it seems. Today, some philosophers and scientists try to solve this problem using probability. This is called Bayesian reasoning, where people adjust their beliefs based on how likely something is and what they already know. But even this method has challenges, like being hard to calculate and including some personal judgment.

Another important thinker was Thomas Kuhn, who wrote a famous book in 1962 called The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. He said that science does not always grow in a straight line by slowly adding new facts. Instead, he said science works through paradigms, big ideas or frameworks that shape how scientists think, what they study, and what evidence they trust. Scientists work within a paradigm for a long time during “normal science,” but eventually they find anomalies, things that do not fit. When enough of these build up, a scientific revolution happens, and the old paradigm is replaced with a new one. For example, when scientists moved from Newton’s laws to Einstein’s theory of relativity, or from Ptolemy’s geocentric model (Earth at the center) to Copernicus’s heliocentric model (Sun at the center), these were paradigm shifts. Kuhn also said that different paradigms can be incommensurable, meaning they are so different that they cannot easily be compared. This idea was controversial. Philosophers like Karl Popper and Imre Lakatos disagreed with Kuhn. Karl Popper, for example, believed that science moves forward by falsification. This means that scientists should constantly test their ideas and try to prove them wrong. If a theory fails the test, it should be rejected. Popper thought that a good scientific theory must be one that could be proven false if the evidence does not support it. For example, saying “All swans are white” is a scientific idea because it can be tested, and even disproven by finding just one black swan. Another philosopher, Imre Lakatos, offered a different view. He did not think science was as dramatic as Kuhn’s idea of sudden "paradigm shifts," but he also did not fully agree with Popper. Lakatos said that science works through research programmes, groups of theories and ideas that develop over time. These programmes may face problems and make mistakes, but if they keep improving and helping us understand more, then they are still making progress. Lakatos believed science should still be rational and goal-directed, even if it changes slowly and builds on earlier ideas.

The philosophy of science does not just focus on how we know things or what reality is made of. It also asks important questions about ethics (what is right or wrong) and politics (how science affects society). These questions are especially important in fields like environmental science, artificial intelligence, biotechnology, and how we respond to pandemics. For example, when scientists or governments use computer models to make decisions about public health or climate change, philosophers ask: Are these models reliable? Are they being used fairly? Scientists also have to think about responsibility, how their discoveries might help or harm people. One idea that comes up is called the precautionary principle. This means that if a new technology might be dangerous and we do not fully understand the risks, we should be careful and not rush into using it. This idea is based on epistemic humility, which means recognizing the limits of our knowledge. A good example is CRISPR, a powerful gene-editing tool. While it can be used to treat diseases, it also raises big questions: Should we change human DNA? Should we allow “designer babies”? These are not just scientific questions, they are philosophical and ethical ones, too.

Philosophers also talk about whether there is only one correct way to do science. Some thinkers, like Paul Feyerabend, believed that there is no single method that all science must follow. He called this idea epistemological anarchism, which means that even unusual or untraditional approaches can lead to progress. This way of thinking is called pluralism, and it accepts that different fields of science may need different tools and ways of thinking. For instance, in climate science, scientists use a mix of physics, statistics, and information about human behavior to make predictions. In medicine, both controlled experiments and patient stories give useful, but very different, kinds of evidence. This shows that science does not always follow just one path. Instead, different methods can work together to give us a better understanding of the world.

Scientific discoveries have played a big role in changing the world. They have helped improve how people live, work, and communicate. Some important examples include the invention of the printing press, the rise of factories during the Industrial Revolution, and modern tools like electricity, antibiotics, and the internet. These discoveries changed not only technology, but also how societies are organized. For example, in the 1700s, James Watt improved the steam engine. This invention made it easier to move goods and power machines. It helped build large cities and connect countries through trade. In 1928, Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin, the first antibiotic. This medicine saved many lives by treating infections and changed the way doctors and hospitals work all over the world.

Science also helps governments make better decisions. When leaders use evidence and facts, they can solve big problems like climate change, diseases, and food shortages. For example, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) studies thousands of scientific papers to give advice about global warming. In 1987, the Montreal Protocol helped protect the ozone layer by banning harmful gases called CFCs. Scientists showed that CFCs were damaging the atmosphere, and the agreement helped the ozone layer begin to heal. During the COVID-19 pandemic, groups like the World Health Organization (WHO) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) gave advice based on science. They told people how to stay safe using masks, vaccines, and social distancing. However, not everyone followed or trusted this advice equally. Science also helps countries work together. This is called science diplomacy. Projects like the International Space Station (ISS) or joint research in the Arctic bring scientists from different countries together. These efforts can build peace and cooperation between nations.

The connection between science and society goes both ways. Science changes the world, but society also shapes how science is done. People's values, culture, money, and politics all influence what research is supported and how results are used. For example, during the Cold War, the U.S. focused heavily on space research after the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 in 1957. This led to the creation of NASA and more investment in science and engineering education. Politics and fear of falling behind in space technology drove this big push. Social movements can also change science. In the 1970s, feminist groups pointed out that medical research mostly focused on men. Because of this, rules changed so women had to be included in clinical trials. This helped scientists understand how treatments can work differently in men and women. In farming, many people worry about genetically modified organisms (GMOs). This public concern has led to different rules in different places. For example, Europe uses the precautionary principle, which means being more careful about approving new GMO products than in countries like the U.S. Even the way scientific papers are shared is shaped by money and business models. Many journals charge people to read studies, which has caused debates about whether scientific knowledge should be free and open to everyone.

Science also helps grow economies and create new jobs. Many big industries, like biotechnology, renewable energy, artificial intelligence, and aerospace, are based on years of scientific research. For example, the semiconductor industry, which makes computer chips, came from early work in solid-state physics. Today, it is a global industry worth trillions of dollars. Governments often help science and technology grow by giving tax breaks, supporting patents, and creating partnerships between public and private groups. In countries like South Korea and Israel, spending more than 4% of the country’s income on research and development (R&D) has helped build strong technology industries. However, new technology can also cause problems. Sometimes, machines and computers take over jobs that people used to do. This is called technological unemployment. It raises hard questions about what to do when people lose their jobs because of automation. Ideas like universal basic income, job training programs, and better education are being discussed to help people adapt to these changes.

Understanding science is important for everyone. It helps people make smart choices, stay healthy, and take part in important debates. This is called scientific literacy. When people understand basic science, they can check if information is true and avoid being misled. If many people do not understand science, it can lead to misinformation. For example, some people still believe vaccines cause autism. This false idea came from a study that was later proven wrong and taken down, but the anti-vaccine movement still exists and causes real harm. Other examples include denying climate change or following pseudoscientific health ideas that are not supported by evidence. To help the public understand science better, many things are being done. Schools are improving science classes, scientists give public talks, and science journalists write easy-to-understand articles. Organizations like the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the British Science Association also organize science festivals and help scientists learn how to talk clearly to the public. People can also take part in citizen science. These are projects where regular people help collect data for scientific studies. Examples include watching birds through eBird or testing water through FreshWater Watch. These projects help people feel more connected to science and show that science is for everyone, not just experts.

As science becomes more powerful, it also raises ethical and philosophical questions. New technologies like gene editing, brain-computer links, and geoengineering can change human life and the planet in big ways. People must think carefully about what is right or wrong when using these tools. For example, a tool called CRISPR-Cas9 might one day cure genetic diseases. But it could also be used to create “designer babies,” which may increase unfairness in society or bring back dangerous ideas like eugenics. Artificial intelligence (AI) is another case. When AI is used to help police or choose job applicants, it can carry hidden biases from the data it was trained on. This has led to calls for fair and transparent AI systems. To deal with these big issues, there are special groups that work on science and ethics. These include The Hastings Center, the Nuffield Council on Bioethics, and UNESCO’s Bioethics Program. They help create rules and ideas that respect human rights, justice, and the limits of science. These discussions are not just for scientists. They also involve ethicists, lawyers, religious leaders, and the general public. This helps make sure that science is used in ways that are fair and good for everyone.

Many of today’s biggest problems, like diseases, climate change, and food shortages, affect the whole world. Solving them requires international cooperation and fair access to scientific knowledge. But there are still big differences between richer and poorer countries, often called the Global North and the Global South. Wealthy countries usually lead in science. They have more money for research, better equipment, and more universities. In contrast, many low- and middle-income countries struggle with problems like not enough funding, brain drain (when scientists leave to work in richer countries), and limited access to scientific tools and journals. Some groups are working to close this gap. For example, TWAS (The World Academy of Sciences) and INASP (International Network for the Availability of Scientific Publications) help support science in developing countries. They promote regional cooperation, open-access publishing, and training programs to build research skills. The idea of open science, supported by UNESCO, says that scientific knowledge should be freely available to everyone. It also encourages scientists to work together, share results, and be transparent about how they do their research. A good example of open science is what happened during the COVID-19 pandemic. Scientists around the world used platforms like GISAID to quickly share data about the virus’s genes. This helped track new versions of the virus and develop better responses faster. However, there are still challenges. Sometimes, patents and intellectual property rules make it hard for poorer countries to get important technologies, like vaccines or medical treatments. This shows that fairness in science is not just about sharing knowledge, it is also about making sure everyone can use it.

Science is the best tool humans have for understanding and predicting how nature works. But it is not perfect. Science has limits, and it is not always free from mistakes or bias. Science depends on observation, testing, and the idea that ideas should be falsifiable, which means they can be proven wrong if new evidence shows up. Because of this, science cannot answer questions that are metaphysical (about things beyond the physical world), emotional, or based on personal values. These kinds of questions cannot be tested or measured with tools and experiments. For example, science can study what happens in the brain during meditation, but it cannot fully explain what a person feels during that experience. This is part of a big question in philosophy and brain science called the problem of consciousness. Scientists also disagree about how best to explain complex systems. Some believe that everything can be broken down into smaller parts (reductionism), while others think that new properties appear when parts come together (emergentism). This is an important debate in areas like neuroscience and systems biology.

Some philosophers have said that science is not as objective as it may seem. For example, Thomas Kuhn argued that what scientists observe is affected by the theories they already believe. This idea is called theory-ladenness. In his famous book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962), Kuhn said that science does not always move forward step by step. Instead, it goes through big changes called paradigm shifts, times when one way of thinking is replaced by another. A good example is how Einstein’s relativity replaced Newton’s mechanics. Kuhn also said that during these shifts, scientists working under different theories may not agree on what counts as proof or even what questions are important. This makes it hard to compare old and new ideas fairly. Another thinker, Paul Feyerabend, said that there is no single "scientific method" that always works. In his book Against Method (1975), he said that in the history of science, sometimes “anything goes.” He believed that too many strict rules in science can actually stop progress. One example is how Galileo’s telescope was at first seen as untrustworthy by many scientists of his time. People did not trust what it showed because it was new and did not fit their existing ideas. This shows that new tools and ideas are sometimes rejected, not because they are wrong, but because they challenge the way people already think.

One basic problem in science is called the problem of induction. It was explained by philosopher David Hume in the 1700s. The problem asks: how can we be sure that something will always happen just because it has happened many times before? For example, the sun has risen every day in history, but that does not guarantee it will rise tomorrow. Yet, science often assumes that nature follows regular patterns like this. Philosopher Karl Popper tried to solve this problem by saying that science should focus on proving ideas false, not just confirming them. This is called falsifiability. According to Popper, science moves forward by getting rid of wrong theories. But this approach also has problems. If an experiment gives unexpected results, scientists do not always throw out the theory. Sometimes they blame the tools, the way the data was read, or unknown factors. For example, if a telescope shows strange data about a planet, the issue might be with the telescope, not the theory. So it is not always clear when a theory has truly been disproven. This shows that scientific ideas are not final truths. They can change when new evidence appears or when old evidence is understood in a new way.

Social and cultural factors also affect science. They influence what gets studied, who gets to do the research, and how results are shared. Most science today is led by institutions in the Western world, and it is often written in English. This has raised concerns about epistemic colonialism, where knowledge from non-Western cultures, like Indigenous traditions or ancient medical systems, is ignored or only accepted when explained in Western scientific terms. For example, Ayurveda and Traditional Chinese medicine have been used for thousands of years. But in modern science, they are often not taken seriously unless specific parts of them are tested in lab conditions or clinical trials. There are also problems inside the scientific community. Many researchers are under pressure to publish lots of papers to keep their jobs. This is called "publish or perish." It can lead to rushed studies, weak results, and even bad practices like p-hacking (changing data to get the desired result). These issues are part of what's known as the replication crisis, when other scientists try to repeat a study but do not get the same results. One big study in 2015, called the Open Science Collaboration, tried to repeat 100 famous psychology experiments. Only 36% of them gave similar results. This showed that many scientific findings may not be as reliable as once thought.

Science works best when it is honest and independent. But sometimes, economic and political pressures can affect what scientists study, how results are shared, and whether the truth is told. For example, in the 1900s, tobacco companies paid for studies that made smoking look safer than it really was. They tried to hide the fact that smoking causes cancer. This delayed laws to protect people and led to millions of deaths. The fossil fuel industry has done something similar. By funding certain research groups and articles, they tried to make people doubt the strong scientific agreement that human actions are causing climate change. These actions are examples of corporate influence over science, which can reduce public trust and keep people from knowing the full truth. Governments can also interfere with science. During the early COVID-19 pandemic, some leaders delayed sharing important data or ignored the advice of health experts. This may have made the pandemic worse and hurt people’s trust in science and government decisions. To keep science honest, there must be transparency (open sharing of methods and results) and safeguards that protect scientists from outside pressure.

Science often uses controlled experiments to find clear answers. But some problems are too complex for this method to work perfectly. Fields like climate science, epidemiology (the study of diseases), and ecology deal with systems that have many parts working together. Because of this, scientists must use models and probabilities to make predictions. For example, climate models look at how things like greenhouse gases, ocean currents, and weather patterns interact. These models can show possible future trends, but they cannot predict exactly what will happen in a specific place at a specific time many years ahead. Sometimes people misunderstand this. They think that if science is uncertain, it must be wrong. But in complex systems, uncertainty is normal. It does not mean the science is bad. The same problem appears in nutritional science. It is hard to study diet because people eat many things at once, and other factors (like sleep or exercise) affect health too. This can lead to confusing or changing advice about what is healthy. Even in areas with experiments, like genetics, scientists have learned that things are more complicated than they once thought. Many diseases cannot be explained by a single gene. Instead, they are caused by interactions between many genes and environmental factors. This shows that reductionism, studying only small parts of a problem, can miss the bigger picture when dealing with complex systems.

Science is a powerful way to learn about the natural world, but it has limits. Some important questions cannot be answered by science alone. These include normative (what we should do), existential (why we exist), and metaphysical (beyond the physical world) questions. For example, science cannot fully answer “What is the meaning of life?”, “Is there a God?”, “What is morally right or wrong?”, or “What is consciousness?”. Science can study things we can see and test, like how the brain works. For instance, neuroscience can show how parts of the brain light up when we make choices. But it cannot tell us what we should do morally. This is known as the is–ought problem, explained by philosopher David Hume. In the same way, evolutionary biology can explain how helping others (altruism) may have developed in humans. But it cannot say whether we should be kind from a moral point of view. These types of questions are explored through philosophy, religion, ethics, and the humanities (like history and literature). Thinking that science is the only way to gain knowledge is called the scientism fallacy. It ignores the important insights from other areas of human thought, like art, culture, and spiritual traditions.

People’s trust in science is not the same everywhere. It depends on their background, politics, and past experiences. In some places, people see science as something only for experts or something that does not care about their real-life problems. This is especially true in communities that have been treated unfairly by scientific institutions in the past. One well-known case is that of Henrietta Lacks, an African-American woman whose cancer cells were taken without her permission in the 1950s. Her cells were used in many scientific breakthroughs, but her family was never asked or informed. This case is still discussed today in conversations about bioethics (the ethics of medical and scientific research) and trust in science. To build trust, it is not enough to just explain science better. Scientists also need to include different communities, listen to their concerns, and make research more open and fair. People also get confused when scientific advice changes. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, guidelines about wearing masks changed as scientists learned more. Some people saw this as a sign that science was unreliable. But in reality, this shows how science works, it updates when new evidence becomes available. That is a strength, not a weakness, but it must be clearly explained so the public understands why advice sometimes changes.

War is a  or a period of fighting between countries or s of people. A war generally involves the use of weapons, a military organization and soldiers. War is a  in which a nation s its rights by using force. Not every armed conflict is a war. A fight between individuals, between gangs, drug cartels, etc. is not considered a war. However, most wars are called armed conflicts. International humanitarian law is a set of rules that tries to limit the effects of wars. International Humanitarian Law recognizes two kinds of wars. These are:

Karl von Clausewitz wrote in his classic book, On War, that "war is a mere continuation of policy with other means.” Clausewitz viewed war as a political instrument. His book about military philosophy remains the most influential work on the history and strategy of war. An earlier authority on war was Sun Tzu. In his book The Art of War, Sun Tzu saw war as a necessary evil. It was something people do.

Wars have been fought to control natural resources, for religious or cultural reasons and over political balances of power. They have been fought over legitimacy (correctness) of particular laws. They have been fought to settle arguments about land or money, and many other issues. The reasons behind any war are often very complex. While a war can start for just about any reason, there is usually more than one cause.

From the earliest times, individual states or political factions have used war to gain sovereignty over regions. In one of the earliest civilizations in history, Mesopotamia, they were in a near constant state of war. Ancient Egypt during its Early Dynastic Period came about by war when Lower and Upper Egypt were joined as one country, about 3100 BC. The Zhou Dynasty ruled Ancient China came to power in 1046 through war. Scipio Africanus (236-183 BCE) defeated Carthage leading Ancient Rome to begin a conquest of the known world. Philip II of Macedon (382-336 BCE) united a group of city-states to become Ancient Greece.

Sometimes, people don't see a difference between fighting between countries or people, and the formal declaration of a state of war. Those who do see this difference usually only use the word "war" for the fighting where the countries' governments have officially declared war on each other. Smaller armed conflicts are often called riots, rebellions, coups, etc.

One country may send forces to another country for a variety of reasons. Sometimes it is to help keep order or prevent killings of innocents or other crimes against humanity. It may be to protect a friendly government against an uprising. Here it may be called a police action or humanitarian intervention instead of a war. Some people think it's still a war.

Another kind of war existed from 1947 until 1991 called the Cold War. This started when diplomatic relations between the United States and the Soviet Union broke down. Both countries had nuclear weapons and both stood ready to use them against the other. But there was no actual war between the two. It ended with the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991. The cold war was also called a containment where the United States tried to prevent the spread of communism to other countries. During the cold war, the major powers did not fight themselves, but often backed third parties in what was called a proxy war. The Vietnam War is often given as an example of a proxy war. But proxy wars happened long before the cold war and are still happening.

A war between peoples and groups in the same country is known as a civil war. It is generally agreed there are two things that make a war a civil war. It must be a struggle between groups in the same country or state over political control or to force a major change in the government's . The second  is that more than 1000 people have to have been killed, with a minimum of 100 from each side. The American Civil War is an example of a civil war. While the figures are mere estimates, the total casualties are thought to be about 750,000.

Only in the last 150 years or so, have states agreed on international laws to limit warfare. This has been mainly for humanitarian reasons. The Geneva conventions and the Hague Conventions are two examples of agreements that establish laws ing wars. Collectively, these are usually called International humanitarian law (IHL). Because these are ed laws, they  those d in armed conflicts to follow the IHL. Also, a country must not only respect the law but they also need to make sure other countries respect it as well. They cannot turn a blind eye (meaning pretend they do not see a thing) to countries who are not following IHC. The first of these was the Geneva Convention in 1864. It became international law with the signatures of 100 countries.

The statistical analysis of war was started by Lewis Fry Richardson following World War I. More recent databases of wars have been assembled by the Correlates of War Project and Peter Brecke.

An earthquake is when Earth's tectonic plates shake and move Earth's surface. Strong earthquakes damage buildings.

Disturbances in the Earth cause earthquakes. Different tectonic plates are slowly moving. When they get stuck, tension builds up in them. Earthquakes occur when tectonic plates suddenly break free, so they start moving quickly. The first point of an earthquake's rupture is called its hypocenter or focus. The epicenter is the point at ground level directly above the hypocenter.

People who study earthquakes are called seismologists. Many earthquakes can occur in a small area in a short period of time. The sudden release of stress in the tectonic plates sends waves of energy that travel through the Earth. Seismology studies the cause, recurrence, type and magnitude of earthquakes.

The effect of an earthquake can be measured with a seismometer. A seismometer detects the tremors of the earth and plots the tremors on a seismograph. The strength or magnitude of an earthquake can be measured using the Richter scale. The Richter scale was invented by Charles Francis Richter in 1935. The scale is numbered 0-10. A 2 on this scale is a tremor that is not easily recorded. And damage of size 5 (or more) in a wide area. The largest earthquake ever measured had a magnitude of 9.5.

No one can tell when an earthquake will happen. But we know where earthquakes are likely to occur in the future, such as near fault lines. An earthquake under the ocean can create a huge wave called a tsunami. Tsunamis can also cause a lot of destruction.

Earthquake zones are concentrated in some parts of the world. The first is the Pacific belt, which circles the Pacific Ocean. This part is the biggest seismic belt: it has the most active earthquakes and the most volcanoes.

The second part is the Alpide belt. It includes the seismic activities from Sumatra, to the Himalayas, to south Europe and north Africa, to the Atlantic Ocean.

These belts are along the edges of tectonic plates. The tectonic plates push on each other and make great amounts of tension.

Earthquakes sometimes hit cities and kill hundreds or thousands of people. Most earthquakes happen along the Pacific Ring of Fire but the biggest ones mostly happen in other places. Tectonically active places are places where earthquakes or volcanic eruptions are regularly repeated.

Earthquakes are caused by tectonic movements in the Earth's crust. The main cause is when tectonic plates ride one over the other, causing orogeny (mountain building), and severe earthquakes.

The boundaries between moving plates form the largest fault surfaces on Earth. When they stick, motion between the plates leads to increasing stress. This continues until the stress rises and breaks, suddenly allowing sliding over the locked portion of the fault. This releases the stored energy as shock waves. The San Andreas fault in San Francisco, and Rift valley fault in Africa are faults like this.

Earthquakes caused by volcanic eruptions can be quite devastating. However, these earthquakes are confined to areas around active volcanoes.

Often the causes are not known, except in the most general terms. An example is the largest earthquake in the history of the United States: the 1811–1812 New Madrid earthquakes. These are described as caused by very deep shifts in ancient rock formations. In other words, the cause is not known in detail.

In areas of intense mining activity, often the roofs of underground mines collapse and minor tremors take place. These are called collapse earthquakes.

There are three main types of geological fault that may cause an earthquake: normal, reverse (thrust) and strike-slip. Normal faults occur mainly in areas where the crust is being extended. Reverse faults occur in areas where the crust is being shortened. Strike-slip faults are steep structures where the two sides of the fault slip horizontally past each other.

Most earthquakes form part of a sequence, related to each other in terms of location and time. Most earthquake clusters consist of small tremors which cause little to no damage, but there is a theory that earthquakes can recur in a regular pattern.

A foreshock is an earthquake that happens before a larger earthquake, called the mainshock.

An aftershock is an earthquake that happens after a previous earthquake, the mainshock. An aftershock is in the same place of the main shock but always of a smaller magnitude. Aftershocks are formed as the crust adjusts to the effects of the main shock.

Earthquake swarms are sequences of earthquakes striking in a specific area within a short period of time. They are different from earthquakes followed by a series of aftershocks by the fact that no single earthquake in the sequence is obviously the main shock, therefore none have notably higher magnitudes than the other. An example of an earthquake swarm is the 2004 activity at Yellowstone National Park.

Sometimes a series of earthquakes happen in a sort of earthquake storm, where the earthquakes strike a fault in clusters, each triggered by the shaking or stress redistribution of the previous earthquakes. Similar to aftershocks but on adjacent segments of fault, these storms happen over the course of years, and with some of the later earthquakes as damaging as the early ones. Such a pattern happened in the North Anatolian fault in Turkey in the 20th century.

A tsunami is a chain of fast moving waves in the ocean caused by powerful earthquakes. They are very serious challenges for people's safety and for earthquake engineering. Those waves can flood coastal areas, destroy houses and even swipe away whole towns. This is a danger for the whole mankind.

Unfortunately, tsunamis cannot be prevented. However, there are warning systems which may warn the population before the big waves reach the land to let them enough time to rush to safety.

Earthquake-proof buildings are constructed to withstand the destructive force of an earthquake. This depends upon its type of construction, shape, mass distribution, and . Different combinations are used. Square, rectangular, and shell-shaped buildings can withstand earthquakes better than skyscrapers. To reduce stress, a building's ground floor can be supported by extremely rigid, empty columns, while the rest of the building is supported by flexible columns inside the empty columns. Another method is to use rollers or rubber pads to separate the base columns from the ground, allowing the columns to shake parallel to each other during an earthquake.

To help prevent a roof from collapsing, builders make the roof out of light-weight materials. Outdoor walls are made with stronger and more reinforced materials such as steel or reinforced concrete. During an earthquake, flexible windows may help hold the windows together so they don't break.

The army is the part of a country's military that fights on the ground. People in the army are called soldiers. Many modern armies have vehicles such as tanks, airplanes, and helicopters to help soldiers fight on the ground.

A soldier may be a volunteer and so choose to serve, or he may be forced by the government to join the army. by conscription, also called the "draft.". Voluntary armies tend to be small by numbers but high in confidence and quality. Drafted armies are large but often lack confidence and quality since it may be very difficult to force someone to risk his life against his will. Sometimes, an army is made up from mercenaries, who fight for pay and have little loyalty to the country that they serve.

Soldiers do many things from shooting enemies to digging defensive trenches. They defend their country or attack another country's army. That is difficult, and soldiers must be in good shapeboth physically and mentally. They almost always move together, which allows the team to do more things more safely. They may be assigned to certain places to guard, or they may be told to search a place, or even attack it. That is up to their commander. Every soldier answers to someone else and so everything is organized.

Sometimes, when a country's army is busy in different places, and there are not enough soldiers to do more, a country hires civilians to do some of the army's jobs like protecting buildings and important people and convoys of trucks traveling from one place to another. Usually, the country hire veterans who were members of the military before leaving and working elsewhere.

Working in the army and wearing the uniform is called "service." A soldier will never say "I work as a sergeant in the signal corps" but always "I serve as a sergeant in the signal corps" or other rank, specialty. and unit. Only civilian workers who do not wear uniform speak about "working" in the army.

Despite the growing importance of military technology, military activity depends above all on people. For example, the British Army declared in 2000, "Man is still the first weapon of war."

The function of the army is based on discipline. That means that soldiers unquestionably carry out the orders that they have received and obey their superior officer or non-commissioned officer. There is only one exception: orders that violate the human rights or international law must not be obeyed. as it is considered a war crime. The chain of command is expressed by the military rank system and hierarchy.

A soldier is supplied with weapons, such as guns, knives, and other simple gear for surviving in the battlefield, such as food, water, clothes, and tents. They must keep good care of the items. Some soldiers train to be a doctor for the army or other civilian duties.

Before a soldier joins the army, he must qualify to be in it first. The person is put through tests so that the army will know if the recruit can do it. That is sometimes called "boot camp." He must complete mental and physical tests. Where he is testing affects how hard it difficult the tests are. He will also take tests to determine what job he will do in the military.

For instance, he may work with computers and be a member of the signal corps or be a cook for the soldiers, he may have been a construction worker in civilian life and be a military engineer, he may become a truck driver and serve in logistics, or he may be very good with a rifle and be a sniper in the infantry. There are many jobs that a person can choose to do in the army.

Engineering is the use of science and math to design or make things.  People who do engineering are called engineers.  They learn engineering at a college or university.  Engineers usually design or build things.  Some engineers also use science, mathematics, and other skills to solve problems in technology.  There are different types of engineers that design everything from computers and buildings to watches and websites.  People have been creating and engineering things for thousands of years.  Some  become engineering managers.

Engineering is a big subject. Here are a few of the many types of engineers:

Engineers do not only work with machines.  They also work a lot with other people. Many engineering projects are large and very complicated. Often different kinds of engineers work together and help each other. As an example, computer engineers need help from electrical engineers to build a computer. The computer needs programs written by software engineers. The computer could be used by aerospace engineers to control an airplane. An airplane is a big mechanical system with many parts, so a mechanical engineer and a systems engineer are also needed.

Most (but not all) engineers have had years of training. Much of their training involves learning to work within limited budgetary and material constraints (limits).

In the United States, most engineers go to a college or university to get an engineering degree. Most people go to school for four years to get a bachelor's degree in engineering. A Master's Degree is an advanced degree, usually requiring two more years of study after the Bachelors. A person with a master's degree is eligible to enter a Doctoral program in engineering. A graduate of a Doctoral program is awarded a Doctor of Philosophy degree, which is commonly called a PhD. A PhD in engineering requires three or four years of study after a master's degree, and includes the completion of a long research report called a dissertation. After having gained enough work experience, one can sit for their Professional Engineer's (PE) License, reinforcing their demonstrated proficiency in their specialty.

In the United Kingdom, engineering degrees at universities are either three year BEng (Bachelor of Engineering) or four year MEng (Master of Engineering). In many universities it is common to take only one engineering discipline (e.g. aeronautical or civil engineering) although some universities have a general engineering degree. British universities may also offer Doctoral programs as a doctor of philosophy (PhD) or a doctor of engineering (EngD).  Engineers of all disciplines have common approaches to solving problems including teamwork, communication, and an Iterative  design process.

Engineers can also get additional recognition in the form of becoming Chartered. A chartered engineer is one who has his degree or doctorate has been recognised by a group of professionals such as the IET (Institute of Engineering and Technology), IMechE (Institution of Mechanical Engineers), IChemE (Institution of Chemical Engineers) or ICE (Institution of Civil Engineers). Experience and responsibility enables a further step of recognition by becoming a Fellow of these institutions.

The best way to become an engineer in France is to take the CPGE (Classe Préparatoire pour les Grandes Écoles is the French class for engineer's school) for two years and then study for three years in an "École d'Ingénieur" (Engineer's school).

You can also study in an IUT (Institut universitaire technologique) for two years, and then study three years in an "École d'Ingénieur".

English is a language that started as the language of the Anglo-Saxons, in England. It is in the Germanic language family (the same family as German, Dutch, Swedish and others), but it was influenced a lot by Old French, so many words are similar to words in Romance languages (such as French, Spanish, or Romanian).

English is now the main first-language in America, Canada, Britain, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand. In total there are about 375 million native speakers in the world, the 3rd most of all languages, behind Chinese and Spanish.

However, there are actually more people who speak English as a second language than as their native language. In many countries – like Nigeria, India, Pakistan, and the Philippines – English is used a lot to communicate between people who have different native languages. English is also the main shared language for communicating across the world, such as for science, travel, trade or politics. For this reason about 1.1 billion people speak English as a second language in 2025.

In total, English is the language with the most speakers in the world – about 1.5 billion in 2025.

Germanic tribes (Saxons, Angles, and Jutes) came to Britain from around 449 AD. They made their home in the south and east of the island, pushing out the Celtic Britons who were there before them, or making them speak the English language instead of the old Celtic languages. Some people still speak Celtic languages today, in Wales (Welsh) and elsewhere. Gaelic is the Scottish Celtic language, still spoken by some in the Scottish Highlands and Islands. "Scots" is a dialect of English, taken from the English spoken in Northumbria. Irish Gaelic is spoken by very few people today.

The Germanic dialects of the different tribes became what is now called Old English. The word "English" comes from the name of the Angles: Englas. Old English did not sound or look much like the English spoken today. If English speakers today were to hear or read a passage in Old English, they would understand just a few words.

The closest language to English that is still used today is Frisian, spoken by about 500,000 people living in the Netherlands, Germany and Denmark. It is much like English, and many words are the same. The two languages were even closer before Old English changed to Middle English. Today, speakers of the two languages would not be able to understand each other. Dutch is spoken by over 20 million people, and is more distant from English.  The number of speakers of German is even greater, and even more distant. All these languages belong to the same West Germanic family as English.

Many other people came to England later at different times, speaking different languages, and these languages added more words to make today's English. For example, around 800 AD, many Danish and Norse pirates, also called Vikings, came to the country, established Danelaw. So, English got many Norse loanwords. Their languages were Germanic languages, like Old English, but are a little different. They are called the North Germanic languages.

When William the Conqueror took over England in 1066 AD, he brought his nobles, who spoke Norman, a language closely related to French. English changed a lot because it was mostly being spoken instead of written for about 300 years. All official documents were written in Norman French. English borrowed many words from Norman at that time, and also began to drop the old word endings. English of this time is called Middle English. Geoffrey Chaucer is a well known writer of Middle English. After more sound changes, Middle English became Modern English.

English continued to take new words from other languages, for example mainly from French (around 30% to 40% of its words), but also Chinese, Hindi, Urdu, Japanese, Dutch, Spanish, Portuguese, etc. Because scientists from different countries needed to talk to one another, they chose names for scientific things in the languages they all knew: Greek and Latin. Those words came to English also, for example, photography ("photo-" means "light" and "-graph" means "picture" or "writing", in Greek. A photograph is a picture made using light), or telephone. So, English is made of Old English, Danish, Norse, and French, and has been changed by Latin, Greek, Chinese, Hindi, Japanese, Dutch and Spanish, along with some words from other languages.

English grammar has also changed, becoming simpler. The classic example is the loss of case in grammar. Grammatical case shows the role of a noun, adjective or pronoun in a sentence. In Latin (and other Indo-European languages), this is done by adding suffixes, but English usually does not. The style of English is that meaning is made clear more by context and syntax.

The history of the British Empire has added to the spread of English. English is an important language in many places today. In Australia, Canada, India, Pakistan, South Africa, and the United States, among others (like those in the Commonwealth of Nations), English is the main language. Because the United Kingdom (the country where England is) and the United States have historically been powerful in commerce and government, many people find it helpful to learn English to communicate in science, business, and diplomacy. This is called learning English as an additional language, English as a second language (ESL) or English as a foreign language (EFL).

English literature has many famous stories and plays. William Shakespeare was a famous English writer of poems and plays. His English is Early Modern English, and not quite like what people speak or write today. Early Modern English sounded different, partly because the language was beginning a "great vowel shift". Later, many short stories and novels also used English. The novel as we know it is first seen in 18th century English. Therefore, today, many famous songs and movies (cinema films) use the English language.

Recent developments of the English language include the usage of artificial intelligence (AI), such as ChatGPT by OpenAI, which uses predictive algorithms to write new texts. There is legitimate concern of whether AI is fully capable of writing, proofreading, or editing English language. So in a real sense, the history of English is continuing to develop in the current day.

English grammar started out based on Old English, which is considered to be a Germanic language. After the Norman French conquered England in 1066, parts of the Latin language were brought to the English language by the Norman French.

There are different types of nouns in English, like proper nouns and common noun. To show if a noun is plural, which means there is more than one of the noun, usually "-s" is added at the end of a word.

Pronouns are words that take the place of a noun to avoid repetition. There are different types of pronouns in the English language. The most important ones are:

Verbs in English show the action or the state of a sentence. Verbs can come in different shapes in a sentence based on the time or condition we are talking about. For example, the verb "eat" changes to "ate" in past.

Adjectives are words that describe a noun. In English they always come before a noun to give you more information about that noun. You can see this in the sentence "the red apples are juicy."

Written English uses a range of historical spelling patterns that changed over time due to political and cultural changes. As a result, different words can use the same letters and combinations for very different sounds. For example, "-ough" was once a guttural but has become different in "through" (threw), "rough" (ruff), "dough" (doe) or "cough" (coff).

Many English-speaking countries spell words differently. Some words that are spelled one way in the United Kingdom and many other countries in the British Commonwealth are spelled differently in the United States.

Nearly 60% of the vocabulary in the English language comes from Latin and its descendants, mainly French:

However, the most common words are more often those of Germanic origin. Also, expressions and typical short phrases are often of Germanic origin.

Democracy means rule by the people. There are different ways this can be done:

The type of government where only one person has most of the power is called a dictatorship. Democracy is the opposite of a dictatorship. Dictatorships often act against freedom of expression so people cannot say bad things about the dictator or replace them for somebody else.

An important source of information is the Democracy Index published by the Economist periodical.

In an election, the people use different ways to choose their leaders. In many countries, the person who gets the most votes wins. But there are many other ways to elect leaders. Very often, the politicians being elected belong to a political party. Instead of choosing a person, people vote for a party. The party with the most votes then picks the leaders. There are multiple ways the party chooses the leader.

Usually, the people being elected need to meet certain conditions: They need to have a certain age or have certain things be able to perform the job.

Not everyone can vote in an election. Suffrage is only given to people who are citizens. Young people are usually excluded, and some other people such as prisoners.

For some elections, a country may make voting compulsory. Someone who does not vote and who does not give a good reason usually has to pay a fine.

In a direct democracy, every adult has the right to vote on individual laws. A modern example of direct democracy is a referendum, which is the name for deciding a law where everyone in the community votes on it. Direct democracies are not usually used to run countries. It is not practical to have everyone voting on everything.

In an indirect, or representative democracy, people choose representatives to make laws for them. These people can be mayors, councilmen, members of Parliament, or other government officials. This is the usual kind of democracy. Large communities like cities and countries use this method, but it may not be needed for a small group.

A term for democracies which are not actually democracies. For example, a constitution of a country may be democratic, but ways are found to interfere with elections. The classic case is Russia, where other candidates that are not in power are not allowed to state their case on any of the state-controlled media. Elections for President are fixed, but the state can claim democratic legitimacy, because in principle other candidates may stand for election. Opposition candidates have no access to the media, and may be harassed in various ways. This is the way all the former parts of the Soviet Union are governed. This does not mean the governments are always bad governments. It does mean that holding "fixed" elections deprives the people of a fair vote. Not surprisingly, these countries have Presidents who are never beaten in an election. They may serve for eight years or longer before retiring. The next leaders are pre-chosen by discussion between the leading families. The elections are often rigged and unfair. The people in power likely stay in power.

The European Parliament says Russia functions as a unitary state despite officially being a federation.

Democracy was developed long ago by the Greeks in classical Athens.  There, everyone who was a citizen (not slaves, women, foreigners, and children) got together in one area.  The assembly would talk about what kinds of laws they wanted and voted on them. The council would suggest the laws. All citizens were allowed in the assembly.

The council were picked by draws (lottery). The participants in the council would change every year, and the number of people in the council was at the most 500. For some offices, the Athenian citizens would pick a leader by writing the name of their favorite candidate on a piece of stone or wood. The person with the most votes became the leader.

In the Middle Ages, there were many systems, although only a few people could join in at this time. The Parliament of England began with Magna Carta, a document which said that the King's power was limited, and protected certain rights of the people. The first elected parliament was De Montfort's Parliament in England in 1265.

However, only a few people could actually join in. Parliament was chosen by only a few percent of the people (in 1780, fewer than 3% of people joined in). The ruler also had the power to call parliaments. After a long time, the power of Parliament began to grow. After the Glorious Revolution in 1688, the English Bill of Rights 1689 made Parliament more powerful. Later, the king or queen became a symbol instead of having real power.

Democratic consolidation means how a new democracy grows up. Once mature, it is unlikely to go back to being a dictatorship without a shock from the outside.

Unconsolidated democracies suffer from elections which are not free and fair. In other words, powerful groups are able to prevent the system working fairly. Some countries are democracies, but then become less so because of the people in power who change the rules to stay in power. This is often gradual.

Christmas (which means “The Mass of Christ”) is a Christian holiday that celebrates the birth of Jesus Christ, who Christians believe is the Son of God. Christmas is also a cultural holiday for many non-Christians all over the world. It is usually celebrated in the month of December, with the main day being Christmas Day on 25 December.

Christmas Day is celebrated on 25 December.  It is an important day, mainly for Christians, along with Easter (which celebrates the death and resurrection of Jesus). The season of Advent begins on a Sunday about four weeks before Christmas.  During Advent, people prepare for Christmas. The Christmas season (called Christmastide) ends 6 January, also called the Twelfth Day of Christmas. On this day, Christians celebrate ‘’Epiphany‘’. Many Christians also attend Church on Christmas Day.

Christmas celebrates the birth of Jesus. There are four different Gospels in the Bible which talk about Jesus’ birth. The Gospel of Luke gives details about Jesus’ birth. The Gospel of Matthew tells another part of the story.  The Gospel of John says that Jesus came from God to bring his “Word” (his message) to all people.  Christians believe these Gospels are based on fact.

The Gospels say that many years before Jesus’ birth, prophets had told a promise to the Jewish people that God would send them a Messiah, or holy teacher. Christians believe that the promised Messiah was Jesus. His mother was a young woman called Mary, who was engaged, but not yet married to a carpenter called Joseph. Joseph found out that Mary was pregnant and was upset. He was wondering what he should do, when an angel came from God to tell him that the baby was the Holy One. The angel said that he must ‘’name the baby’’. This was a sign that he would take care of it like his own child.

At this time, the Middle East was ruled by the Romans. An order came that all the people had to travel back to their home town, to put their names on the taxation lists. Joseph took his new wife to Bethlehem. There was nowhere for them to stay, except a stable where the animals slept. This is where the baby was born. Joseph called him Jesus, as the angel had said.

The baby Jesus had two lots of visitors. On the night he was born, angels told some shepherds in the fields that they would find a newborn king lying in an animals’ feed trough (or ‘’manger’’). Jesus’ other visitors were some wise men who saw a new star in the sky and followed it, until they found the house where the family was now living and gave the young child expensive gifts of gold, incense and a precious herb called myrrh. (The wise men are often traditionally called the Three Kings, because there were three very expensive presents but the Bible does not say how many wise men there were.)

All these parts of the Christmas story are remembered and celebrated in different ways at Christmas: in pictures, songs, plays, stories and in models that are called “cribs”, “creches” or “presepe”.

Most Christian countries of the world use a calendar called the Gregorian Calendar, but some churches use a calendar called the Julian Calendar. Most Christians, such as those of the Catholic and Protestant Churches, celebrate the birth of Jesus on 25 December, although holidays begin on 24 December also known as Christmas Eve.

The Eastern Orthodox Church still uses the Julian Calendar in some regions such as Russia. In such regions, Christmas is celebrated on 25 December in the Julian Calendar, but because of the difference between the calendars it is 7 January in the modern Gregorian Calendar. In 2023 Ukraine celebrated Christmas on 25 December for the first time since 1917.

Some Christians, like Jehovah's Witnesses, do not celebrate Christmas because there is no instruction from Jesus in the Bible which tells Christians to celebrate his birth. Mormons celebrate Christmas on 25 December but they believe that Christ’s actual birth took place on 6 April.

Some believe that Jesus was probably not born on 25 December. Historians say this date was used by the Catholic Church to replace the pagan rites that took place at that time of the year.

The Season of Advent, which begins on Sunday about four weeks before Christmas Day, is celebrated by the Catholic and Anglican Churches, as well as others. It is a time for people to prepare themselves for two different things: for the coming of the baby Jesus and Christmas, and for the second coming of Jesus, when he shall rule over all the Earth in peace. Not all Christian people remember Advent. Some people use it as a time of fasting, study, meditation and prayer. Special Advent calendars are made for children, with pictures or treats for each day of Advent.

Generally, Advent is a time when many people are very busy in preparation for Christmas Day, cleaning and decorating, buying food and presents, writing cards and letters, and cooking the Christmas feast.

Before the 4th century AD, Christians could only worship and celebrate in secret. The feast of Christmas probably began while Constantine was the Emperor of Rome, because it was he who made Christianity a legal religion and built some of Rome’s oldest churches. Some old stone coffins or ‘’sarcophagi’’ from this time are carved with pictures of Mary and baby Jesus and the Wise Men.

Through the Middle Ages Christmas was celebrated with feasting, singing and plays. The plays were held in churches, and also in castles and in market places, where a big hay wagon was sometimes used as a stage.

Because Advent was a time of prayer and preparation, most parties were held after Christmas, rather than before it. The main pre-Christmas celebration was the Feast of St. Nicholas on 6 December. In some countries, particularly the Netherlands, the tradition grew for children to receive presents on this day, rather than Christmas Day. The name of Saint Nicholas is now remembered in many countries as Santa Claus.

Another festivity that takes place is the Feast of Saint Lucy (St. Lucia Day) on 13 December which is particularly celebrated in Scandinavia, where girls take part in candlelit processions, and the daughters of the house must rise early to bring coffee or chocolate to the family.

For many centuries, the celebration of Christmas often began with a church service or mass, which lasted from late at night to after midnight on Christmas morning. Christmas Day was a time of feasting. On the following day, the Feast of Saint Stephen people from rich households would carry boxes of food out to the street for the poor and hungry. Many people would go back to work but employers would give gifts of money to their workers.

The Holy Days continued with the feast of Saint John and Holy Innocents' Day. The feasting and parties ended on the Feast of the Epiphany, the day of the Three Wise Men, often called the “Three Kings”. The season is nowadays remembered by the song “The Twelve Days of Christmas”. William Shakespeare wrote a play to be performed as part of the celebration, called “Twelfth Night“.

Many Christians celebrate Christmas by attending church, and with prayers and singing. And each year there are Bible readings from the Gospels that tell the story of the birth of Jesus.

The celebration of Christmas is a very important time for churches. Almost every church has special services or celebrations. Here are some of the ways that churches celebrate Christmas.

It is the custom in many churches to set up a Crib (or ‘’Creche’’) scene of the ‘’Nativity’’ or birth of Jesus. The first scene of this type was set up by St. Francis of Assisi in the 13th century. They have been very popular in Italy ever since then, and the custom has spread to other countries.

Nativity scenes can be large with life-sized statues, or they can be tiny enough to fit in a matchbox. They are made of many different things including carved and painted wood, brightly coloured ceramics (pottery), painted paper glued to boards, and mixtures of material with clay, wood, cloth, straw and metal used for different parts.

The Advent wreath is a circle of leaves, usually pine boughs, ivy and holly, with 4 (or sometimes 5) candles in it which is hung up in a church. The candles are lit on each Sunday in Advent, and the central candle is lit on Christmas morning. Churches are often decked with green branches and leaves, and many churches also have a Christmas tree.

A popular tradition in many churches is the Carol Service which is often lit only by candles. The carol service generally has lots of singing and Bible readings. There is a tradition in England which began in the Temple Church in London and has now spread to many other places for a service of Nine Lessons and Carols. The lessons are Bible readings. Some carols are sung by a choir and others by the choir and people (the congregation). Every year one of these services is recorded in a large English Church, often King's College Chapel, Cambridge, and is broadcast on radio and television to be enjoyed by people who love good music and carol singing, but particularly for people who cannot go to a Christmas service.

For many, Christmas has become a time when having parties, sending messages to family and friends and giving presents has become more important than the celebration of Jesus’ birth. Manufacturers and stores have responded to the feasting and present-giving with lots of advertising, decorations and displays. In the US, the Christmas displays are put up right after Thanksgiving, late in November. In some countries such as Australia, stores put up decorations at the beginning of November. Given that Jesus himself called people making money in the Jewish Temple ‘robbers’ (Matthew 21:13) many Christians are uneasy about profit instead of prophets at Christmas.

People celebrate Christmas in many places around the world. Some people celebrate Christmas as a religious holiday. In some places, Christmas is a time of celebration for Christians and non-Christians alike. Christmas traditions are different in different countries. However, they almost always include a feast; giving gifts or cards; and enjoying church or public festivities, like singing Christmas carols and songs. Christmas is not limited to Christianity. The idea of Santa Claus is based on Saint Nicholas, a 4th-century Christian saint of Greek origin.

In the Northern Hemisphere, Christmastide happens during the winter. Before Christmas was ever celebrated, ancient peoples celebrated winter festivals. Some traditions from these ancient festivals became Christmas traditions.  For example, some Christmas traditions come from the pagan holiday of Yule. Today, Christmas traditions often focus on gift-giving. About a month before Christmas Day, retail stores start selling gifts, food, greeting cards, Christmas trees, Sugar cookies, Candy canes, and decorations.

Town councils celebrate by decorating streets and squares, and providing Christmas entertainment for shoppers. In countries of the Southern Hemisphere, where Christmas falls in Summer, there is a tradition of open-air Carol Services, often organised by the town council, which are attended by thousands of people.

Many cities and towns celebrate Christmas by putting up decorations. These may be banners and bunting which are strung from buildings or lampposts. They may be Christmas lights which can also decorate buildings and street trees. Many large cities put up a huge Christmas tree in a public place, such as those in Trafalgar Square in London, Times Square in New York and Martin Place in Sydney. This is often combined with an appeal to the people of the city to give money or gifts to help the poor and needy.

In many cities, the usual shopping hours are made longer before Christmas so that workers have more time to buy Christmas food and presents. Shop windows are often decorated with Christmas scenes, with large department stores often having animated scenes to entertain children. Shopping malls and big stores often have a Santa Claus, who sits on a throne, while children tell him what they want for Christmas, and have their photos taken.

Many towns hold Christmas parades, street entertainment and concerts. Some towns have a tradition of carols with a choir and entertainers in the town hall, while in Australia and New Zealand, these concerts of Christmas entertainment and carols are usually held outdoors, in parks or even on beaches, with families bringing picnics. The arrival of Santa Claus at the end of the evening is accompanied by a firework display.

A traditional part of Christmas is the theatre entertainment. This includes the performance of classical music such as Handel’s Messiah as well as orchestral concerts and band recitals. Pantomimes are often played at Christmas and favourites include “Peter Pan and Wendy“ and “Cinderella“. Many children’s movies are released during the Christmas season.

Because many people feel very lonely, hungry and sad at Christmas, many cities, churches, charities and service organisations try to help the poor and lonely by providing Christmas food and gifts for poor families, and Christmas parties for people who are hungry or who are lonely and without any friends or family.

Family celebrations are often very different from each other, depending on where a family comes from, and the customs that have grown in particular families.

Most families think of Christmas as a time to get together with other members of the family. People often travel from far away to be with other family members at Christmas. Those people who cannot travel often make long-distance phone calls on Christmas Day. Many people also see Christmas as a time to reach out to others that they know might be lonely, and invite them to dinner on Christmas Day. Christmas is seen as a time for people of all ages to have fun together, for cousins to get to know each other, for grandparents to see their grandchildren and for the family to admire the babies that have been born during the year. Big family parties are usually a time of joy, but some families often talk about their disagreements and have big fights at Christmas time.

Family traditions are very different. Some families might all go off to church together, to a Carol Service, a Midnight Mass, or a Christmas Morning service. Some families are pulled out of bed very early by children who want to open their presents. In other families, presents are given on St. Nicholas Day, on Christmas Eve or not until after church on Christmas morning. The Christmas feast might start on Christmas Eve, with a special breakfast on Christmas morning, or at midday on Christmas Day.

Some families have a tradition of carol singing, and might go around the streets, to hospitals and other such places singing with members of their church. Other families like to watch certain television programs together, which might include carol services and the Queen’s Message. Some families use Christmas as a time to play music and sing together, or to read a favourite book such as “A Christmas Carol” by Charles Dickens. In countries in the Southern Hemisphere, a visit to the beach or a swim in a pool is often part of the Christmas Day tradition.

Christmas Dinner, usually eaten in the middle of the day, is an important part of the family celebration. The food differs from country to country and also from family to family. In the Northern Hemisphere, roasted meat and vegetables are generally the main courses of the meal. Usually one of several types of meat are served, which may include turkey, Chicken, ham, roast beef, or lamb. There are often several courses, with special treats that are usually only eaten at Christmas.

In English-speaking countries, the traditional dessert is Christmas plum pudding. Nowadays these puddings are often bought from bakers, but many people make their own to a family recipe. The tradition came from the Middle Ages when the pudding was used to preserve some of the fruit from autumn until the mid-winter. A traditional pudding is baked six weeks before Christmas and is left tied up in a cloth or basin with a cloth covering, in a cool place. Stirring the pudding is sometimes a family tradition, with everyone making a wish as they stir. Traditionally a silver coin would be stirred into the pudding, to bring luck to the person who found it. Nowadays most coins cannot be used because they are not made of silver so taste horrible and may be poisonous. Some families use old coins or silver charms. On Christmas Day the pudding must be boiled in a pot for several hours. When it is served, the cloth is cut off, brandy is poured onto the pudding, and it is set on fire before it is carried to the table. Christmas crackers are  used to decorate and are often opened prior to serving the dish or starter course. It is usually served with hard sauce.

Many families have a Christmas cake or a special bread instead of a pudding (or as well as a pudding). These are very different depending on the country, but often have marzipan which is made from almonds and is traditional in many countries at Christmas. In France ‘’Buche de Noäl’’ or gingerbread men and women are decorated and hung on the Christmas tree. In Scotland a pastry biscuit called shortbread is made and has become a popular tradition in many countries. A German tradition is ‘’pfeffernuss’’, spiced cookies rolled in powdered sugar. Other Christmas food includes fruit cakes, sultanas, ginger and sweets such as  baklava, almonds, chocolates, caramel toffee, candy canes and cookies.

Many families also prepare mulled wine which is warmed with cinnamon and nutmeg or egg nogs, a sweet drink made of milk, sugar, eggs, nutmeg and sometimes alcohol.

In the Southern Hemisphere, the traditional roast dinner is often replaced with cold cuts of meat, and served with salads. The first course might be prawn cocktail or a cold soup like borsch. The plum pudding might be served with ice cream. White wine and beer are both served cold (beer is kept in a refrigerator). Christmas dinner may be served on the veranda, or sometimes as a picnic.

In most homes when Christmas is celebrated, people set up a Christmas tree in the house. This old Yuletide custom began in Germany as the “Tannenbaum” (German for ‘’Fir Tree’’). These are traditionally evergreens, the best type being the Fir Tree which does not shed its needles or lose its fragrance. The tree may be a cut tree that is bought from a plantation or taken from the forest. Artificial trees are sometimes preferred to real trees. The Christmas tree is decorated with lights, shiny coloured balls, sparkly tinsel and other ornaments. A wreath of leaves or pine is often put on the front door of a house as a sign of welcome. Other plants that have special significance at Christmas are holly which is used as decoration and mistletoe which is hung in the centre of a room. The tradition is that people who meet under the mistletoe must kiss.

Many people decorate their homes at Christmas time. These decorations and the Christmas tree are generally inside, but may be put where they can also be seen through a window by people passing by. In the mid 20th century there grew up a custom for decorating the outside of houses as well. These decorations may be just a few lights around the porch, or hundreds of lights and colourful Christmas figures decorating the whole house and garden. Some neighbourhoods hold competitions for the best-decorated house, and driving around the streets to look at them has become another family tradition.

The giving of gifts at Christmas comes from several different ideas. One is that God gave his son, Jesus, to the world at Christmas. There is also the story of the Wise Men who came to the baby Jesus with three gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh. For many centuries it has been the custom for people to give small gifts at Christmas, and also to give generously to the poor and needy to help them through the winter. Another tradition has become linked to this one, and the result is the tradition of Santa Claus, or Father Christmas as he is sometimes called, and who is nowadays thought by many children to be the bringer of presents and happiness.

In the 4th century, in a Greek village that is now part of Turkey, there was a good man who would secretly given presents to the poor to help them. He became a bishop and is called Saint Nicholas. Over the centuries, he became a very popular saint and lots of churches were named after him. He was very popular in places where there were lots of sailors. One of those places was the Netherlands. In the Netherlands and many other European countries, presents are given on the feast of Saint Nicholas, 6 December. Traditionally, the presents are not big, and are sometimes hidden, or have a funny joke or poem that must be read. In many towns of Europe a man dressed in bishop’s robes comes on a horse or in a boat, acting as St. Nicholas. His name was often shortened to Sante Claus, or Santa Claus in English.

In English speaking countries, where presents are usually given on Christmas Day, not 6 December, Santa Claus, (or Father Christmas) is usually thought of as coming on Christmas Night, when his magic sleigh is pulled across the sky by reindeer, and he comes into houses through the chimney. While in Europe, children put out their shoes for St. Nicholas, the English tradition is to hang up stockings (or long socks) in front of the fireplace. Santa Claus would traditionally fill the socks or shoes with nuts, raisins, chocolates and an orange. Nowadays children usually get much more expensive presents, and hang up pillow cases or have the presents in a big pile under the Christmas tree.

Another Christmas tradition is the sending of cards to friends and relatives. These contain warm greetings and may also have a letter telling all the things that have happened to the person or family during the year.

In December, many Christmas movies are shown on television. Some of the most popular Christmas films are: Home Alone, The Grinch, Scrooge, The Polar Express, A Christmas Carol, Elf and The Nightmare Before Christmas.

In addition to movies, many Christmas songs are played on radios throughout Winter. Some of the most popular songs are: All I Want for Christmas Is You, Last Christmas,Santa Baby and Feliz Navidad, and White Christmas.

Weather is the day-to-day or hour-to-hour change in the atmosphere. Weather includes wind, lightning, storms, hurricanes, tornadoes, rain, hail, snow, and lots more. Energy from the Sun affects the weather too.

Climate tells us what kinds of weather usually happen in an area at different times of the year.

Changes in weather can affect the mood and life of many living things. People wear different clothes and do different things in different weather conditions. They also choose different  food in different seasons.

Weather stations around the world measure different parts of weather. Ways to measure weather are wind speed, wind direction, temperature and humidity. People try to use these measurements to make weather forecasts for the future.  These people are  scientists that are called meteorologists. They use computers to build large mathematical models to follow weather trends.

Severe weather can hurt people and their property. It can also just be a bother. Some examples of severe weather are:

Weather happens because different parts of the Earth get different amounts of heat from the Sun. This makes different climates. The tropics get the most heat because the Sun shines straight down on them, while the poles get the least heat because the Sun shines on them from a low angle. Warmer air is lighter than cooler air and rises higher in the sky by convection.

The air always has some water mixed with it. This is called humidity. When it cools, the water can change from a gas to a liquid through condensation. Then the water can fall from the sky as rain or snow. After the air rises, it gets colder and goes back towards the ground. Because the air lost its water before, it is dry when it comes back to the ground. When two air masses of different temperatures meet, this is called a warm front or cold front. The ways that the air moves around the Earth are called atmospheric circulation.

A book is a set of printed sheets of paper held together between two covers. The sheets of paper in a book are called pages. The pages have words written in them and maybe illustrations drawn. The first books were not printed, but written by hand in ink.

The book is a more flexible format than the earlier idea of the scroll. The change from scrolls to books began in the Roman Empire and took many centuries to become complete.

A writer of a book is often called an author. Someone who draws the pictures in a book is called an illustrator. Books can have more than one writer or illustrator.

A book can be a text that is a part of a larger collection of texts. A section of a text may be published as a book so that it only has one writer or only focuses on one subject area. Books written in this way can be understood without reading whole collection of writings. Examples are the Iliad, Odyssey, Bible, Quran and Torah. Encyclopedias often have separate articles written by different people, and are published as separate volumes. Each volume is a book.

Hardcover books have hard covers made of cardboard that is covered in cloth or leather and sewn together. Paperback books have covers made of stiff paper that is glued together. A small book is a "booklet" and may be stapled together. The words in books can be read aloud and recorded. These are called "audiobooks".

Books may be borrowed from a library or bought from a bookstore. People can make their own books and write in them, and add family photos and drawings. Some books are empty inside, like a diary, an address book, or photo album. These books are meant to be written in. Usually, the word "book" means that the pages inside have words, and often pictures.

Some books are written just for children, some are for entertainment, and some are textbooks for studying something in school, such as math or history.

It is thought that the earliest Indo-European writings may have been carved on beech wood. The Latin word , means a book in the modern sense (bound and with separate leaves). It originally meant 'block of wood'.

There are two main kinds of book text: fiction and non-fiction.

These books are novels and short stories. They are stories that have not happened. They are often imagined by the writer. Many books are based on real events from history,but the writer creates imaginary characters or  for the events.

Non-fiction fiction are about true facts or things that have really happened. Some examples are dictionaries, cookbooks, textbooks for learning in school, or a biography (someone's life story).

Between the written manuscript and the book are several inventions. While manuscripts are hand-made, books are now industrial products.

A common type of manuscript was the scroll. It is a long sheet that is rolled up. The sheet could have been made of papyrus (made by the Egyptians, by weaving the inner stems of the papyrus plant and then hammering them together), or parchment or vellum (very thin animal skin, first used by the ancient Greeks), or paper (made from plant fibers, invented by the Chinese). Manuscripts of this kind lasted to the 16th century and beyond. Turning the manuscript into a book required several developments.

In Roman Britain we have examples of a message system which was widespread. It was wax on boards, reusable. Waxed boards could be scratched with messages such as (from one woman to another) "Dear, please come to my birthday party, it won't be the same without you". Many examples have been found near Roman encampments on the border with Scotland.

The Romans were the first people to put separate pieces of manuscript between covers, to form a codex. This was more convenient to handle and store than scrolls, but was not yet a book as we understand it.

Scrolls and codices were written and copied by hand. The Chinese invented woodblock printing, where shapes are carved out of a block of wood, then ink is applied to the carved side, and the block is pressed onto paper. This woodcut method was slow because the symbols and pictures were made by cutting away the surrounding wood.

Johannes Gutenberg was the first person to invent a machine for printing, called the printing press. He made it in the 15th century. This involved more than just a press because it involved the production of a movable metal type that was suitable for the machine process.

Initially, the machines were slow, and needed a muscle power to work. The Industrial Revolution brought steam power, and later electrification.

Paper had been invented in China in the 8th century, but it was kept secret for a long time. In Europe hand-made paper was available from about 1450. It was cheaper than parchment but still expensive, and the early printing was a slow process. Therefore, books remained rare. In 1800 the first machines for making paper from wood pulp were invented. New kinds of inks were also invented for various purposes, and machines were driven by steam engines and later by electricity.

The common cheap supply of paper fed the faster printing machines, and books became cheaper. At the same time, in America, Britain and continental Europe, more people learnt to read. So, in the 19th century, many ordinary people could afford to buy books and could actually read them. Also in the 19th century came public libraries, so poorer people could get access to the best books.

Printing was done on large sheets of paper, which were then folded, guillotined (cut) and sewn into the covers. Bookbinding and all the other processes have been done by machines since the 19th century.

Today, some of the technologies have been changed, especially those involving illustration and typography. However, books look much the same as they did, with more illustration in color, but basically the same. That is because experience has shown that readers need certain things for pleasurable reading. Graphic design and typography are the practical arts used to make books attractive and useful to readers.

An election is a way people can choose their candidate or their preferences in a representative democracy or other form of government.

Most democratic countries hold elections for their national legislature every few years. The elections select representatives for the local areas. These are called Members of Parliament in the British parliamentary system. Parliamentary systems may have a head of government and a head of state, but sometimes the two posts are held by the same person. They may be directly elected or elected by  national legislature.

The legislature chooses the government, usually by majority vote in the legislature. Some democracies elect a president, who then selects the government. Most democratic countries also have regional, provincial or state elections and local elections.

There are different ways to organize an election. Voters might vote for an individual, or they might vote for a political party. This is because different countries use different voting systems.

As a foundation of democracy, voting in elections happens in most countries around the world. Whilst the process of electing an individual as a representative in a government can be simple, many election candidates spend large amounts of money on their campaigns.  Higher household incomes, inflation and population growth have contributed to this trend of higher election spend.

Every country around the world has different rules and regulations for voting in elections. The biggest differences amongst most major countries is the age in which an individual may vote and whether voting in an election is compulsory or not.  People who are not citizens may not be allowed to vote.  Argentina, Brazil and Austria are among the few countries where the legal voting age is 16.

Countries that are not democracies can also hold elections. This is usually done to let the people choose a local representative (like a mayor). Also many countries call themselves democracies, but behind the scenes have a more autocratic form of government.

Vatican City is a theocracy: The pope (and a few high-ranking clerics) run the state. When the pope dies, or steps down, the cardinals select a new pope, through an election. When they are done, they will announce the result in a speech, called Habemus Papam (Latin: We have a pope)

Elections keep a democratic country functioning, as they give people the right to select their own government. However, there are ways a government can "fix" elections. Opposition candidates are permitted in former USSR countries, but they may be prevented from using broadcasting, social media, or the newspapers. This means that the ruling president is not challenged. Elections which are fixed are sometimes called sham elections or show elections.

Countries where the candidates are elected with a very high approval rating usually use elections to hide a more autocratic form of government. When Saddam Hussein was elected president of Iraq in 1995, he got 99.96% approval. There were about 8.4 million valid votes,  3,052 people voted against him.   99.47% of all people allowed to vote did so (this is called voting turnout).  Another example: Kim Jong-un was elected the leader of North Korea, in 2014, with 100% of the vote.

Poetry is written, spoken or sung language that is used in stronger or more original ways than prose is used. Poetry uses the meanings of words as prose does; but it also uses the sounds of words as if they were music, especially rhymes, other repeating sounds, and rhythms (beats or meters).

Poetry arranges words and groups of words to make repetitions and parallelisms. Poetry uses figures of speech, ellipses and delayed identification to suggest that there is more meaning in the language.

Some people believe that poetry began when language began. They think it is probably "as old as history and older, present wherever religion is present."

The English words "poetry," "poet," and "poem" first appeared in English in the 14th century. They come from the Latin word poeta, which itself probably comes from poiein, a Greek word that means "to make."

There are three major kinds of poetry: lyric, narrative, and dramatic.

A poem can be as short as a few words or as long as a book. A one-line poem is called a monostich. A poem that is as long as a book is an epic.

Poems are often printed on the page as lines and groups of lines called stanzas.

There are many different "poetic forms" or ways to shape a poem on the printed page or in the ear of the person who hears it. Some forms are: the sonnet, haiku, the ballad, the stev, the prose poem, the ode, free verse, blank verse, limerick, and nursery rhymes.

A mountain is a large natural rise of the Earth's surface that usually has a "summit" (the name for a mountain's top, which can also be called a peak). It is usually steeper and taller than a hill. By definition, mountains are often thought of as being a landform which is higher than .

The forming of a mountain is called orogeny. Mountains are formed when rock layers in the ground are pushed from opposite sides, and by being pushed, they push the crust up.  A mountain range is a large group of mountains beside each other. There are three main ways a mountain may be made:

Fold mountains occur when two plates collide. The less dense continental crust "floats" on the denser mantle rocks beneath. The continental crust is normally much thicker under mountains, compared to lower lying areas. Rock can fold either symmetrically or asymmetrically. The upfolds are anticlines and the downfolds are synclines. The Jura Mountains are an example of fold mountains.

Folded mountains make up some of the highest mountains in the world. Folded mountains commonly form along boundaries, where 2 continents meet. Some really complex folds are in parts of the Andes, Alps, Himalayas, Appalachians, and Russia's Ural Mountains. These long mountain chains also show lots of signs of folding.

Block mountains are caused by faults in the crust: a seam where rocks can move past each other. When rocks on one side of a fault rise relative to the other, it can form a mountain. The uplifted blocks are block mountains or horsts. The dropped blocks are called graben. They can form extensive rift valley systems. This form of landscape can be seen in East Africa, the Vosges, the Basin and Range province of Western North America and the Rhine valley. These areas often occur when the regional stress is extensional and the crust is thinned.

Examples of volcanoes include Mount Fuji in Japan and Mount Pinatubo in the Philippines. The magma does not have to reach the surface in order to create a mountain: magma that solidifies below ground can still form dome mountains, such as Navajo Mountain in the states of Utah and Arizona, in the United States.

Volcanic mountains form when molten rock erupts onto the Earth's surface. They can either form on land or in the ocean. The Cascade Range in Washington, Oregon and northern California is made of volcanoes. Some of the largest volcanoes are on divergent boundaries, which form the mid-ocean ridges. The mid-ocean ridges have big volcanic mountain chains that run through the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans. The mountains in the mid-ocean ridges can grow tall enough to create islands such as Iceland or the Azores.

Other volcanic mountains form over hot spots, pockets of magma beneath the crust which erupt onto Earth's surface. The Hawaiian Islands are the tops of really high volcanic islands that have formed over a hot spot on the sea floor. The main Hawaiian island is a volcano about  above the ocean floor. Its base is about  wide. Almost  of this island is above sea level.

Dome mountains, like those in the Black Hills of South Dakota and the Adirondack Mountains of New York, are an unusual domish type of mountain that is formed when molten rock rises through the crust and push up the rock layers above it. This creates a circular dome on the Earth's surface. The molten rock later cools off and forms hardened rock. When the pushed up rocks are worn away, the hardened rock is shown. This hardened rock then wears away in places. When it wears away, it leaves mountains, and they are called dome mountains.

Plateau mountains are formed a bit like folded mountains. They are large areas of flat topped rocks that have been lifted high above the crust by continental plates. Most plateaus are near folded mountains.

The height of a mountain is measured as distance above sea level.

The highest known mountain in the Solar System is Olympus Mons (27 km high) on Mars. The highest mountain on Earth is Mount Everest (8,848m) which is in Nepal and Tibet, in Asia.

The "tallest" mountain in the world is Mauna Loa, in Hawaii.  The "height" of a mountain is measured from sea level, but the "tallness" of a mountain is measured from its base, even if under water.  The highest mountain in North America is Mount McKinley (6,194m) in Alaska in the USA. The highest in South America is Aconcagua (6,962m) in Argentina. For Africa, it is Kilimanjaro (5,963m) of Tanzania. In Europe, the highest mountain is in Russia called Elbrus (5,633m). Antarctica's highest mountain is Vinsin Massiff (5,140m). In Oceania, a mountain called Puncak Jaya (5,030m) is the highest there. This particular mountain is in Papua New Guinea / Indonesia.

Rain is a kind of precipitation. Precipitation is any kind of water that falls from clouds in the sky, like rain, hail, sleet and snow. It is measured by a rain gauge.

Rain is part of the water cycle. Clouds will often absorb smoke to create rain, commonly referred to as "nature's laundry" due to this process. Some places have frequent rain. This makes rainforests. Some have little rain. This makes deserts.

A rainstorm is a sudden heavy fall of rain. It may cause flash floods in valleys. Heavy rain for a long time may make floods that destroy houses and cause drowning. Also, landslides may happen.

When the Sun heats the Earth's surface, the ground heats the air above it. Convection makes the air rise and  cool. When it cools to the dew point, clouds form and rain follows. This usually occurs on flat land. This type of rainfall often causes summer showers and thunderstorms.

Relief rain typically occurs along coastal areas where a line of hills runs along the coast. Wet onshore wind from the sea meets a mountain, hill or any other sort of barrier, it is forced to rise along the slope and cools. When the air temperature falls to its dew point, water vapour condenses to form clouds. When the clouds can no longer hold the water droplets, relief rain begins to fall on the windward slope of the mountain.  On the leeward slope, air sinks, it is warmed and further dried by compression. Therefore, the leeward slope is known as rain shadow. Moist winds blow in from the sea and are forced to rise over the land. The air cools and the water vapour condenses, forming raindrops. Places that reactive a lot of rain in the world are places that have relief rainfall.

Frontal rain, also known as cyclonic rain, happens when cooler air and warmer, humid air meet in a weather front.  The less dense warm air rises and condenses forming clouds. These clouds grow and eventually create rain. In some places on the northern temperate zone the cold air front tends to come from the north west and the warm air front comes from the south west.

Rain is often collected in a rainwater tank, which is used for watering plants, cleaning the house, bathing, or drinking. It is not always safe to drink rainwater. It can have bacteria, parasites, viruses, and chemicals that could make people sick.

Snow is a form of ice. Snow forms when water in the atmosphere becomes frozen. It comprises individual ice crystals that grow while suspended in the atmosphere—usually within clouds—and then fall, accumulating on the ground where they undergo further changes. Snow comes in all different shapes and sizes.

At the freezing point of water (0° Celsius, 32° Fahrenheit), snow melts and becomes liquid water. Sometimes, the snow will melt very fast and become water vapor. This is called sublimation. The opposite, where water vapor becomes snow, is called deposition.

Snow is used for some winter sport activities like skiing and sledding. Sometimes people make artificial snow so they can ski. People also commonly build things out of snow for fun.

Snow can also be dangerous, as it can lower visibility and make driving very difficult. When it snows, the snow will melt a little during the daytime and freeze again at night. This makes ice which can make driving conditions very treacherous. Snow plows are used to remove snow from roads to make driving easier and safer. Also, sand or salt may be added to the road to help tires grip the road. When salt is mixed with snow, the snow will melt more easily. This is because salt water has a lower melting point than fresh water (water without salt).

A blizzard is a dangerous type of a snowstorm. A blizzard produces strong winds that keep the snow in the air, thus reducing visibility. Sometimes it produce thunder snow, which is snow with lightning and thunder.

A volcano is a mountain that has lava (hot, liquid rock) coming out from a magma chamber under the ground, or did have in the past. Volcanoes are formed by the movement of tectonic plates.

Volcanoes can also form where there is stretching and thinning of the crust's plates, e.g., in the East African Rift. Volcanoes are not typically found where two tectonic plates slide past one another.

Volcanism away from plate boundaries is caused by mantle plumes. These so-called "hotspots", for example Hawaii, are thought to arise from upwelling magma from the core–mantle boundary, 3,000 km deep in the Earth.

Most volcanoes have a volcanic crater at the top. When a volcano is active, materials come out of it. The materials include lava, steam, gaseous sulfur compounds, ash and broken rock pieces.

When there is enough pressure, the volcano erupts. Some volcanic eruptions blow off the top of the volcano. Sometimes, the magma comes out quickly or slowly depending on the eruption. Some eruptions come out at a side instead of the top.

Volcanoes are found on planets other than Earth. An example is Olympus Mons on Mars.

Volcanologists are scientists who study volcanoes using methods from geology, chemistry, geography, mineralogy, physics and sociology.

The world's biggest volcano is named Mauna Loa in Hawaii. Mauna Loa is part of the five volcanoes on Hawaii's 'Big Island'. The most recent time this volcano erupted was in 1984. It erupted 33 times in the last 170 years. Like all the other Hawaiian volcanoes, Mauna Loa was created by the movement of the Pacific tectonic plate which moved over the Hawaii hotspot in the Earth's mantle. Mauna Loa is 4,196 meters tall. It is a shield volcano. The largest recent eruption from Mauna Loa left a lava trail  long.

The lava and pyroclastic material (clouds of ash, lava fragments and vapor) that comes out from volcanoes can make many different kinds of land shapes. There are two basic kinds of volcanoes.

Shield volcanoes are built out of layers of lava from continual eruptions (without explosions). Due to the lava's low viscosity, it spreads out, often over a wide area, forming the shield volcano's characteristic gently sloping sides. The base of the volcano increases over successive eruptions.

Although their sides are typically less steep, shield volcanoes rank among the largest in the world. Mauna Kea, in Hawaii, is the biggest mountain on Earth when measured from its base on the ocean floor.

A stratovolcano, also known as a composite volcano, is a tall, conical volcano. It is built up of many layers of hardened lava, tephra, pumice, and volcanic ash.

Unlike shield volcanoes, stratovolcanoes have a steep profile and periodic eruptions. The lava that flows from stratovolcanoes cools and hardens before spreading far. It is sticky, that is, it has high viscosity. The magma forming this lava is often felsic, with high-to-intermediate levels of silica, and less mafic magma. Big felsic lava flows are uncommon, but have travelled as far as .

Two famous stratovolcanoes are Japan's Mount Fuji, and Vesuvius. Both have big bases and steep sides that get steeper and steeper as it goes near the top. Vesuvius is famous for its destruction of the towns Pompeii and Herculaneum in 79 AD, killing thousands.

A caldera is a basin-like feature formed by collapse of land after a volcanic eruption. This happens after a huge stratovolcano blows its top off. The base of the crater then sinks, leaving a caldera where the top of the volcano was before. Krakatoa, best known for its catastrophic eruption in 1883, is much smaller now.

Volcanoes are made when two tectonic plates come together. When these two plates meet, one of them (usually the oceanic plate) goes under the continental plate. This is the process of subduction. Afterwards, it melts and makes magma (inside the magma chamber), and the pressure builds up until the magma bursts through the Earth's crust.

The second way is when a tectonic plate moves over a hot spot in the Earth's crust. The hot spot works its way through the crust until it breaks through. The caldera of Yellowstone Park was formed in that way; so were the Hawaiian Islands.

A  way to  or  volcanoes is by its pattern of eruptions. Those volcanoes which may erupt again at any time are called active. Those that are now quiet are called dormant (inactive). Those volcanoes which have not erupted in historical times are called extinct.

An active volcano is currently erupting, or it has erupted in the last 10,000 years. An example of an active volcano is Mount St. Helens in the United States (US).

A dormant volcano is "sleeping," but it could awaken in the future. Mount Rainier in the United States is considered dormant.

An extinct volcano has not erupted in the past 10,000 years. Edinburgh Castle in Scotland sits on top of an extinct volcano.

The Earth's largest volcano has been discovered. It is 2 km below the sea on an underwater plateau known as the Shatsky Rise. This is about 1,600 km east of Japan. The previous record-holder, Mauna Loa in Hawaii, is still the largest volcano on land.

The 310,000 km2 (119,000 sq mi) volcano, Tamu Massif, is comparable in size to Mars' vast Olympus Mons volcano, which is the largest known volcano in the Solar System. It was formed about 145 million years ago when massive lava flows erupted from the centre of the volcano to form a broad, shield-like feature. That suggests the volcano produced a flood basalt eruption.

The Tamu Massif extends some 30 km (18 miles) into the Earth's crust. The researchers doubted the submerged volcano's peak ever rose above sea level during its lifetime and say it is unlikely to erupt again.

Modern Standard Hindi (आधुनिक मानक हिन्दी), or simply Hindi (हिन्दी), historically known as Hindavi (हिन्दवी) or Rekhta (रेख़्ता), is an Indo-Aryan language. It is the biggest language in India and one of the official languages. Nearly half the people in India speak Hindi. The Devanāgarī script is used to write Hindi. Previously Hindi was known as Hindui.

Hindi is an official language in ten states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat , Uttarakhand, and six union territories Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Delhi, Chandigarh, Jammu and Kashmir, Ladakh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu, and an additional official language in the state of West Bengal and Maharashtra    Hindi is also one of the 22 scheduled languages of the Republic of India. It is also one of the two official languages of the union government of India  alongside English as per Article 343 of the constitution. It is furthermore an official language in the Pacific nation of Fiji

Modern Standard Hindi and standard Urdu are very similar languages and can be understood by speakers of both, except for differences in script and formal words. Both languages come from the same historical language, Shauraseni Prakrit. Hindi is spoken in different parts of India, sometimes in simpler forms like Bazaar Hindustani or Haflong Hindi.  Caribbean Hindustani is spoken in Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, and Guyana.

Hindi is one of the most widely spoken languages globally. It ranks fourth as a first language, following Mandarin, Spanish, and English. When combined with Urdu, which is mutually intelligible, it becomes the third most-spoken language, trailing only Mandarin and English. According to Ethnologue's 2022 report, Hindi is also the third most-spoken language when counting both first and second language speakers..

Hindi is the fastest-growing language of India, followed by Kashmiri, Meitei, Gujarati and Bengali, according to the 2011 census of India.

The word "Hindi" originally referred to the people living in the Indo-Gangetic Plain. It comes from the Classical Persian term هندی (Hindī), which means "of or belonging to Hind (India)." Over time, it evolved to describe the language spoken by these people.

Another name Hindavī (ہندوی/) () was often used in the past, for example, by Amir Khusrau in his poetry. The terms Hindi and Hindu trace back to Old Persian, which derived these names from the Sanskrit name Sindhu (), referring to the Indus River. The Greek cognates of the same terms are Indus (for the river) and India (for the land of the river).

The term Modern Standard Hindi is commonly used to specifically refer to the modern literary Hindi language, as opposed to colloquial and regional varieties that are also referred to as Hindi in a wider sense.

Hindi, like other Indo-Aryan languages, traces its roots back to early forms of Vedic Sanskrit. Over time, it evolved through Shauraseni Prakrit and Śauraseni Apabhraṃśa, the latter deriving from the Sanskrit word apabhraṃśa, meaning "corrupt" or "deviated from the classical form." This stage of linguistic transformation emerged around the 7th century CE, shaping the Hindi we know today.

The sound changes that characterised the transition from Middle Indo-Aryan to Hindi are:

During the Delhi Sultanate period in medieval India, Old Hindi, which had a Sanskrit and Prakrit base, absorbed many Persian loanwords due to the interaction between Hindu and Muslim cultures. This led to the development of Hindustani, which blends elements from both traditions. Hindi gained importance when Shah Jahan made it the official language of the imperial court. Later, Emperor Aurangzeb is recorded to have spoken Hindvi, an earlier form of Hindi. During the Indian Independence movement, Hindustani became a symbol of national unity, as it was widely spoken across the northern Indian subcontinent. Even today, this influence is seen in Bollywood films and songs, which often feature Hindustani vocabulary, making it a common cultural thread across India and beyond.

Standard Hindi is based on the language that was spoken in the Ganges-Yamuna Doab (Delhi, Meerut and Saharanpur) called Khariboli; the vernacular of Delhi and the surrounding region came to replace earlier prestige languages such as Awadhi and Braj. Standard Hindi was developed by supplanting foreign loanwords from the Hindustani language and replacing them with Sanskrit words, though Standard Hindi does continue to possess several Persian loanwords. Modern Hindi became a literary language in the 19th century. Earliest examples could be found as Prēm Sāgar by Lallu Lal, Batiyāl Pachīsī of Sadal Misra, and Rānī Kētakī Kī Kahānī of Insha Allah Khan which were published in Devanagari script during the early 19th century.

John Gilchrist was principally known for his study of the Hindustani language, which was adopted as the lingua franca of northern India (including what is now present-day Pakistan) by British colonists and indigenous people. He compiled and authored An English-Hindustani Dictionary, A Grammar of the Hindoostanee Language, The Oriental Linguist, and many more. His lexicon of Hindustani was published in the Perso-Arabic script, Nāgarī script, and in Roman transliteration. In the late 19th century, a movement to further develop Hindi as a standardised form of Hindustani separate from Urdu took form. In 1881, Bihar accepted Hindi as its sole official language, replacing Urdu, and thus became the first state of India to adopt Hindi. However, in 2014, Urdu was accorded second official language status in the state.

On 14 September 1949, the Constituent Assembly of India officially adopted Hindi in the Devanagari script as the official language of the Republic of India. Before this, Hindustani in the Perso-Arabic script was used during the British Indian Empire. Many influential figures worked hard to promote Hindi across India, including Beohar Rajendra Simha, Hazari Prasad Dwivedi, Kaka Kalelkar, Maithili Sharan Gupt, and Seth Govind Das. They even debated the issue in Parliament to push for its adoption. Interestingly, the decision was made on Beohar Rajendra Simha's 50th birthday, marking the success of their efforts. Since then, Hindi Day is celebrated on 14 September every year to honor this milestone. It’s a day dedicated to recognizing the importance of the Hindi language and its cultural significance in India.

Hindi is the lingua franca of northern India (which contains the Hindi Belt), as well as an official language of the Government of India, along with English.

In Northeast India a pidgin known as Haflong Hindi has developed as a lingua franca for the people living in Haflong, Assam who speak other languages natively. In Arunachal Pradesh, Hindi emerged as a lingua franca among locals who speak over 50 dialects natively.

Hindi is quite easy to understand for many Pakistanis, who speak Urdu, which, like Hindi, is a standard register of the Hindustani language; additionally, Indian media are widely viewed in Pakistan.

A sizeable population in Afghanistan, especially in Kabul, can also speak and understand Hindi-Urdu due to the popularity and influence of Bollywood films, songs and actors in the region.

Hindi has a significant presence beyond India, especially among **Madheshis** in **Nepal**, who have ancestral roots in North India but migrated over centuries. Additionally, Hindi is widely spoken by the **Indian diaspora**, particularly those from the **Hindi Belt** of India. A large number of North Indians have settled in places like the **United States, the United Kingdom, the United Arab Emirates, Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Suriname, South Africa, Fiji, and Mauritius**. In these countries, Hindi continues to thrive within **Hindustani-speaking communities**, where it is often spoken at home and in cultural gatherings.

Outside India, Hindi speakers are 8 million in Nepal; 863,077 in the United States of America; 450,170 in Mauritius; 380,000 in Fiji; 250,292 in South Africa; 150,000 in Suriname; 100,000 in Uganda; 45,800 in the United Kingdom; 20,000 in New Zealand; 20,000 in Germany; 26,000 in Trinidad and Tobago; 3,000 in Singapore.

An alphabet is a writing system, a list of symbols for writing. The basic symbols in an alphabet are called letters. In an alphabet, each letter is a symbol for a sound or related sounds. To make the alphabet work better, more signs assist the reader: punctuation marks, spaces, standard reading direction, and so on.

The symbols are in a strict ordered list, called alphabetical order. The name alphabet comes from Aleph and Beth, the first two letters in the Phoenician alphabet.

This article is written with the Roman alphabet (or Latin alphabet).  It was first used in Ancient Rome to write Latin.  Many languages use the Latin alphabet: it is the most used alphabet today.

It seems that the idea of an alphabet – a script based entirely upon sound – has been copied and adapted to suit many different languages. Although no alphabet fits its language perfectly, they are flexible enough to fit any language approximately. The alphabet was a unique invention.p12

The Roman alphabet, the Cyrillic, and a few others come from the ancient Greek alphabet, which dates back to about 1100 to 800BC.p167 The Greek alphabet was probably developed from the Phoenician script, which appeared somewhat earlier, and had some similar letter-shapes.

The Phoenicians spoke a Semitic language, usually called Canaanite. The Semitic group of languages includes Arabic, Maltese, Hebrew and also Aramaic, the language spoken by Jesus. We do not know much about how the alphabetic idea arose, but the Phoenicians, a trading people, came up with letters which were adapted by the early Greeks to produce their alphabet. The one big difference is that the Phoenician script had no pure vowels. Arabic script has vowels which may, or may not, be shown by diacritics (small marks above or below the line). The oldest Qu'ran manuscripts had no diacritics. Israeli children to about the third grade use Hebrew texts with vowel 'dots' added.p89

No ancient script, alphabetic or not, had pure vowels before the Greeks. The Greek alphabet even has two vowels (Eta) and Epsilon) for 'e' and two (Omega and Omicron) for 'o', to distinguish between the long and short sounds. It appears that careful thought went into both the Phoenician invention and the Greek adaptation, but no details survive of either process.

Semitic scripts apparently derive from Proto-Sinaitic, a script of which only 31 inscriptions (plus 17 doubtful) are known. It is thought by some researchers that the original source of this script was the Egyptian hieratic script, which by the late Middle Kingdom (about 1900BC) had added some alphabetic signs for representing the consonants of foreign names. Egyptian activity in Sinai was at its height at that time. A similar idea had been suggested many years previously.

A list of alphabets and examples of the languages they are used for:

Other writing systems do not use letters, but they do (at least in part) represent sounds. For example, many systems represent syllables. In the past such writing systems were used by many cultures, but today they are almost only used by languages people speak in Asia.  A syllabary is a system of writing that is similar to an alphabet. A syllabary uses one symbol to indicate each syllable of a word, instead of one symbol for each letter of the word. For example, a syllabary would use one symbol to mean the syllable "ga", instead of two letters of the alphabet "g" and "a".

Originally, 1200 BC in the Shang dynasty, Chinese characters were mainly "pictographic", using pictures to show words or ideas.  Now only 1% of Chinese characters are pictographic.p97 97% of modern characters are SP characters.  These are a pair of symbols, one for meaning (semantics) and the other for pronunciation.p99 In many cases the P and S parts are put together into one joint character.  Chinese is not one spoken language, but many, but the same writing system is used for all.  This writing system has been reformed a number of times.

A village is a place where people live, normally in the countryside. It is usually larger than a hamlet and smaller than a town or city.  In some places, it may be a kind of local government. The dwellings in a village are clustered fairly near one another, not scattered broadly over the landscape.

In the past, villages were where most people lived. Villages were a usual form of community for societies that do subsistence agriculture, and for some non-agricultural societies. After the industrial revolution, when people started making a lot of things in factories, people lived more in towns. Moving to towns is called urbanization. When villages grow a lot they can grow into towns and then cities. This is what happened to Athens and Chicago.

In The U.K. the main difference between a hamlet and a village is that many villages have a church.

Most villages are long-standing. The land has been settled (peopled) since the ice age. The soil is generally very fertile, and the land was once heavily forested. Much of what was forest was cut down to make ships, and farming replaced it. The land is fertile because of the deep loam (soil) in many places. That is partly due to the ice age, since the ice cover moved and ground against the bedrock.

The word "village" is not used in most states. However, in twenty  US states, a "village" is a sort of local government, similar to a city but with less power and for a smaller place. But this is not so in all the United States. In many states, there are villages which are bigger than the smallest cities in the state. The difference is not the population, it is how much power the different sorts of places have, and what they do for people living there.

In the state of New York, a village is a place which is usually called a town.

In many states, a "village" is only a place where people live, with no legal power, similar to a hamlet in New York state. The name for these is "unincorporated villages".

A court in a law, is a part of the government in which people come together to decide how to apply the country's laws to a specific situation, especially when there is an argument over how to apply the law. Some disagreements a court may decide are whether a person is guilty of a crime, who is the legal owner of property, or who the children of two divorced parents should live with. The system of courts that interprets and applies the law is commonly known as the judiciary. A court is usually located in a special building called a courthouse.

Most countries have multiple courts to deal with different issues.  For example, civil courts deal with private disputes between people or organizations, while criminal courts deal with people who have been accused of crimes.

A newspaper is a publication printed on paper and issued regularly, usually once a day or once a week. It gives information and opinions about current events and news.  Usually people like to read them to stay informed about their local city, state or country.  Newspapers can be delivered to one's home, by subscription.  One also can buy a newspaper at a store or at a newsstand.  Recycling of paper is common.  It may be converted to new paper, for example.

Newspapers usually have many topics.  They usually include political events, crime, business, sports, and weather news.  Newspapers use photographs to illustrate stories; and also often include comics and other entertainment, such as crosswords and horoscopes.  Many have opinion sections.  These sections print the opinions of people who work for the newspaper.  The opinions, which are usually on stories in the news, are called editorials.  Opinion sections usually also print short letters from people who read the newspaper.

Newspapers started as handwritten newsletters distributed to a few merchants. In the 17th century they began being printed and sold to anyone who paid for one.

A child (the plural is children) is a person below the age of puberty (biologically) or, at least in English-speaking countries, below the age of majority or in other contexts below the age of consent. A person can be called his or her parent's child, regardless of the person's age. Another word for "child" is "kid".

In almost all countries, it is legally required that children be educated either at school or by homeschooling. Small children may go to nursery school, preschool or kindergarten. Playing and using imagination is a beneficial part of child development. But in poor areas, especially in third world countries, children may be forced to work long and hard and be used for child labor, such as in the poorest areas of India, South America, or Africa.

When people marry and one (or both) of them have children with someone else before this marriage, that child is known as a stepchild by the child's stepparent. If both people had children, the children of the other parent are stepbrothers or stepsisters of each other. Children with no parents are referred to as orphans. Children who are adopted and live with non-biological parents are referred to as adoptive (or foster) children.

An invention is a new thing that someone has made. The computer was an invention when it was first made. We say when it was "invented". New things that are made or created are called inventions. Cars and plastics are inventions that everyone knows. Inventions are made by inventors. Many inventions are patented.

Ideas are also called inventions. Writers can invent characters, and then invent a story about them.

Over time, humans have invented objects which make life easier for themselves. Because of this, a quote "necessity is the mother of invention", was written. The quote means that a lack of something should inspire someone to create something to fill that empty space. However, not all people believe that this is true. They think that too much of something can lead to an invention.

Many inventions are just a variation of something that already exists.

A forest is a piece of land with many trees. Forests are important and grow in many places around the world. They are an ecosystem which includes many plants and animals. Many animals live in forests and need them to survive.

Temperature and rainfall are the two most important things for forests. Many places are too cold or too dry for them. Forests exist from the equator to near the polar regions, but different climates have different kinds of forests. In cold climates conifers dominate, but in temperate zone and tropical climates forests are mainly made up of flowering plants. Different rainfall also makes different kinds of forest.

There are no forests in deserts, just a few trees in places where their roots can get some underground water. Aquifers beneath the Sahara desert have plentiful water, and also beneath Australian desert areas. The general term for this is "groundwater".

Forests contain 80% of the Earth's plant biomass. The total live biomass on Earth is about 550–560 billion tonnes C.

The three major forest biomes are coniferous forests, deciduous forests, and tropical rain forests. More than half of the world's forests are found in only five countries (Brazil, Canada, China, the Russian Federation, and the United States of America). More forests (45 percent) are in the tropics than any other climates.

Coniferous forests stretch across Canada, Alaska, Northern Asia, and Northern Europe.  Their main trees are evergreen conifers which produce seeds in cones.

The weather during the winter is cold, but when snow melts in the spring, some parts of the forest become swamps.  There are not many different types of trees in coniferous forests because of the cold weather, and the poor soil.  Fallen branches, needles, and dead animals do not decay as fast as in warmer regions.  This is why the soil in coniferous forests is not very fertile.  Also, only those trees that have adapted to cold weather and poor soil can survive.  These trees have flexible branches that support heavy snowfalls. Less water evaporates from their leaves because of the shape of their needles.

Many coniferous trees shade large parts of the soil below them, which keeps many plants from growing on the forest ground.  Some animals that live in the coniferous forests are pine martens, deer, bears, caribou, moose,  several owls, crossbills, and red squirrels.

Deciduous forests mostly grow in the temperate zone of North America, Europe and Asia. They have a moderate climate during the spring, summer, autumn (fall) and winter, with rainfall of at least 500mm a year. Summers are warm and winters are cold, but not as cold as the northern coniferous forests. In the winter, snow covers the ground and the deciduous trees and plants lose their leaves. The decaying leaves help make the soil rich in nutrients. Many insects, spiders, snails, and worms make their homes in this rich soil. Wild flowers and ferns grow almost everywhere in the spring. New leaves capture the energy of the sun and sprout before the tall trees shadow them.

During the winter, many birds migrate to warmer climates. Many small animals hibernate or aestivate, in other words, they slow down their metabolism and sleep or stay in their burrows. Some of the other animals just slow down their metabolism and eat food they stored during the summer and fall months. The trees in winter are bare, but with the coming of spring, leaves sprout, birds return, animals are born, and all the forest animals get busy with their lives. Animals that we may see or hear in this biome include bears, deer, raccoons, otters, beavers, foxes, frogs, squirrels, snakes, salamanders, and birds such as woodpeckers, robins (European or American), owls, blue jays and the small birds usually called tits (family Paridae).

Some deciduous forests grow in tropical places that do not have a winter but do have a wet season and a dry season.

Tropical rainforests grow in South America, the Congo, Indonesia and some nearby countries, Hawaii, and north eastern Australia. Tropical rainforests are well named, as it rains here on about half the days. The only season in a tropical rain forest is summer, so plants grow for all 12 months of the year. Trees are tall and thick in the rain forest and they grow so close together that they form a big umbrella of greenery called a canopy. This blocks out most of the sunlight. The air is muggy as it filters through the dense canopy cover of the trees. The light that filters through this tree cover is dim and green. Only along river banks and in places that have been cleared does enough sunlight allow plants to grow on the forest ground.

Millions of species of plants and animals live in the world's tropical forests. Life in the rain forest exists at different levels or layers in the trees. Each layer has a name, such as 'emergent', 'canopy', 'understory', and 'forest floor'. Animal life is found on all levels.

The first forests on Earth were about 380 million years ago), in the later Devonian period. Archaeopteris grew to about 10 meters tall (33 feet). The plant was rather fern-like, with deciduous fronds which dropped onto the forest floor. Streams running through the forest picked up fronds, which perhaps stimulated freshwater fishes. Wattieza was an even earlier plant which has been claimed as the "first tree". They were also fern-like, reproduced with spores and grew in groups together.

Forests were widespread biomes in the Carboniferous period. The earlier part is called the Mississippian, and the later part is known as the Pennsylvanian in North America.

A desert is an arid (dry) biome. They get less than  of rainfall a year.

It is "any region that can have a moisture deficit over the course of a year". In other words, they can have less rainfall in a year than they give up through evaporation".

Including the semi-arid regions, deserts  cover about 33% of the land on Earth. That includes much of Antarctica, where large areas get no snow at all. The largest hot desert is the Sahara desert, in northern Africa, covering nine million square kilometres.

Deserts land surfaces are varied. Examples are stones, sand dunes and snow. They may have some animals and plants. Deserts sometimes expand (desertification), and sometimes contract.

Deserts are mostly in the western part of the Americas, Western Asia, Central and western Australia, Namibia and North Africa. Some, such as the Sahara, are very hot during the day and have cold nights, but there are also cold deserts such as the Atacama in South America which are frozen day and night.

Cold deserts can be found close to the poles. That is why they are also called polar deserts. Other regions of the world have cold deserts too, for instance high altitude areas like the Himalayas. These are called montane deserts. Antarctica is the world's largest cold desert. The second largest one is the Arctic desert, but that has started to warm up now.

Hot deserts are mostly in the subtropics. They can be covered by sand, rock, salt lakes, stony hills and even mountains. Most non-polar deserts are hot in the day and chilly at night. The temperature in the daytime can reach  or higher in the summer, and dip to  or lower at nighttime in the winter. The largest hot desert in the world is the Sahara in North Africa. It is almost as large as Europe or the United States.

The Atacama Desert may not have had any significant rainfall from 1570 to 1971.

It may be the oldest desert on Earth. It has been a desert for at least three million years. It may be the oldest continuously arid region on Earth.

It does rain in the desert, but not often. One place in the Atacama Desert had no rain for 400 years. In other deserts it may rain every year or once every few years.  Rains in a desert may bring a great amount of water to the ground in a short time. Some rain passes straight into the dry soil, but the rest may form a temporary river.  Wadis, stream channels that are normally dry, can quickly fill after heavy rain, causing a flash flood.

People sometimes bring water from wet places to hot deserts so plants can grow. This is called irrigation.

A sandstorm or dust storm arises when wind blows loose sand and dust from a dry surface. Clouds of sand or dust are often so dense that they blot out the Sun. A sandstorm can move whole sand dunes. Sandstorms are common in large, dusty deserts.

There are not many animals in the desert, but some animals are able to survive. They have different ways to survive the intense conditions of the desert. Examples of animals that live in hot deserts are lizards, small rodents, snakes, and camels. Plants and animals in hot deserts must live with very little water.

Xerophytic plants which live in the desert have special adaptations. They may survive by growing roots that are very near the surface to absorb the rain that may fall before it evaporates. Plants such as the cactus have thick, fleshy stems that help them store water.

Small animals such as lizards and small rodents often escape the hot rays by digging underground burrows where they live. They only come out at night to search for food. Like the plants, desert animals must live on as little water as possible. Most of the water used by these animals comes from seeds and stems that absorb and hold water. Camels survive in hot deserts by storing water in body fat in their humps. Like other desert animals, the camel loses little water in its wastes (urine and feces).

Technology is the skills, methods, and processes used to achieve goals. The word has been in use since the 17th century.

Technology can be knowledge of how to do certain things.  Some machines have automatic controls.  This lets others use the machines without knowing how they work.  Technological systems use technology by taking something, changing it, then producing a result. They are also known as technology systems.

The most simple form of technology is the  and use of basic tools. The discovery of fire and the Neolithic Revolution made food easier to get. Other inventions, such as the wheel and the ship, helped people to transport goods and themselves. This, along with information technology such as the printing press, the telephone, and the Internet, has led to globalization.

People have used technology for millions of years.  Without food technology, most people would die.

A magazine is a type of book people read. Magazines differ from books because a new issue of the magazine is printed many times each year with new contents. Magazines are a type of periodical. They are called periodicals because editions are published at a fixed frequency. Magazines are similar to newspapers, but usually the time between new issues is longer. Each copy of a magazine costs more money than a newspaper, and many are in color on every page. Sometimes magazines come with little gifts to reward the readers who buy it.

Magazines are printed on paper. Many people subscribe to them so every issue will be delivered. Others buy them at a newsstand or elsewhere. An example of a magazine is Time. There are magazines about many things. Magazines often feature articles, advertisements, and photographs that focus on specific topics like fashion, technology, or entertainment.

Novels are books that have one long story written in them. They are works of prose fiction and are longer than short stories and novellas.

There are many kinds of novels. For example, some are adventure stories, like Treasure Island by Robert Louis Stevenson. There are horror stories like Mary Shelley's Frankenstein. There are also science fiction novels like Dune by Frank Herbert, and humorous novels like The Adventures of Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain. Novels in English are usually at least 60,000 words long. Some are much longer, at 150,000 words or more. Novels usually have 100 pages or more.

The first novels were written more than three hundred years ago. Some people say that Don Quixote by Miguel de Cervantes is the first novel; it was first published in 1605.

There are many different genres, or categories, of novels. Some of these are:

A birthday is the day when a person was born. In many places, on a person's birthday, he or she celebrates with friends and family at a party, where they eat cake or other foods, and get gifts. It is a common use to offer gifts in packages decorated for the occasion and accompanied by greeting cards.

Not everyone celebrates birthdays, including Jehovah's Witnesses.

In much of the English-speaking world people sing the song "Happy Birthday to You" to the person celebrating her or his birthday.  There are similar songs in other languages.

A birthday cake is usually decorated and covered with candles.  Sometimes the number of candles is the same as the age of the birthday person.

A person's astrological sign is based on his or her birthday.

A birthstone symbolizes the month of birth. In 1912, the Jewelers of America agreed on a list of birthstones:

Diwali (also: Deepawali) is one of India's biggest festivals. The word Deepawali' means rows of lighted lamps. It is a Festival of Lights, and Hindus celebrate it with joy. It marks the beginning of a new year.

Diwali is one of the most important festivals in Hinduism. It comes on Amavasya in the month of Kartik.

Dipavali (IAST: Dīpāvalī), commonly known as Diwali (/dɪˈwɑːliː/), is the Hindu festival of lights, with variations celebrated in other Indian religions such as Jainism and Sikhism. It symbolises the spiritual victory of Dharma over Adharma, light over darkness, good over evil, and knowledge over ignorance. Diwali is celebrated during the Hindu lunisolar months of Ashvin (according to the amanta tradition) and Kārtika – between around mid-September and mid-November. The celebrations generally last five or six days.

During this festival, people light up their houses and shops with small cup-shaped oil lamps made of baked clay. They worship the Lord Ganesha and Goddess Lakshmi for welfare and prosperity. People clean and decorate their houses before the festival. They make colorful rangoli art on floors with rice and flowers.

Deepawali is celebrated in India and is a public holiday there. Shops, school, offices and temples are thoroughly cleaned, whitewashed and decorated with lights, flowers and oil lamps. Hindus believe that, on this day, Lakshmi enters houses which are neat and tidy. They leave the lights on in their homes to welcome Lakshmi with happiness.

At night, buildings are illuminated with earthen lamps, candles and lights.

On the day of Deepawali, people wear new clothes and exchange greetings, gifts and sweets with their loved ones. People buy sweets for their families and also send them as presents to their friends and relatives. Others prepare lots of sweets with their oil. People light diyas and burn crackers.

A storm is a violent meteorological phenomenon in which there is heavy rain, and wind due to moisture in the air. Hail and lightning are also common in storms. More rarely, tornadoes can occur in storms.

Hurricanes, typhoons, and tornadoes are, often, called storms too but they have special names because they are very, very strong. Storms are studied by scientists called meteorologists. The idea of shipping forecasts started with a concern to save ships from unexpected storms in the North Atlantic. A storm is associated with severe weather and may be marked by strong wind,  thunder, lightning and heavy precipitation such as ice. Therefore, the knowledge of the weather condition is extremely important.

There are many varieties and names for storms: icestorm, blizzard, snowstorm, ocean-storm, firestorm, etc. The storms called thunderstorms develop in hot, humid tropical areas like Mexico very frequently. The rising temperatures produce strong upward rising winds. These winds carry water droplets upwards, where they freeze, and fall down again. The swift movement of the falling water droplets along with the rising air create lightning and thunder.

An ocean is a large body of water between continents. Oceans are extremely big and they join smaller seas together. Oceans (or marine) cover 70% of Earth. There are five main oceans: the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, the Southern Ocean, and the Arctic Ocean.The largest ocean is the Pacific Ocean. The smallest ocean is the Arctic Ocean. Many types of animals live in oceans, such as carp, crabs, starfish, sharks, and whales.

Different water movements separate the Southern Ocean from the Atlantic, Pacific and Indian Oceans. The Southern Ocean is also called the Antarctic Ocean, because it covers the area around Antarctica.

The deepest ocean is the Pacific Ocean. The deep ocean is characterized by cold temperatures, high pressure, and complete darkness. Some very unusual organisms live in this part of the ocean. They do not require high energy from the sun to survive, because they use chemicals from deep inside the Earth.

Although many people believe that the oceans are blue because the water reflects the blue sky, this is actually not true. Water has a very slight blue color that can only be seen when there is a lot of water. However, the main cause of the blue or blue/green color of the oceans is that water absorbs the red part of the incoming light, and reflects the green and blue part of the light. We then see the reflected light as the color of water.

Many organisms live in oceans. Organisms that live in oceans can live in salt water. They are affected by sunlight, temperature, water pressure, and water movement. Different ocean organisms live near the surface, in shallow waters, and in deep waters. Small plant organisms that live near the surface and use sunlight to produce food are called phytoplankton. Almost all animals in the ocean depend directly or indirectly on these plants. In shallow water, you may find lobsters and crabs. In deeper water, marine animals of many different shapes and sizes swim through the ocean. These include many types of fish, such as tuna, swordfish and marine mammals like dolphins and whales. The skies above the open ocean are home to large sea birds, such as the albatross. In marine reptiles, there is a large number of snakes lived under water, such as Yellow-lipped Sea Krait, Beaked Sea Snake, Belcher’s Sea Snake, Bighead Sea Snake, Black Banded Sea Snake, Brooks Sea Snake, Saint Girons’ Sea Krait and many more.

Nations like Russia and Japan have lots of huge ships that go to some of the world's best fishing areas for many months. These large ships have libraries, hospitals, schools, repair (fixing) shops and other things that are needed for fishermen and their families.

Many people look at the sea as a source of food, minerals and energy.

According to the FishBase.org website, there are 33,200 known fish species, many of which live in the oceans.  Many of these fish are a fine source of protein, so many people eat them. Fishing  is very important because they make jobs and give food to millions of people. Today, usually through ocean fishing, the ocean supplies about 2% of the calories needed by people. Tuna, anchovies, and herring are harvested close to the surface of the ocean. Pollock, flounder, and cod are caught near the ocean floor. More than a million tons of herring are caught every year in the North Pacific and North Atlantic, and almost eight fish out of ten fish are eaten as food for humans. The other fish are used as fertilizer, glue, and pet and other animal food.

There are many different ocean temperatures in the open ocean, both vertically (from top to bottom) and . Icebergs are made over very cold waters at either pole, while waters at the equator are pretty warm. Water cools and warms more slowly than land does, so land influenced by the ocean has later and milder seasons than land that is farther away from the ocean.

The surface part of the ocean, also called the mixed layer, is not much colder even when we go deeper down. Below this surface zone is a layer of sudden temperature difference, called a thermocline. This is a middle layer hat is from the surface zone down to about 2,600 feet (800 m). Thermoclines may happen only at seasons or , and may change depending on where and how deep they are. As evaporation occurs, it begins to cool, and if the water evaporates very quickly, it becomes saltier. The salty, cold water is , so it sinks. This is why warm and cold waters do not easily mix. Most animals and plants live in the warm upper layer. Below the thermocline, the temperature in the deep zone is so cold that it is just above the freezing point - between .

Cooking is a process to make food ready to eat by heating it.

Cooking is often done in a kitchen using a stove or an oven. It can also be done over a fire (for example, over a campfire or on a barbecue).

The heat for cooking can be made in different ways. It can be from an open fire that burns wood or charcoal. It can be on a stove or in an oven that uses propane, natural gas, or electricity.

There are several different ways to cook food. Boiling cooks food in hot water. Frying (deep or shallow) cooks food in hot butter, fat or oil. Baking and roasting cook food by surrounding it with hot air. Grilling means cooking food on a metal grill that has heat under it.

People often cook meat by boiling, roasting, frying, or grilling it. Some foods such as bread or pastries are usually baked.

Usually food is cooked in some kind of pot or pan.  Sometimes people cook food by putting it directly into the fire, or by wrapping the food in leaves before they put it into the fire.

A person whose job it is to cook food may be called a cook or a chef.  The word cooker means a machine or tool that a cook might use to cook food. Rice cookers and pressure cookers are examples.

Dance is a performing art. It is described in many ways. It is when people move to a musical rhythm. They may be alone, or in a group. The dance may be an informal play, a part of a ritual, or a part of a professional performance. There are many kinds of dances, and every human society has its own dances.

Dancing is not a sport, though it does have some athletic aspects. Dance is an art. Some people dance to express their feelings and emotions, or to feel better. Dance can be used to tell a story. In some societies, dance goes with song as well as music. Dancing is sometimes done as sport and has similar athletic aspects. People who want to learn to dance can go to dance schools. It may take years of practice to become an experienced and capable dancer. Dancing is a good form of exercise because it is more fun than most other forms.  It is a good way to lose weight.

To plan a dance is called choreography, done by a choreographer. Often this goes with music, and fits into a certain style. Dances may be planned in detail, or they may be whatever dancers feel like doing. However, most dancing does follow some general style or pattern. One style is the couple dance, where (usually) a man and a woman dance together. Other dances need an ensemble, a group of people together to make it work. Some styles of dance are lyrical, ballet, ballroom, tap, acrobatics, jazz, musical theater, contemporary, modern, hip hop, and western.

People have always danced. Many cultures have their own dances. There are pictures, on pottery and stone, which show dances from several thousand years ago, in Egypt and Greece.

Sachs divides early dances into 'Imageless dances' and 'Image dances'. By 'imageless dances' he meant dances which have no set form but aim at getting the dancers into a state of ecstasy. In this state the dancer(s) seem changed, in a trance, and are often thought of (by their society) as being 'possessed by spirits'. These dances are done on certain occasions: marriage, war, famine, illness or death, and so on. They are found in all early ('primitive') societies.p49; 62

The 'image dances', according to Sachs, are to do with the world outside the dancer. By imitating an animal or object, the dancer believes he can capture a power and make it useful. To dance in imitation of the animal which is going to be hunted is to become one with them. To imitate the act of sex is to achieve fertility. This is the kind of thinking behind an image dance. Sachs points out that societies of this kind do not really understand the connection between cause and effect. They really believe the image dances work. The dance type which is used in image dances is mime.p49; 77

The two styles of dance may be joined. Fertility dances may involve both ecstatic states and mime. The great dancer Nijinsky used some of these ideas in his choreography for the ballet Le Sacre du Printemps (The Rite of Spring), a ballet about the sacrifice of a girl during a primitive celebration of Spring.

In more recent times, the first dance school we know about was opened in 1661 in Paris. Only men were accepted until 1681. After 1681, women were accepted too. Ballroom dances are forms of modern dance. Ballroom dances such as the waltz are done by couples.

Until the 20th century, most ballroom dances were sequence dances. The way people moved was planned in set formation. These formations were usually lines or squares. Everyone moved at the same time and finished at the same time. The music played for a set time, and then stopped. After the invention of the waltz, around 1800, another style of dancing developed. In the waltz, and later dances, people danced in couples, but they did so separately. They did not dance in formation but moved round the room as they pleased (but anticlockwise). Often, new dance styles arrive. Some dance as individuals, separately, as they please. Street dance is like that. All these types of dances have music.

At the same time, round the world there are many traditional dances. Some of them have been going for hundreds of years. We call them folkloric dances.

The coming of popular music videos and DVDs led to a kind of dancer previously seen in some stage shows. A backup dancer (or background dancer) is a performer who dances with or behind the lead performers in a live musical act or in a music video.

There are many different styles of dance, which fall into these general types:

Food is what people and apes eat to live. Every organism needs energy to carry on with the process of living which comes from food. Food usually comes from animals and plants. It is eaten by living things to provide energy and nutrition. Food contains the nutrition that people need to be healthy. The consumption of food is normally enjoyable to humans.

It contains protein, fat, carbohydrates, vitamins, water and minerals. Liquids used for energy and nutrition are often called "drinks". If someone cannot afford food they go hungry and could die.

Food for humans is mostly made through farming or gardening. It includes animal and vegetable sources. Some people refuse to eat food from animal origin, like meat, eggs, and products with milk in them. Not eating meat is called vegetarianism. Not eating or using any animal products is called veganism.

Food produced by farmers or gardeners can be changed by industrial processes (the food industry). Processed food usually contains several natural ingredients and food additives (such as preservatives, antioxidants, emulsifiers, flavor enhancers). For example, bread is processed food.

Food processing at home is done in the kitchen, by the cook. The cook sometimes uses a cookbook. Examples of cooking utensils are pressure cookers, pots, and frying pans.

Food can also be prepared and served in restaurants or refectory (in particular for children in school).

The utensils used may be a plate, knife, fork, chopsticks, spoon, bowl, or spork.

Many people do not grow their own food. They have to buy food that was grown by someone else. People buy most of their food in shops or markets. But some people still grow most or all of their own food.

People may buy food and take it home to cook it. They may buy food that is ready to eat from a street vendor or a restaurant.

Other countries have their own way of eating food. An example of an ethnic food is Mexican food.

Originally, people got food as hunter-gatherers. The agricultural revolution changed that. Farmers grew crops including those invented and improved by selective breeding. These improvements, for example the invention of maize, allowed feeding more people, and further improvements gave it a better taste.

Food shortage has been a big problem throughout history. Many people do not have enough money to buy the food that they need. Bad weather or other problems sometimes destroy the growing food in one part of the world. When people do not have enough food, we say that they are hungry. If they do not eat enough food for a long time, they will become sick and die from starvation. In areas where many people do not have enough food, we say that there is famine there.

Food and water can make people sick if it is contaminated by microorganisms, bad metals, or chemicals.

People may often have a variety of eating disorders that cause them to either eat too much, or not be able to eat certain things or amounts. Common diseases like Coeliac disease or food allergies cause people to experience ill effects from consuming certain foods that are normally safe. If people eat too much food, they can become overweight or obese. This causes numerous health problems. On the other hand, eating too little food, from lack of access or anorexia could cause malnutrition. Therefore, people have to balance the amount, the nutrition, and the type of food to be healthy.

Many cultures or religions have food taboos. That means they have rules what people should not eat, or how the food has to be prepared. Examples of religious food rules are the Kashrut of Judaism and the Halal of Islam, that say that pig meat cannot be eaten. In Hinduism, eating beef is not allowed. Some Christians are vegetarian (someone who does not eat meat) because of their religious beliefs. For example, Seventh-day Adventist Church recommends vegetarianism.

Fish (plural: fish or fishes) are a group of animals which live in water and respire (get oxygen) from their gills. As a group, they are much older than other vertebrates. The first fish developed about 500 million years ago.

Shell fish such as the crab or lobster are actually small, boneless creatures that live in their own shell house or shell-like partial exterior, dwelling in seas and oceans. Some other examples include:

There are more fish than four-limbed animals: there are over 33,000 described species of fish. Fish are usually covered with scales. They have two sets of paired fins and several unpaired fins. Most fish are cold-blooded (poikilotherm).

There are many different kinds of fish. The thing to remember is that they all have adaptations, which are the features which let them live in the way they do. Yes, they do all live in water. But living in a fast-flowing river is different from living in a slow-moving river. In the sea, it matters the depth they live at. They live in fresh water in lakes and rivers (freshwater fish), and in salt water (marine fish) in the oceans. Some fish are less than one centimeter long. The largest fish is the whale shark, which can be almost 15 meters long and weigh 15 tons. Almost all fish live in the water. A group of fish called the lungfish have developed lungs because they live in rivers and pools which dry up in certain parts of the year. They burrow into mud and aestivate until the water returns.

The English word "fish" is not just one phylum.  Some fish are more closely related to land animals than they are to other fish. For example, lobe-finned fish were the first animals with bones to come live on land, and all land animals are their descendants. Lobe-finned fish are more closely related to humans than to ray-finned fish.

"Fish" is not a formal taxonomic grouping in systematic biology. Amphibians, reptiles, birds and mammals all descended from lobe-finned fish. But the use of the term "fish" is so convenient that we go on using it.

Fish are the oldest vertebrate group. The term includes a huge range of types, from the Middle Ordovician, about 490 million years ago, to the present day. These are the main groups:

Certain animals that have the word fish in their name are not really fish: crayfish are Crustacea, and jellyfish are Cnidaria. Some animals look like fish, but are not. Whales and dolphins are mammals, for example.

Most kinds of fish have bones. Some kinds of fish, such as sharks and rays, do not have real bones. Their skeletons are made of cartilage, and so they are known as cartilaginous fish.

All fish are covered with overlapping scales, and each major group of fish has its own special type of scale. Teleosts ('modern' fish) have what are called leptoid scales. These grow in concentric circles and overlap in a head to tail direction like roof tiles. Sharks and other chondrichthyes have placoid scales made of denticles, like small versions of their teeth. These also overlap in a head to tail direction, producing a tough outer layer. Shark skin is available for purchase as shagreen, a leather which as original is smooth in one direction, and rough in the other direction. It may be polished for use, but is always rough in texture and resistant to slipping.

The scales are usually covered with a layer of slime which improves passage through the water, and makes the fish more slippery to a predator.

There are various types of eel: most are in the Anguilliformes. Their life-style has evolved many times. Eels have scales with smooth edges or are absent.

41% of all fish live in freshwater. There are also some important fish which breed in rivers, and spend the rest of their life in the seas. Examples are salmon, trout, the sea lamprey, and three-spined stickleback. Some fish are born in salt water, but live most of their mature lives in fresh water: for example the eels.

Species like these change their physiology to cope with the amount of salt in the water.

59% of fish live in saltwater and are known as marine fish. Some of the common marine fish are from the family Pomacentridae and sub-family Pomacentrinae. Many of the smaller, colourful marine fish are used in aquariums.

Fish swim by exerting force against the surrounding water. There are exceptions, but this is usually done by the fish contracting muscles on either side of its body. This starts waves of flexion which travel the length of the body from nose to tail, generally getting larger as they go along.

Most fishes generate thrust using lateral movements of their body & tail fin (caudal fin). However, there are also species which move mainly using their median and paired fins. The latter group profits from the gained manoeuvrability. This is needed, for example, when living in coral reefs. Such fish cannot swim as fast as fish using their bodies & caudal fins.

Fish can swim slowly for many hours using red muscle fibres. They also make short, fast bursts using white muscle. The two types of muscle have a fundamentally different physiology. The red fibres are continued in the middle of the body along the spine and usually alongside a much greater number of white fibres.

The white fibres get their energy by converting the carbohydrate glycogen to lactate (lactic acid). This is anaerobic metabolism, that is, it does not need oxygen. They are used for fast, short bursts. Once the lactic acid builds up in the muscles, they stop working, and it takes time for the lactate to be removed, and the glycogen replaced. Using their white fibres, fish can reach speeds of 10 lengths per second for short bursts.

Swimming for long periods needs oxygen for the red fibres. The oxygen supply has to be constant because these fibres only operate aerobically. They are red because they have a rich blood supply, and they contain myoglobin. Myoglobin transports the oxygen to the oxidising systems. Red muscle gets its energy by oxidising fat, which weight for weight has twice as much energy as carbohydrate or protein. Using their red fibres, fish can keep up a speed of 35 lengths per second for long periods.

Many fish swim in groups.  Schools of fish can swim together for long distances, and may be chased by predators which also swim in schools. Casual groups are called 'shoals'.

The shape of the body of a fish is important to its swimming. This is because  body shapes makes the water drag less. Here are some common fish shapes:-

The picture on the right shows a shark. This shark's shape is called fusiform, and it is an ovoid shape where both ends of the fish are pointy. This is the best shape for going through water quickly. Fishes with fusiform shapes can chase prey and escape predators quickly. Many live in the open ocean and swim constantly, like marlins, swordfish, and tuna. Land animals which change to living in the sea may develop (evolve) shapes similar to fishes. Ichthyosaurs, porpoises, dolphins, killer whales all have similar shapes. This is an example of convergent evolution.

The long, ribbon-like shape of an eel's body shows another shape.  This enables them to hide in cracks, springing out quickly to capture prey, then returning quickly to their hiding spot.

Flatfish live on the bottom of the ocean or lake. Most use camouflage: they change colours to match the ocean floor. During their early lives, their eyes move to the upper side of their flat body.

Reef fish also have flat bodies, and their body is often highly coloured. Flat bodies can slip in and out among the corals, sponges, and rocks, avoiding predators. Angelfish, surgeonfish, and butterflyfish are examples.

People eat many different kinds of fish. These include carp, cod, herring, perch, sardines, sturgeon, tilapia, trout, tuna, and many others.  A person who buys and sells fish for eating is called a fishmonger.

The word to fish is also used for the activity of catching fishes.  People catch fish with small nets from the side of the water or from small boats, or with big nets from big boats.  People can also catch fish with fishing poles and fishhooks with bait.  This is often called angling.  Anglers also different types of fishing lures.

Because people are catching too many fish for food or other uses such as for sport, there are less and less fish in the sea. This is a problem known as overfishing.

Selective breeding of carp made them into the domesticated koi in Japan, and goldfish in China. This breeding began over 2,000 years ago. The Chinese brought their goldfish indoors during the Song Dynasty. They kept them in large ceramic vessels. That we now do in glass fish tanks.

In botany, a fruit is a plant structure that contains the plant's seeds.

To a botanist, the word fruit is used only if it comes from the part of the flower which was an ovary. It is an extra layer round the seeds, which may or may not be fleshy. However, even in the field of botany, there is no general agreement on how fruits should be classified. Many do have extra layers from other parts of the flower.

In general speech, and especially in cooking, some fruits are a sweet product, but not all fruits are sweet, most fruits are fruity and edible, and many botanical fruits are known as vegetables. This is how ordinary people use the words. On this page, we describe what botanists call a fruit.

The fleshy part of a fruit is called the mesocarp. It is between the fruit's skin (exocarp) and the seeds. The white part of an apple, for example, is the "fleshy" part of the apple. Usually, when we eat a fruit, we eat the "fleshy" part.

If the entire fruit is fleshy, except for maybe a thin skin, the fruit is called a berry. A berry might contain one seed or many. Grapes, avocados, and blueberries are berries. They all have a thin skin, but most of the fruit is fleshy. Don't get confused by the name of fruits like strawberries, because actually they are not berries. The seeds are on the outside: on a real berry, the seed or seeds are inside the fruit.

A pepo (pronounced pee' po) is a  berry. Its skin is hard and thick and is usually called a "rind". Pumpkins and watermelons, for instance, are pepos.

A hesperidium is another modified berry. It has a leathery skin that is not as hard as the skin of a pepo. All citrus fruit like oranges and lemon are hesperidiums.

A pome (pohm) is a fruit that has a  surrounded by fleshy tissue that one can eat. The core is usually not eaten. Berries are different - the seeds are inside the fleshy part, not separated from it by a core. Apples and pears are pomes.

Drupes are also called stone fruit. A drupe is a fleshy fruit with a hard stone around the seed. We usually call this 'stone' the 'pit' of the fruit. Peaches and olives are drupes. Actually, the almond fruit is a drupe, too, though we eat the seed that is inside the 'pit' of the almond fruit.

Since fruits are produced from fertilised ovaries in flowers, only flowering plants produce fruits. Fruits are an evolutionary 'invention' which help seeds get  by animals.

The botanical term includes many that are not 'fruits' in the common sense of the term. such as the vegetables squash, pumpkins, cucumbers, tomato, peas, beans, corn, eggplant, and bell pepper and some spices, such as allspice and chili

An accessory fruit or false fruit (pseudocarp) is a fruit in which some of the flesh is derived not from the ovary but from some adjacent tissue.

A fig is a type of accessory fruit called a syconium. Pomes, such as apples and pears, are also accessory fruits: the core is the true fruit.

These are fruits which you can buy in shops, and which are also acceptable as botanical fruits:

Many fruits come from trees or bushes. For plants, fruits are a means of dispersal, usually by animals. When the fruit is eaten, the seed(s) are not digested, and get excreted. Where fruits have big stones, just the soft parts are eaten.

Most fruits we eat contain a lot of water and natural sugars, and many are high in Vitamin C. They have a large amount of dietary fibre. Fruits are usually low in protein and fat content, but avocados and some nuts are exceptions to this. Not only humans, but our closest living relatives (primates) are keen fruit-eaters. So are many other groups of herbivorous mammals and many birds.

Seedlessness is an important feature of some fruits of commerce. Commercial bananas, pineapple, and watermelons are examples of seedless fruits. Some citrus fruits, especially oranges, satsumas, mandarin oranges, and grapefruit are valued for their seedlessness.

Seedless bananas and grapes are triploids, and seedlessness results from the abortion of the embryonic plant which is produced by fertilisation. The method requires normal pollination and fertilisation.

A farm is a piece of land used to grow crops  and/or raise animals.

People who grow these plants or raise these animals are called farmers. This work is called farming.

Land that is used to grow plants is called farmland.  Land that is used to feed animals with its grass is called pasture.  Land that can be used to grow plants for food is called arable land.

Many farms are very large and can cause damage.  In some places farms are many and small, and can also cause damage.  Farms provides most of the food for people.  Some people farm to eat the food they produce (subsistence agriculture). Other farms, including large ones, sell their produced crops or animals, like horses, to markets far away in urban areas (commercial or industrial farming). Most subsistence farms are in poorer countries, while industrial farms are in richer countries.

The word oil is used for many different kinds of liquids. Oil usually does not mix with water.

Vegetable oils are made from plants. Many are used in foods and for cooking. Some kinds of plant oils that people use are palm oil, maize (corn), olive, peanut, soy, and sunflower.

Other kinds of oil are made from crude oil (petroleum), which comes from under the ground. People use large oil wells to bring the oil up to the surface. The oil is sent in special ships called tankers or in pipelines to factories called refineries where it is distilled into LPG, gasoline (petrol), diesel fuel, and fuel oil. Plastics are among the petrochemicals made from crude oil or natural gas. Oils from crude oil are also used as fuels for engines or as lubricants to make the parts of machines work together without sticking or stopping.

Different kinds of oils are also used for many other things, for example, to make cosmetics, medicines, paints, and detergents, like washing up liquids. Soap(s) are similar to detergents, but they are generally made from animal fat(s) rather than oils.

Oil is also made for various purposes, including synthetic fuel and lubricant.

Theatre (British English and also American English), or Theater (mostly American English), has several meanings.

The word comes originally from the Greek Theatron, meaning roughly, 'a place for viewing'. In American English, the word 'theater' can mean either a place where films are shown (this is also called a cinema) or a place where live stage plays are performed. In British English, 'theatre' means a place where live plays are performed.  Some people, both English and American, use the spelling 'theatre' to mean a place where live plays are performed, and the spelling 'theater' to mean a cinema.

'Theatre' can also mean the business of putting on plays. An actor might say "I am in the theatre business", or a writer might say "I write for the theatre", meaning that they write plays, rather than writing for movies or television shows.

The first people we know created plays were the Ancient Greeks, around the year 500 B.C. They divided plays into two kinds: tragedy and comedy. This division is still used today. The best known Ancient Greek writers of plays are Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides and Aristophanes. Some of their plays survived, and are still performed today.

These ancient Greek plays were performed outdoors in large amphitheatres, so that many people could see them. There were contests among the playwrights (people who write plays are called playwrights) and the winner would get a prize.

The Greeks had many brilliant ideas. They used mechanical devices like trap doors and the machina: a crane for winching gods on and off the stage (hence 'Deus ex machina'). They had a Greek chorus that offered information to help the audience follow the performance. The chorus comments on themes, and shows how an audience might react to the drama. The players wore masks. Illustrations on vases show helmet-like masks, covering the entire face and head, with holes for the eyes and a small aperture for the mouth, plus a wig. The mask was to ‘melt’ into the face and allow the actor to vanish into the role. Therefore, onlookers did not think about the actor, but thought about the character.

In the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church began to use theatre as a way of telling the stories from the Bible to people who did not know how to read.  They wrote Mystery Plays, where each part of the Bible story would be a play put on by a different group of people.  They wrote miracle plays which were about the lives of the saints.  They wrote morality plays which taught the audiences how to live a good Christian life.

In the 1500s, groups of actors toured around Italy performing comic plays to entertain townspeople.  These plays were called Commedia dell'arte, and different stories would be created around the same group of characters.  Often the spoken lines would be made up by the actors for each performance.

Other kinds of plays called Neoclassical Dramas and Neoclassical Comedies were also popular in Italy and in France at this time. These plays were written to copy the style of the plays from Ancient Greece and Rome.

At the end of the sixteenth century (before 1600), the traveling actors began to perform in fixed theatre buildings. This was the period when William Shakespeare wrote. He lived from 1564 to 1616. At that time, in England, women were not allowed to perform, so male actors would play female characters.

His theatre was in London, England. It was called The Globe Theatre. It was an outdoor theatre and plays were performed in the daytime for large audiences. His plays were very popular and many are still performed today. Many people believe Shakespeare was one of the best playwrights (a writer of plays).

Plays including Shakespeare's were banned during the Protectorate. After that, many more were written and acted.

After World War II, playwrights in Europe and the United States began doing plays in a new style called "Theatre of the Absurd." After seeing the horrors of war, these playwrights felt that all their old values had been destroyed. Playwrights such as Samuel Beckett, Eugène Ionesco, Harold Pinter, and Jean Genet wrote plays that are considered to be "Theatre of the Absurd."

The "Theatre of the Absurd" plays have some of the same ideas that are found in the philosophy (a way of thinking) called existentialism. Existentialism is very different from many other philosophies. Most religions and philosophies say that human life has a meaning (or a purpose). The philosophy of existentialism is that human life does not have a meaning (or a purpose). When something has no meaning, it is "absurd". (absurd means means silly and meaningless.)

The plays written in this style make people think about questions like "what is it like to be a person in the world?" and "what does it mean for a person to be free?" They are often filled with sad emotions, such as worry, fear, and thoughts about death.

Theatre breaks are a form of short holiday, based around viewing a theatrical convention show. Theatre breaks tend to include a nights hotel accommodation included in the price.

A tree is a tall plant with a trunk and branches made of wood.

Trees can live for many years. The oldest living tree found is about 5,000 years old. The oldest tree from the UK is about 1,000 years old.

The four main parts of a tree are the roots, the trunk, the branches, and the leaves. Trees are a wide variety of plant species that have independently evolved a trunk and branches as a way to tower above other plants to compete for sunlight.

The roots of a tree are usually under the ground. However, this is not always true. The roots of the mangrove tree are mostly under water. A single tree has many roots. The roots carry nutrients and water from the ground through the trunk and branches to the leaves of the tree. Leaves can also breathe in air. Sometimes, roots are specialized into aerial roots, which can also provide support, as is the case with the banyan tree.

The trunk is the main body of the tree. The trunk is covered with bark which protects it from damage. Branches grow from the trunk. They spread out so that the leaves can get more sunlight.

The leaves of a tree are green most of the time, but they can come in many colors, shapes and sizes. The leaves take in sunlight and use water and food from the roots to make the tree grow, and to reproduce.

Trees and shrubs take in water and carbon dioxide and give out oxygen with sunlight to form sugars. This is the opposite of what animals do in respiration. Plants also do some respiration using oxygen the way animals do. They need oxygen as well as carbon dioxide to live. Trees are renewable resources because, if cut down, other trees can grow in their place.

The parts of a tree are the roots, trunks, branches, twigs and leaves. Tree stems are mainly made of support and transport tissues (xylem and phloem). Wood consists of xylem cells, and bark is made of phloem and other tissues external to the vascular cambium.

As a tree grows, it may produce growth rings as new wood is laid down around the old wood. In areas with seasonal climate, wood produced at different times of the year may alternate light and dark rings. In temperate climates, and tropical climates with a single wet-dry season alternation, the growth rings are annual, each pair of light and dark rings being one year of growth. In areas with two wet and dry seasons each year, there may be two pairs of light and dark rings each year; and in some (mainly semi-desert regions with irregular rainfall), there may be a new growth ring with each rainfall.

In tropical rainforest regions, with constant year-round climate, growth is continuous. Growth rings are not visible and there is no change in the wood texture. In species with annual rings, these rings can be counted to find the age of the tree. This way, wood taken from trees in the past can be dated, because the patterns of ring thickness are very distinctive. This is dendrochronology. Very few tropical trees can be accurately dated in this manner.

The roots of a tree are almost always underground, usually in a ball shaped region centered under the trunk, and extending no deeper than the tree is high. Roots can also be above ground, or deep underground. Some roots are short, some are meters long.

Roots provide support for the parts above ground, holding the tree upright, and keeping it from falling over in high wind.

Roots take in water, and nutrients, from the soil. Without help from fungus for better uptake of nutrients, trees would be small or would die. Most trees have a favorite species of fungus that they associate with for this purpose.

Above ground, the trunk gives height to the leaf-bearing branches, competing with other plant species for sunlight. In all trees the shape of the branches improves the exposure of the leaves to sunlight. Branches start at the trunk, big and thick, and get progressively smaller the farther they grow from the trunk. Branches themselves split into smaller branches, sometime very many times, until at the end they are quite small. The small ends are called twigs.

The leaves of a tree are held by the branches. Leaves are usually held at the ends of the branches. The, although some have leaves along the branches. The main functions of leaves are photosynthesis and gas exchange. A leaf is often flat, so it absorbs the lightest, and thin, so that the sunlight can get to the green parts in the cells, which convert sunlight, carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and water from the roots, into glucose and oxygen. Most of a tree's biomass comes from this process.

Most leaves have stomata, which open and close, and  carbon dioxide, oxygen, and water vapour exchange with the atmosphere.

Trees with leaves all year round are evergreens, and those that shed their leaves are deciduous. Deciduous trees and shrubs generally lose their leaves in autumn as it gets cold. Before this happens, the leaves change colour. The leaves will grow back in spring.

The word "tree" in English means a long-lived plant having obvious main stem and growing to a considerable height and size. Thus, not all trees have all the organs or parts as mentioned above. For example, most (tree-like) palms are not branched, and tree ferns do not produce bark. There are also more exceptions.

Based on their general shape and size, all of these are nonetheless generally regarded as trees. Trees can vary a lot. A plant that is similar to a tree, but generally smaller, and may have multiple trunks, or have branches that arise near the ground, is called a "shrub", or a "bush". Since these are common English words there is no precise differentiation between shrubs and trees. Given their small size, bonsai plants would not technically be "trees", but are indeed "trees". Do not confuse the use of tree for a species of plant, with the size or shape of individual specimens. A spruce seedling does not fit the definition of a tree, but all spruces are trees.

A tree is a plant form that can be found in many different orders and families of plants. Trees show many growth forms, leaf type and shape, bark traits and organs.

The tree form has changed separately in classes of plants that are not related, in response to similar problems (for the tree). With about 100,000 types of trees, the number of tree types in the whole world might be one  of all living plant types. Most tree species grow in tropical parts of the world and many of these areas have not been surveyed yet by botanists (they study plants), making species difference and ranges not well understood.

The earliest trees were tree ferns, horsetails and lycophytes, which grew in forests in the Carboniferous period; tree ferns still survive, but the only surviving horsetails and lycophytes are not of tree form. Later, in the Triassic Period, conifers, ginkgos, cycads and other gymnosperms appeared, and subsequently flowering plants in the Cretaceous period. Most species of trees today are flowering plants (Angiosperms) and conifers.

A small group of trees growing together is called a grove or copse, and a landscape covered by a dense growth of trees is called a forest. Several biotopes are defined largely by the trees that inhabit them; examples are rainforest and taiga (see ecozones). A landscape of trees scattered or spaced across grassland (usually grazed or burned over periodically) is called a savanna. A forest of great age is called old growth forest or ancient woodland (in the UK). A very young tree is called a sapling.

Scientists in the UK and Malaysia say they have discovered the world's tallest tropical tree measuring more than 100m (328ft) high.

A coast redwood: , in Redwood National Park, California had been measured as tallest living tree. It has been named Hyperion. Hyperion was measured as 116.07 metres (380.8 ft) tall in 2019. It is estimated to be 600 to 800 years old.

The tallest trees in Australia are all eucalypts, of which there are more than 700 species. The so-called 'mountain ash'. with a slim, straight trunk, grows to over 100 metres.

The stoutest living single-trunk species in diameter is the African baobab: , Glencoe baobab (measured near the ground), Limpopo Province, South Africa. This tree split up in November 2009 and now the stoutest baobab could be Sunland Baobab (South Africa) with diameter 10.64 m and circumference of 33.4 m.

Some trees develop multiple trunks (whether from an individual tree or multiple trees) which grow together. The sacred fig is a notable example of this, forming additional 'trunks' by growing adventitious roots down from the branches, which then thicken up when the root reaches the ground to form new trunks; a single sacred fig tree can have hundreds of such trunks.

Trees have been found growing at record-breaking heights in Scotland's mountains. On Braeriach, Britain's third highest mountain, a sitka spruce was found at 1,125m (3,691ft).

The life-span of trees is determined by growth rings. These can be seen if the tree is cut down or in cores taken from the edge to the center of the tree. Correct determination is only possible for trees which make growth rings, generally those which occur in seasonal climates. Trees in uniform non-seasonal tropical climates are always growing and do not have distinct growth rings. It is also only possible for trees which are solid to the center of the tree; many very old trees become hollow as the dead heartwood decays away. For some of these species, age estimates have been made on the basis of extrapolating current growth rates, but the results are usually little better than guesses or speculation. White proposed a method of estimating the age of large and veteran trees in the United Kingdom by correlation between a tree's stem diameter, growth character and age.

Other species suspected of reaching exceptional age include European Yew Taxus baccata (probably over 2,000 years) and western redcedar Thuja plicata. The oldest known European yew is the Llangernyw yew in the Churchyard of Llangernyw village in North Wales which is estimated to be between 4,000 and 5,000 years old.

The oldest reported age for an Angiosperm tree is 2,305 years for the Sri Maha Bodhi sacred fig (Ficus religiosa) planted in 288 BC at Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka; this is said to be the oldest human-planted tree with a known planting date.

The earliest fossilised trees date to 386 million years ago in the Devonian period. They have been found at an abandoned quarry in Cairo, New York. The forest was so vast it originally stretched beyond Pennsylvania.

This discovery is two or three million years older than the previous oldest forest at Gilboa, also in New York State.

Studies have shown that trees contribute as much as 27% of the appraised land value in certain markets.

These most likely use diameter measured at breast height (dbh), 4.5 feet (140 cm) above ground—not the larger base diameter. A general model for any year and diameter is:

Tree climbing is an activity where one moves around in the crown of trees.

Use of a rope, helmet, and harness are the minimum requirements to ensure the safety of the climber. Other equipment can also be used depending on the experience and skill of the tree climber. Some tree climbers take special hammocks called "Treeboats" and Portaledges with them into the tree canopies where they can enjoy a  or nap or spend the night.

Tree climbing is an "on rope" activity that puts together many different tricks and gear originally derived from rock climbing and caving. These techniques are used to climb trees for many purposes, including tree care (arborists), animal rescue, recreation, sport, research, and activism.

The three big sources of tree damage are biotic (from living sources), abiotic (from non-living sources) and deforestation (cutting trees down). Biotic sources would include insects which might bore into the tree, deer which might rub bark off the trunk, or fungi, which might attach themselves to the tree.

Abiotic sources include lightning, vehicles impacts, and construction activities. Construction activities can involve a number of damage sources, including grade changes that prevent aeration to roots, spills involving toxic chemicals such as cement or petroleum products, or severing of branches or roots. People can damage trees also.

Both damage sources can result in trees becoming dangerous, and the term "hazard trees" is commonly used by arborists, and industry groups such as power line operators. Hazard trees are trees which due to disease or other factors are more susceptible to falling during windstorms, or having parts of the tree fall.

The process of finding the danger a tree presents is based on a process called the quantified tree risk assessment.

Trees are similar to people. Both can take a lot of some types of damage and survive, but even small amounts of certain types of traumas can result in death. Arborists are very aware that established trees will not tolerate any appreciable disturbance of the root system. Even though that is true, most people and construction professionals do not realize how easily a tree can be killed.

One reason for confusion about tree damage from construction involves the dormancy of trees during winter. Another factor is that trees may not show symptoms of damage until 24 months or longer after damage has occurred. For that reason, persons who do not know about caring for trees may not link the actual cause with the later damaged effect.

Various organizations have long recognized the importance of construction activities that may damage tree health. This can result in monetary losses due to tree damage and replacement costs. As a result, standard methods of tree management for building activities are well established and tested.

The tree has always been a cultural symbol. Common icons are the World tree, for instance Yggdrasil, and the tree of life. The tree is often used to represent nature or the environment itself. A common mistake (wrong thing) is that trees get most of their mass from the ground. In fact, 99% of a tree's mass comes from the air.

A Wish Tree (or wishing tree) is a single tree, usually distinguished by species, position or appearance, which is used as an object of wishes and offerings. Such trees are identified as possessing a special religious or spiritual value. By tradition, believers make votive offerings in order to gain from that nature spirit, saint or goddess fulfillment of a wish.

Tree worship refers to the tendency of many societies in all of history to worship or otherwise mythologize trees. Trees have played a very important role in many of the world's mythologies and religions and have been given deep and sacred meanings throughout the ages. Human beings, seeing the growth and death of trees, the elasticity of their branches, the sensitiveness and the annual (every year) decay and revival of their foliage, see them as powerful symbols of growth, decay and resurrection. The most ancient cross-cultural symbolic representation of the universe's construction is the 'world tree'.

The tree, with its branches reaching up into the sky, and roots deep into the earth, can be seen to  in three worlds - a link between heaven, the earth, and the underworld, uniting above and below. It is also both a feminine symbol, bearing sustenance; and a masculine, phallic symbol - another union.

For this reason, many mythologies around the world have the concept of the World tree, a great tree that acts as an Axis mundi, holding up the cosmos, and providing a link between the heavens, earth and underworld. In European mythology the best-known example is the tree Yggdrasil from Norse mythology.

The world tree is also an important part of Mesoamerican mythologies, where it represents the four cardinal directions (north, south, east, and west). The concept of the world tree is also closely linked to the motif of the Tree of life.

In literature, a mythology was notably developed by J.R.R. Tolkien, his Two Trees of Valinor playing a central role in his 1964 Tree and Leaf. William Butler Yeats describes a "holy tree" in his poem The Two Trees (1893).

There are many types of trees. Here is a list of some of them:

Water () is a simple chemical compound made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. It is clear, has no taste or smell, and is almost colorless. All living things need water to survive. Water molecules stick together because of hydrogen bonds. These bonds give water special properties. For example, water has high surface tension, and can dissolve many substances. Water exists in three forms on Earth: solid (ice), liquid (water), and gas (water vapor). The word "water" comes from the Old English word wæter.

About 71% of Earth’s surface is covered by water. Most of this water (about 97%) is in the oceans. This water is salt water, which we cannot drink or use for farming. Only 3% of Earth’s water is fresh water, and even that is not easy to get. 69% of all fresh water is frozen in glaciers and ice caps. 30% is stored underground in aquifers. Less than 1% is in lakes, rivers, and swamps. If you look at all the water on Earth, only about 1% can be used by us. And most of that water is found underground. Water is always moving in a cycle. This is called the water cycle. It includes:

Water has many unique abilities. One is that it expands when it freezes. This makes ice less dense than liquid water, so ice floats. Water also has a high specific heat capacity. It can absorb or lose a lot of heat without changing temperature much. This helps keep Earth's climate stable. Water’s surface tension lets it form droplets. It also lets small insects walk on water. Water is an excellent solvent. It can dissolve more substances than any other liquid. This is why it is called the "universal solvent." However, it cannot dissolve oily or nonpolar substances well. These special abilities come from water's polar nature and the hydrogen bonds between them.

Water is important for all living things. Every kind of life we know needs water to survive. This includes tiny living things like bacteria, archaea, and protists, and bigger ones like fungi, plants and animals. The human body is about 50-60% water. Water helps move nutrients, gases, and waste inside the body. Inside cells, water is where most chemical reactions happen. It also helps cells keep their shape. Water is needed for  digestion in animals, and photosynthesis in plants. It also helps control body temperature. Without water, life could not exist. That is why water is one of the most important substances for all living things.

Water is also very important to the world economy. About 70% of the fresh water people use goes to farming. Water is used to grow crops and raise animals. Fish from oceans, lakes, and rivers are an important source of food. Many products, like crude oil and other goods, are moved around the world by ships through oceans, rivers, and canals. Water is also used to heat and cool buildings and machines. Because it can dissolve many substances, it is very useful in factories, cooking, and cleaning. Water can also be used to make electricity, using hydroelectric plants. It is also used for fun activities like swimming, boating, fishing, diving, ice skating, snowboarding, and skiing.

Many civilizations in history began near rivers or other places where they could get water easily. For example, Mesopotamia began between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Ancient Egypt depended on the Nile. The Indus Valley civilization started near the Indus River. Ancient Rome was built near the Tiber River. Even today, many big cities like London, New York, and Shanghai grew near water. Being close to rivers or oceans made it easier to trade and travel. Islands with good harbors, like Singapore, also became rich and powerful because ships could stop there easily. In dry places like North Africa and the Middle East, clean water has always been important. Having water often made the difference between a small village and a strong civilization.

Water is not just found on Earth. Scientists have discovered water in many places in space. Ice has been found on Mars, and even on the Moon. Some moons in our solar system, like Europa and Ganymede (around Jupiter), and Enceladus (around Saturn) may have liquid water under their icy surfaces. Water vapor has also been found in the atmosphere of some exoplanets. These are planets that orbit stars far away from our solar system. Water has even been found in clouds of gas and dust in space where new stars are being born.

Shortly after the Big Bang, around 13.8 billion years ago, the universe was a hot, dense soup of particles. After 380 000 years, the universe expanded and cooled down enough for the first atomic nuclei to form in a process known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis. This produced mostly hydrogen, with smaller amounts of helium and trace amounts of lithium and beryllium. Oxygen and heavier elements did not yet exist, meaning water could not yet form.

Hundreds of millions of years later, the first stars were made from clouds of hydrogen and helium. Inside these stars, nuclear fusion began to produce heavier elements. In massive stars, fusion of lighter elements created heavier elements like carbon, nitrogen, and finally oxygen (a key ingredient for water). When these massive stars reached the end of their lives, they exploded as supernovae. This scattered those elements, including oxygen, into the interstellar medium.

Now that hydrogen and oxygen existed in the universe, they began to react and form water (H₂O). This happened mainly in molecular clouds. Here, water could form in two ways. On dust grains, hydrogen and oxygen atoms stuck to the surface can react to form water ice. In hot places inside the molecular cloud like around young stars, hydrogen and oxygen gas could react to form water vapor.

As molecular clouds collapsed to form new stars, protoplanetary disks (flat disks of gas and dust moving around the star) formed around these young stars. Water in these disks could be found as water vapor or ice. This depended on how close or far away the water was from the star. The "snow line" is a place far away from the star where it is cold enough for water to freeze and turn into ice. Inside this line, water stays as a gas, but beyond it, water becomes ice. This ice allowed particles to clump together and form planets. Water got trapped in icy planetesimals, comets, and asteroids. In the inner parts of star systems, it was usually too warm for ice, so most water there was in the form of vapor. Some water may have arrived later when comets or water-rich asteroids from the colder outer regions crashed into these inner planets, bringing ice that had formed far from the star.

On some planets and moons, the conditions were just right for water to exist as a liquid, solid (ice), or gas (vapor). Earth is the best and only example we know of. Because it is the right distance from the Sun and has a protective atmosphere, it has had oceans of liquid water for billions of years. Other places, like the moons Europa, Enceladus, and Ganymede, have oceans hidden under thick layers of ice. Mars has signs that it once had rivers and lakes long ago. Comets and asteroids still hold water from the early days of the solar system.

Today, water continues to be everywhere but mostly frozen or in vapor form. It found in molecular clouds, where stars and planets are still being made. It can also be found in interstellar space as ice on dust grains. It has also been found in the atmospheres of exoplanets. At the center of galaxies, massive amounts of water, billions of times the amount on Earth has been found around black holes. But, liquid water remains extremely rare, because it requires a very narrow set of conditions. Earth is unique because it contains liquid water on its surface.

One of the biggest mysteries in astronomy is where Earth's water came from. Scientists are still trying to answer this question. Earth is special because it is the only rocky planet in our Solar System with oceans of liquid water on its surface. The other rocky planets, Mercury, Venus, and, Mars do not have large amounts of liquid water on their surface. Liquid water is important because every living thing we know needs it to survive. Earth has liquid water because it is in just the right spot in space. This spot is called the habitable zone. It is not too close to the Sun, where water would evaporate. It is also not too far away, where water would freeze. This perfect distance helps keep water in its liquid form on Earth.

There are many ideas about how Earth got its water. Most of these ideas fall into two main groups. One idea is that Earth already had the right ingredients (hydrogen and oxygen) when it formed, and those combined to make water. The other idea is that water came from space. It was carried by asteroids or comets that crashed into Earth after it formed. Some scientists think both of these ideas could be true. Earth might have gotten its water from more than one source. That makes the mystery a bit more complex, but researchers are trying their best to understand what happened in the early Solar System and how water ended up on our planet.

Earth formed about 4.54 billion years ago, after the Sun was born from a huge cloud of gas and dust. The leftover material from that cloud became the rest of the Solar System, including Earth. One idea is that Earth was born with everything it needed to create oceans, lakes, and rivers. But there is a problem. The early Solar System was extremely hot, especially near the center where Earth formed. Any water on the surface would have turned into gas and escaped into space. Another idea is that Earth’s water may have come from deep inside the planet. Water might have been trapped inside rocks deep underground when Earth was forming. This water was safe from the heat because it was hidden inside minerals in Earth's mantle. Over time, volcanoes released that water as steam. When the steam cooled, it turned into rain that helped form oceans and rivers.

Another idea is that Earth may have created its own water. Powerful space telescopes have seen young planets far away, that are surrounded by thick clouds of hydrogen gas. Scientists think that when Earth was very young, it might have had a lot more hydrogen in its atmosphere than it does today. Right now, Earth’s atmosphere is mostly nitrogen, and has almost no hydrogen. One idea suggests how hydrogen gas from the atmosphere could react with molten rock (magma) on the early Earth. This reaction could have produced large amounts of water. As the surface cooled and hardened, this water would have stayed on the planet, forming oceans and lakes.

A long time ago, the inner Solar System was a dangerous place. Between 4.0 and 3.8 billion years ago, the outer planets (Jupiter and Saturn) moved around and changed their orbits. Their powerful gravity sent icy space rocks flying toward the inner planets, including Earth. This time period is called the Late Heavy Bombardment. Many of these space rocks crashed into Earth, and scientists think they could have brought water with them. At first, people thought the water mainly came from comets. But space missions like Giotto (which visited Halley's Comet in 1986) and Rosetta (which visited another comet from 2014 to 2016) found that the water on comets is different from the water in Earth’s oceans. That means comets probably weren't the main source. Instead, scientists now think asteroids and meteorites brought most of the water. For example, a spacecraft called Hayabusa2 brought back pieces of an asteroid named Ryugu. Scientists found that the water trapped in its rocks looks like Earth’s ocean water. Ryugu is made of the same stuff as a type of meteorite called CI chondrites, which could have delivered up to 30% of the water in Earth’s oceans.

Scientists use ancient rocks to figure out when water first appeared on Earth. One kind of rock they use is called pillow basalt, which forms when a volcano erupts underwater. One of these rock was found in the Isua Greenstone Belt in Greenland. It is about 3.8 billion years old. This tells us that there was liquid water on Earth at that time. More of these very old rocks can be found in Canada, in a place called the Nuvvuagittuq Greenstone Belt. Some studies of these rocks also say there was water about 3.8 billion years old. Other studies suggest there was water 4.28 billion years. If there was water, like oceans, even earlier than that, we don't know yet. That might be because the Earth’s surface is always changing over time. Old rocks can be destroyed or buried through processes like plate tectonics and recycling of the crust, which can erase early signs of water. In 2020, scientists suggested that there might have been enough water to fill the oceans immediately after Earth formed.

To understand what Earth was like after it formed, scientists study rocks called zircons. Unlike most rocks, zircons are very tough. They can survive for billions of years, making them useful for studying early Earth. Zircons show that there was liquid water and an atmosphere 4.404 billion years ago, not long after Earth formed. This creates a problem, because the cool early Earth hypothesis says that Earth was cold enough to freeze water between 4.4 and 4.0 billion years ago. Other zircon studies from ancient Australian rocks suggest that plate tectonics may have started around 4 billion years ago. If that's true, Earth may have been similar to today, instead of being hot and covered in carbon dioxide. Plate tectonics helps trap carbon dioxide, which cools the planet and allows solid rock and liquid water to form.

In early human history, people survived by hunting animals and gathering plants. They often moved around and stayed close to sources of water or carried water around. But about 12 000 years ago, during the Neolithic revolution, humans started farming and raising animals. To do this, they needed a steady supply of water. Areas with rich soil and regular water made farming possible. This let people settle in one place and live in larger groups. Water also provided food, like fish and other water animals, and helped people travel using simple boats like canoes.

The first human civilizations began in river valleys, where there was plenty of fresh water and good soil for farming. For example, Mesopotamia, known as the "Cradle of Civilization," grew between the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. People there built irrigation canals to bring water to their crops. In Ancient Egypt, the Nile river was very important. It helped people grow food, raise animals, and move goods and people around. The Indus Valley civilization grew near the Indus River. They built advanced water systems, like wells, drains, and public baths. In Ancient China, the Yellow River helped northern China grow, but it also flooded a lot and caused many deaths. That is why it was called both "China’s pride" and "China’s sorrow." In Ancient Rome, people built aqueducts. They were long channels that carried water from far away places into cities. This water was used for farming, public baths, toilets, and even homes.

In the earliest civilizations, rivers and seas were very important for transport and trade. They made it easier to move heavy goods over long distances. In Mesopotamia, the Tigris and Euphrates rivers connected cities like Ur and Babylon. In Egypt, the Nile River helped people trade from Nubia in the south all the way to the Mediterranean Sea. The Phoenicians were great sailors who built strong ships and set up trade colonies around the Mediterranean. Busy ports like Alexandria, Athens, Tyre, and Carthage became rich and full of culture because of sea trade. In Medieval Europe, rivers like the Danube, Rhine, and Seine helped create strong trade networks. Cities like Venice and Genoa became powerful by trading across the sea. In the 1400s, countries like Portugal, Spain, England, and the Netherlands began exploring the world by sea. Christopher Columbus’s voyages opened up the Atlantic Ocean. This connected Europe, Africa, and the Americas in what became known as the Columbian Exchange. Later, the British and the Dutch East India Company built huge trade empires using powerful ships and ocean routes.

As cities got bigger with more people, their water systems could not keep up with the growing population. This led to more disease outbreaks. This was before people understood how germs worked. Diseases like typhoid, cholera, and dysentery spread quickly through dirty water and killed millions of people over the centuries. In Medieval Europe, cities did not have good plumbing. Waste flowed through open sewers in the streets and often mixed with drinking water. This caused many deadly epidemics. In the 1800s, London had several major cholera outbreaks. At first, people thought the disease came from bad air, called “miasma.” But in 1854, a doctor named John Snow proved that cholera was actually spread through dirty water. He traced the outbreak to a single water pump on Broad Street. People learned that having water was not enough. It had to be clean and kept away from waste. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, cities began improving public health by building better water systems. Engineers created piped water networks, storage tanks, and pumping stations to bring clean water to homes. They also built underground sewer systems to safely carry away human waste. Cities like London, Paris, and New York only made these changes after big epidemics showed how serious the problem was. New water treatment methods like sand filtering and adding chlorine helped kill germs and made water safer to drink.

A long time ago, ancient Greek thinkers like Thales of Miletus believed that water was the basic building block of everything in the world. Around 250 BCE, Archimedes used water to figure out the volume of an object by seeing how much water it pushes away when put in water. During the Renaissance, Leonardo da Vinci studied how water flows and how it helps wear away rocks over time. He helped build canals and other things to help control water. Galileo Galilei looked at why some things float on water and others do not. He also studied tides, the regular rising and falling of the sea. By the late 1700s, Antoine Lavoisier figured out that water was not an element, but a compound made from hydrogen and oxygen.

Today, about 70% of all the freshwater we use around the world goes to agriculture, making farming the biggest user of water. Plants need water to grow, animals need it to live, and irrigation helps farmers grow crops even in dry areas. In modern times, how much water a country has can affect whether it can grow enough food for its people or if it has to buy food from other countries. Places with lots of water, like the United States, Brazil, China, and India, are major food producers. These countries grow extra crops like wheat, corn, soybeans, and rice, and sell them to other countries. Having lots of rain, rivers, underground water, and good systems like dams and canals gives these countries a big advantage. But countries with very little water, like Saudi Arabia, Qatar, the UAE, and Kuwait have trouble growing enough food. They do not have enough freshwater or good land for farming, so they import most of their food from other places. Fish are also an important source of food for the world. Over 1 billion people depend on fish as their main source of protein, especially in places near rivers and oceans. Fish farming, called aquaculture, has allowed us to raise fish instead of looking for them.

Even today, oceans and rivers are still the main way we move goods around the world. In fact, about 80% of all global trade by volume travels by sea. Oceans, rivers, and canals are great for moving things like fuel, raw materials, and products because it is cheaper than using trucks or planes. Some water routes are especially important. The Suez Canal, Panama Canal, Strait of Hormuz, and Strait of Malacca are key paths for global trade. Large ports like those in Shanghai, Rotterdam, Singapore, and Los Angeles help grow their countries' economies. Big rivers like the Mississippi in the U.S., the Yangtze in China, and the Danube in Europe are also important. They help move large amounts of goods inside countries cheaply.

Modern water systems help bring clean water to billions of people around the world. Dams and reservoirs store water for drinking, farming, flood control, and even to make electricity. Famous examples include the Hoover Dam in the U.S. and the Three Gorges Dam in China. Pipelines and aqueducts move water from places that have a lot of it to places that do not have much and big cities. For example, Los Angeles gets much of its water from places far away. In very dry regions like the Middle East, Israel, and parts of Australia, desalination plants turn salty seawater into fresh drinking water. But this process uses a lot of energy. Wastewater treatment plants clean dirty water from homes and businesses so it does not pollute rivers and lakes. Sometimes, this cleaned water is reused for farming or industry.

The world still faces big problems with water. More than 2 billion people live in places where there is not enough water. In areas like India, the southwestern U.S., and the Middle East, people are using up groundwater faster than it can be replaced. Because of this, there might not be enough water in the future. Climate change is making things worse. It causes longer droughts, changes where and when rain falls, and reduces the amount of snow in mountains. Snow is important because it slowly melts releasing water into rivers over time. Pollution is also a big problem. Factories, farms, and untreated sewage can make rivers and lakes dirty. Rising sea levels are pushing saltwater into underground water supplies near the coasts, making them unsafe to drink. More powerful storms are causing floods that city drainage systems can not handle. Because of this, we must protect and manage water carefully for the future.

Water is a chemical substance. It is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Its chemical formula is H₂O. These atoms are held together by something called a covalent bond. At room temperature and normal pressure, water is a liquid. It has almost no color, taste or smell. Water is often called the "universal solvent" because it can dissolve more substances than any other liquid. But it cannot dissolve nonpolar substances like oil very well. Water is also the only common material on Earth that can naturally exist as a solid, liquid, and gas.

A water molecule looks like a bent “V” shape. The angle between the two hydrogen atoms is about 104.5°. This shape happens because of how electrons are arranged around the oxygen atom. Oxygen has six outer (valence) electrons. It uses two of them to bond with two hydrogen atoms (one for each). The other four electrons stay in two pairs, called lone pairs, that do not bond with anything. According to VSEPR theory, all these pairs of electrons want to stay as far apart as possible. This creates a shape like a tetrahedron with four regions: two bonding pairs and two lone pairs. But lone pairs take up more space and push harder than bonding pairs. They push the hydrogen atoms closer together, so the angle becomes smaller than the usual 109.5° of a perfect tetrahedron. That is why the water molecule is bent instead of straight, and why the bond angle is 104.5°.

A water molecule (H₂O) has one oxygen atom and two hydrogen atoms. Oxygen is much more electronegative than hydrogen. This means it attracts electrons closer to itself much more than hydrogen. So, when oxygen and hydrogen share electrons in a water molecule, the electrons spend more time near the oxygen atom.  This gives the oxygen atom a partial negative charge (δ⁻). And the hydrogen atoms gains a partial positive charge (δ⁺). So, the water molecule now has a positive side and a negative side. Because of this, the positive hydrogen of one water molecule is attracted to the negative oxygen of another. This attraction is called a hydrogen bond. It is not as strong as a normal chemical bond (like a covalent bond). But, it is strong enough to hold water molecules loosely together. Hydrogen bonding explains many of water’s unusual properties. For example, water's high boiling and melting points, high surface tension, the ability of ice to float on water, and the ability to dissolve many substances.

Water (H₂O) is a liquid at room temperature. This might seem normal until you compare it to similar substances. Water belongs to a group of compounds called hydrogen chalcogenides. These are made when hydrogen bonds with elements from the same family as oxygen: sulfur, selenium, and tellurium. This includes hydrogen sulfide (H₂S), hydrogen selenide (H₂Se), and hydrogen telluride (H₂Te). But, while water is a liquid, the others are all gases at room temperature. The reason is hydrogen bonding. Oxygen is very electronegative (it strongly pulls on electrons) and is small in size. Because of this, water molecules can form strong hydrogen bonds. Each water molecule can form up to four hydrogen bonds with its neighbors. This creates a kind of "stickiness" that holds the molecules together and makes it harder for them to break apart and turn into a gas. That is why water has a high boiling point of 100 °C (212 °F) for such a small molecule. The other chalcogens (sulfur, selenium, and tellurium) are larger but less electronegative than oxygen. In hydrogen sulfide (H₂S), hydrogen selenide (H₂Se), and hydrogen telluride (H₂Te), the bonds between hydrogen and the other elements are weaker. These molecules do not form strong hydrogen bonds. Instead, they only have weak van der Waals forces, which are easy to break. So these substances boil at much lower temperatures. Hydrogen sulfide (H₂S) boils at –60 °C. Hydrogen selenide (H₂Se) boils at –41.5 °C. Hydrogen telluride (H₂Te) boils at –2.2 °C. That is why they are gases at room temperature, while water is a liquid.

Water molecules stick to each other. This is called cohesion. This happens because each water molecule can form hydrogen bonds with its neighbors. Inside a drop of water, each molecule is pulled in all directions by the other water molecules around it. But at the surface, there are no water molecules above. The hydrogen bonds at the surface of water pulls molecules tightly together, forming a sort of "skin" on the surface. This is called surface tension. This is why water forms droplets. It is also why small insects, like water striders, can walk on water. It is also why small objects like a needle can float if placed gently on water.

Water molecules can stick to other surfaces. This is called adhesion. This especially happens to surfaces that are polar or charged, like glass, plant cell walls, or soil particles. Water's adhesion can be seen when water climbs up the side of a glass container, forming a curved surface called the meniscus. It can also be seen as water spreads out on a leaf or sticks to surfaces like spider webs. Whether water forms flat puddles or round beads depends on the balance between cohesion and adhesion. If water sticks more to the surface, it spreads out. If water sticks more to itself, it forms beads.

Water can climb up a thin tube or narrow space. This is called capillary action. It happens because adhesion pulls water molecules to the sides of a thin tube or pore, while cohesion pulls other water molecules along with it. In plants, capillary action helps water move from the roots to the leaves. As water evaporates from the leaves, it pulls more water up behind it. Adhesion helps the water stick to the sides of the plant's tubes. Cohesion keeps the water molecules connected like a chain, so they move upward together. This allows them to move up against gravity.

Water is very good at staying at the same temperature. It does not heat up or cool down quickly. This is because water has a high specific heat capacity. That means it takes a lot of heat to make water warmer, and it cools down slowly too. Specific heat is the amount of heat needed to change the temperature of 1 gram of a substance by 1 °C. For water, this is 1 calorie. That is much higher than most other common substances. For example, alcohol only needs 0.6 calories to do the same, so it heats up faster than water.

If you touch a metal pot with warm water inside, the metal might feel hotter than the water. That is because metal heats up faster than water. Water takes longer to warm up because water molecules are held together by hydrogen bonds. When heat is added, much of the energy goes into breaking the hydrogen bonds between water molecules. Once those bonds are broken, the molecules can move faster, and the temperature rises. So instead of heating up quickly, water stores heat by breaking the hydrogen bonds first. When water cools down, the hydrogen bonds form again and release heat. This helps keep temperatures steady. Oceans and lakes can absorb heat from the sun during the day or in summer and release it slowly at night or in winter. That is why places near water usually have milder temperatures. Water’s high specific heat also keeps the ocean from getting too hot or too cold. This is very important for ocean life. And because our bodies are mostly made of water, this also helps us keep a steady body temperature.

Water molecules usually stay close together. But if some molecules move fast enough, they can break free and escape into the air as gas. This process is called evaporation. Even at low temperatures, the fastest molecules can still escape. This is why a glass of water will slowly disappear over time. Heating water makes its molecules move faster, so it evaporates faster too. The heat of vaporization is the amount of heat needed to turn 1 gram of liquid water into gas. For water, it takes about 580 calories to evaporate just 1 gram at 25 °C. This is nearly double the amount needed for ammonia and alcohol. Water’s high heat of vaporization is because of hydrogen bonds. Water molecules are held together through hydrogen bonds. To vaporize water, these bonds must be broken, which takes a lot of energy. The energy does not raise the temperature. It goes into breaking the hydrogen bonds. That is why water takes a long time to boil and releases a lot of heat when it condenses.

This high heat of vaporization has important effects on Earth. Tropical oceans take in a lot of heat from the Sun. Some of this heat is used to evaporate water. When that water vapor travels to cooler places and turns back into rain, it releases heat. This helps balance Earth’s climate and spread heat around the planet. Evaporation also cools things down. When water evaporates, the fastest (hottest) molecules leave first. This lowers the temperature of the water that is left behind. This is called evaporative cooling. It helps keep lakes, plants, and animals from getting too hot. When we sweat, the sweat takes heat from our skin as it evaporates. This is why sweating cools down. On hot, humid days, the air already has a lot of water vapor. That makes it harder for sweat to evaporate, so we feel even hotter. Some animals that cannot sweat, like elephants, cool themselves by spraying water on their skin.

It also takes a lot of energy to melt ice. This is called the heat of fusion. The heat of fusion is the amount of energy needed to change 1 gram of a substance from solid to liquid at its melting point. For water, this is 334 joules per gram (J/g). That is higher than most other substances, especially for a molecule as small as water. When water freezes into ice, its molecules form a crystalline structure held together by hydrogen bonds. To melt ice, you need enough energy to break many of these bonds. The heat added goes into breaking these bonds, but does not increase the temperature. The water that is produced also remains at  0 °C until all of the ice is melted. The same amount of energy needed to melt ice could warm that same ice from –160 °C all the way up to 0 °C. Ice and snow can take in heat without melting right away. This helps keep temperatures from changing too quickly. In cold places like the North and South Poles or high mountains, this helps keep the temperature more steady. Before we had refrigerators, people used ice to keep food cool because it stayed frozen for a long time.

Water is one of the only substances that becomes less dense when it freezes. This means that ice floats on water. Most substances get smaller and denser when they freeze. But water is different. It expands (or gets bigger) when it freezes. This strange behavior happens because of hydrogen bonds. At temperatures above 4 °C, water acts like most liquids. It expands when heated and shrinks when cooled. But between 4 °C and 0 °C, something strange happens. As the water gets colder, the molecules slow down. They do not have enough energy to break the hydrogen bonds between them. At 0 °C, the molecules line up into a solid crystal shape. Each molecule connects to four others with hydrogen bonds. These bonds hold the molecules further apart. So the ice takes up more space than the liquid water, even though it has the same number of molecules. That is why ice is about 9% less dense than water at 4 °C. When ice melts, the bonds break and the molecules move closer together. Water is densest at 4 °C. It becomes less dense if it gets warmer or cooler from that temperature.

The fact that ice floats is very important for life on Earth. If ice sank, lakes and oceans could freeze all the way to the bottom. This would make it hard or even impossible for fish and other living things to survive. Instead, ice floats on top, and acts like a blanket. This helps keep the water below from freezing. Fish and other organisms can stay alive under the ice. Also, floating ice provides homes for animals like polar bears and seals.

When you drop a sugar cube into a glass of water, the sugar slowly dissolves and spreads out. This creates a mixture. This type of mixture is called a solution. In a solution, the solvent is the substance that does the dissolving (in this case, water), and the solute is the substance that gets dissolved (the sugar). If water is the solvent, the solution is called an aqueous solution.

Water is a very good solvent. Because of this, it is often called the "universal solvent". This is because it can dissolve more substances than any other substance. This happens because water molecules have slightly positive and negative parts. These parts attract other charged or polar substances. For example, when you add salt (sodium chloride, or NaCl) to water, it breaks into sodium (Na⁺) and chloride (Cl⁻) ions. The negative side of water pulls on the sodium, and the positive side pulls on the chloride. Water molecules surround each ion. They then pull them away from the salt crystal. After that, they spread them out in the water. This group of water molecules around an ion is called a hydration shell. Other ionic compounds, like potassium chloride, also dissolve in water this way. Seawater is full of dissolved ions like these. But a substance does not have to be made of ions to dissolve in water. Polar molecules like sugar can also dissolve. This is because they can form hydrogen bonds with water. Even large molecules, like proteins, can dissolve in water if they have polar or charged areas on their surfaces.

Water is the main solvent for living things. Many important substances are dissolved in the water in blood, plant sap, and cells. Any substance that mixes well with water is called hydrophilic (water-loving). Some hydrophilic substances do not dissolve in water. For example, some molecules in cells are too big to dissolve. Another example is cotton. Cotton is made up of giant molecules of cellulose. Cellulose does not dissolve in water. It has lots of positive and negative parts that can form hydrogen bonds with water. Water sticks to the cellulose. That is why cotton towels drys things well, but does not dissolve in the washing machine. Plants also use cellulose in the tubes that carry water from roots to leaves. Water sticks to the hydrophilic walls of these tubes, helping it move upward against gravity. On the other hand, substances that do not mix with water are called hydrophobic (water-fearing). These include oils and fats. They don't dissolve because they do not have charges that attract water. That is why oil and water do not mix. Hydrophobic molecules can be found in cell membranes. Without them, cells would dissolve in water. Life would be impossible.

Water can exist in three main forms: solid, liquid, and gas. These are called states or phases. Which one water is in depends on the temperature and pressure.

When people say "water" in everyday life, they usually mean liquid water. This is the form that comes from taps, fills oceans, rivers, and lakes, and is used for drinking, cooking, and cleaning. Liquid water is the most common form found on Earth's surface. When water gets cold enough, it freezes and becomes a solid called ice. Ice can be in the form of hard cubes (like in your freezer) or soft, loose crystals, like snow. There are also other strange kinds of ice. These are often found in extreme environments like outer space deep inside Uranus. When water gets hot enough, it turns into a gas called water vapor. This is what we see as steam rising from boiling water.

Water can also exist in a very strange state called a supercritical fluid. This only happens at extremely high temperatures above (374 °C or 705 °F) and very high pressures (above 22.064 megapascals). Here, water acts like a gas and a liquid at the same time. It can flow like a liquid and spread out like a gas. Supercritical water is useful because it can dissolve many things that normal water cannot. It can dissolve nonpolar organic compounds like oil. This strange state of water does not happen naturally on Earth’s surface. But it can happen deep in the ocean. One example is near hydrothermal vents. This happens at around 2200 meters deep. The ocean is much deeper than that on average at about 3800 meters.

A phase diagram is a special graph. It shows how a substance like water changes between solid, liquid, and gas depending on the temperature and pressure. On this graph, the bottom (horizontal) line shows temperature. The side (vertical) line shows pressure. The graph is divided into three parts. One part shows where water is a solid (ice). Another part shows where it is a liquid (water). And another part shows where it is a gas (steam).  There is a special point on the graph called the triple point. At this temperature and pressure, water can exist as a solid, liquid, and gas at the same time. For water, this happens at 0.01 °C and a pressure of 611.657 pascals.

At normal air pressure (1 atmosphere), water freezes into ice at 0 °C (32 °F) and boils into steam at 100 °C (212 °F). The freezing point is the temperature at which water turns to ice. The boiling point is the temperature at which water turns into gas. Water does not need to be boiling to become gas. Even at low temperatures, some water molecules can move fast enough to evaporate. This is why a glass of water when left alone will slowly dry out. But when water is heated, the molecules move faster and evaporate quicker. When water reaches 100 °C, bubbles of water vapor form inside the liquid. These bubbles rise to the top and release steam into the air.

Water vapor (gas) can turn directly into ice without becoming liquid first. This is called deposition. You can see this when frost forms on cold windows. It also happens when snowflakes form in clouds. In clouds, tiny pieces of dust or pollen help water vapor turn straight into ice. The opposite of deposition is called sublimation. This is when ice turns straight into water vapor without becoming a liquid. One use of sublimation is in freeze-drying food. a method of preserving food. First, the food is frozen. Then it is put into a vacuum (a space with no air). The ice inside the food turns into vapor. This leaves the food dry, without using heat.

Water usually freezes at 0 °C (32 °F) at normal air pressure. But in special conditions, pure water can stay liquid even it is colder than that. If it is not shaken or disturbed, it can cool all the way down to about –42 °C (–44 °F) without freezing. This is called supercooling.

The melting and boiling points of water change with pressure. For most things, if you add more pressure, they melt at a higher temperature. But water is different because ice is less dense than liquid water. That is why ice floats. When pressure is added to ice, the melting point actually goes down. That means ice can melt even when it is colder than 0 °C if there is enough pressure. This can happen deep under a glacier. The heavy ice on top pushes down with a lot of pressure. This pressure can melt the ice under it, even though it is very cold. That is how lakes can form under glaciers.

Steam (which is water in gas form) takes up much more space than liquid water. That means it is less dense. When the pressure is high, it becomes harder for water to boil, so it needs to be hotter to turn into steam. In places with a lot of pressure, water can stay as a liquid even when it gets hotter than 100 °C (212 °F), which is the normal boiling point. For example, in geysers like Old Faithful, water can get over 205 °C (401 °F) without boiling. And near underwater volcanoes called hydrothermal vents, water can reach 400 °C (752 °F) and still stay liquid.

At sea level, water boils at 100 °C (212 °F). But when you go up higher like up the mountains, the air pressure gets lower. When pressure is lower, water boils at a lower temperature. For every 274 meters (or about 900 feet) you go up, the boiling point goes down by about 1 °C. For example, at 274 meters (about 900 feet), the boiling point becomes 99 °C (210.2 °F) instead of 100 °C (212 °F). That is why food takes longer to cook at higher altitudes. The water boils before it gets really hot. A pressure cooker works the opposite way. It traps steam inside, which raises the pressure. This lets water boil at a higher temperature, so food cooks faster. In places with no air at all, like in a vacuum, water can even boil at room temperature. This is because there is no pressure holding the water molecules together.

People often say that water has no taste or smell. But in real life, most of the water we drink has some taste or smell. This is because there are usually tiny amounts of other substances dissolved in the water. Pure water does not have a taste, but our tongues can tell if something is mixed in. For example:

Even tiny amounts of these substances can change the taste. How strongly people taste them can depend on how cold or warm the water is and even a person's genes.

Some of these smells are so strong that the human nose can detect them even in very small amounts. Some animals, like frogs, can even smell water itself.

Water is often called incompressible. This means that even if you push on it really hard, it doesn't shrink much. For example, at the bottom of the ocean, about 4 kilometers (2.5 miles) deep, the pressure is 400 times greater than at sea level. But water only gets about 1.8% smaller. This happens because water has a high bulk modulus (about 2.2 gigapascals). This means it resists being squeezed.

Viscosity is how easily a liquid flows. Water has low viscosity, so it flows quickly and easily, like in rivers or through pipes. Honey or syrup have high viscosity, so they flow slowly and are thick. Water flows smoothly through rivers, pipes, and the human body (like in blood vessels and cells). Viscosity changes with temperature. When a liquid gets warmer, it becomes thinner and flows more easily. When it gets colder, it becomes thicker and flows more slowly. So, warm water flows faster, and cold water flows slower. Water is called a Newtonian fluid. This means its viscosity stays the same even if you stir it fast or slow.

Sound travels through water at about (1400 to 1540) meters per second, depending on how warm, salty, or deep the water is. That is over 4 times faster than in air. Whales use sound to talk and find food underwater. Humans use tools like sonar to find things under the sea.

Water is a polar molecule. This means it has slightly charged ends. In water molecules, the hydrogen atoms have a small positive charge, and the oxygen atom has a small negative charge. This happens because oxygen pulls electrons closer to itself. That is because oxygen is more electronegative. It likes to attract electrons more than hydrogen does. This polarity helps water surround and pull apart other substances, especially those made of charged particles, like table salt (NaCl). When salt is added to water, the negative part of water (the oxygen) surrounds the positive sodium ions (Na⁺). The positive part (the hydrogen) surrounds the negative chloride ions (Cl⁻). This helps break the salt apart and keep the ions floating around in the water.

Water also has a high dielectric constant. It is about 80 at room temperature. That is much higher than most other liquids. This means water can reduce the electrical attraction between opposite charges. As a result, ions (like those from salt) can separate more easily in water. This is why it is so good at dissolving electrolytes. This makes it easier for ions to stay separate and move around freely. This is important for conducting electricity in biological and chemical systems. Thanks to its polarity and dielectric nature, water is one of the best solvents in the world. That is why it is called the "universal solvent".

Water can go through a special process called autoionization (also called self-ionization). This means that two water molecules can react with each other to make two new particles: a hydronium ion (H₃O⁺) and a hydroxide ion (OH⁻). One water molecule, takes a hydrogen from the other becoming a hydronium ion while the other is left with one hydrogen becoming a hydroxide ion.

This reaction does not happen often. At room temperature (25 °C), only a tiny number of water molecules do this. In pure water, the amounts of H₃O⁺ and OH⁻ are each 1 × 10⁻⁷ mol/L (moles per liter). That tiny amount makes water neutral and gives it a pH of 7. The pH scale, which tells us if something is acidic or basic, is based on this. Because there are so few ions, pure water does not conduct electricity well. That means pure water is more like an insulator than a conductor.

But water can dissolve ionic substances like salt very well. When you add even a little table salt (NaCl) to water, it releases lots of ions. The conductivity goes up a million times. That is why tap water and seawater conduct electricity so well. Seawater, for example, has ions like Na⁺, Cl⁻, and Mg²⁺, making it highly conductive. This matters in real life. Distilled water, which has no ions, can't carry electricity. But regular water, with minerals or salts in it, can carry electric current. This is important in batteries, electrolysis, and even in cells in your body.

In small amounts, water looks clear, but pure water actually has a slight blue tint. You can see the blue color more easily when you look at a large amount of water, like in a swimming pool, lake or ocean. The color comes from the way water interacts with light. Pure water absorbs some colors of light more than others. Those colors include the red, orange, and yellow parts of sunlight. This leaves more blue light to be reflected into our eyes. This is why water looks blue. You cannot see this in a glass of water. You can only see this when you are looking at deeper water, like in a swimming pool or lake. The deeper the water, the more light gets absorbed, and the more the blue color is seen. If water has something dissolved in it or tiny particles floating in it, the color can change. For example, algae and organic matter can make water look green or brown. Minerals and sediments in the water can change its color. Tannins from decaying plants can give water a tea-like, brownish color.

Visible light can mostly go through water. Blue and green light go the deepest in water. On the other hand, red, orange, and yellow light gets absorbed by the water, so they do not go very deep. In clear ocean water, sunlight can reach down to about 200 meters. This upper layer is called the photic zone. It is where there is enough light for plants and tiny algae like phytoplankton to do photosynthesis. Deeper than that, there is not enough light for plants to do photosynthesis.

Water bends light because it has a higher refractive index than air. The refractive index of water at room temperature (20 °C or 68 °F) is about 1.333. The refractive index of air is about 1.0. This means that when light enters water from the air, it slows down and bends. This is called refraction. It is this bending of light that causes a straw to look bent or broken in a glass of water. It is also why things under water look closer or larger than they actually are. Ice has a slightly lower refractive index (about 1.31). Because of this, light bends a bit less when passing through ice than through liquid water. The refractive index of water is similar to some liquids like ethanol and alkanes. But, it is lower than substances like glycerol, benzene, carbon disulfide, or glass (which range from 1.4 to 1.6). Also, the refractive index of water can change a little depending on the how hot or how cold it is, the pressure, or how much salt is in the water.

Water can react with some metals. It reacts with metals more reactive than hydrogen. When this happens, the metal reacts with water to make hydrogen gas and a metal hydroxide. Some metals, like the alkali metals (such as lithium, sodium, and potassium), react very strongly with water. Alkaline earth metals like calcium and magnesium react less violently. For example, sodium reacts violently and makes sodium hydroxide and hydrogen gas:

This reaction gives off a lot of heat (exothermic). It can even cause the hydrogen gas to catch fire.

Water is amphoteric. This means it can act like an acid or a base. This depends on what it is reacting with. When water is with a strong base, it gives away a hydrogen ion (H⁺) and acts like an acid. When water is with a strong acid, it takes in a hydrogen ion and acts like a base.

Water can also react with itself in a process called self-ionization:

This creates a hydronium ion (H₃O⁺) and a hydroxide ion (OH⁻). This reaction does not happen much in water. It helps set the pH scale, which tells us how acidic or basic a liquid is.

Water can also break one molecule into two smaller ones in a process called hydrolysis. The word comes from Greek: "hydro" meaning water, and "lysis" meaning to break or unbind. In hydrolysis, one molecule breaks into two molecules. A water molecule then breaks apart into a hydrogen ion and a hydroxide ion. The hydrogen ion attaches itself to one of the two new molecules. The hydroxide ion attaches itself to the other molecule. In industry, hydrolysis is used to break down compounds like esters or salts. In biology, proteins are broken into amino acids through hydrolysis. Fats (lipids) are broken into glycerol and fatty acids. Carbohydrates, such as sucrose, are broken into simpler sugars like glucose and fructose:

Hydrolysis is the opposite of a condensation reaction. Condensation combines two molecules and releases water. Hydrolysis breaks one molecule into two smaller ones by adding water.

Water can be broken down into hydrogen gas (H₂) and oxygen gas (O₂), using a process called electrolysis. In this process, an electric current is passed through water that contains small amounts of an electrolyte like sulfuric acid or salt. This helps the water conduct electricity. The electricity breaks down the water molecules:

Electrolysis is important because it produces clean hydrogen fuel when powered by renewable energy like solar or wind. This is often called green hydrogen. It can be used to store energy, power fuel cells, or replace fossil fuels in industry and transportation.

Hydrology is the science that studies how water moves, where it is found, and its quality all over the Earth. It is part of a larger group of sciences that study water in different places and forms:

All the water on Earth (in oceans, rivers, lakes, ice, underground, and even in the air) is called the hydrosphere. The Earth holds about 1.386 billion cubic kilometers of water. Water on Earth is not distributed equally. Most of the water on Earth is found in the oceans. About 96.5% of all the water on Earth is salt water in the oceans. This cannot used for drinking or farming. That leaves only 2.5% of the Earth's water as fresh water. Of this small percentage of freshwater, most of them are in hard to reach places. Around 68.7% of Earth's fresh water is stored in ice caps, glaciers, and permanent snow. This is mainly in Antarctica and Greenland. Another 30.1% is found as groundwater, stored in aquifers deep under the Earth's surface. This groundwater is an important source of water for wells and springs. It is very important in agriculture and for drinking. Only about 1.2% of all fresh water is water that can be found on the surface of the Earth. This includes water in lakes (about 20.9%), swamps and marshes (2.6%), and rivers (0.49%). Water can also be found in the atmosphere as vapor, clouds, and precipitation, and in soil moisture, permafrost, and living organisms. But these make up only a tiny fraction of all the water on Earth (less than 0.01%).

Fresh water is not evenly distributed across the Earth. Some places have more water than others. Countries like Canada, Brazil, and Russia have large supplies of fresh water because of lots of rivers and rainfall. In contrast, dry places like North Africa, the Middle East, and parts of Central Asia have very limited freshwater. Some tropical and temperate regions get lots of rainfall, while others may go months without much rain.

The water cycle (also called the hydrologic cycle) is the constant movement of water through the Earth's atmosphere and surface. Water moves between the air, ground, rivers, oceans, lakes, plants, and even underground. The main parts of the water cycle are:

The sun is the main source of energy that drives the water cycle. When sunlight heats up water, the water molecules move faster and can turn into vapor. This a process called evaporation. This happens in oceans, lakes, rivers, and even from the land. Plants also release water vapor through their leaves in a process called transpiration. Together, evaporation and transpiration are called evapotranspiration. The term evapotranspiration is commonly used by geologists. Water vapor is invisible to our eyes.

Winds carry water vapor in the atmosphere over long distances. When water vapor cools down, it changes back into liquid water. This is called condensation. This can happen when warm air meets cool air. The water forms tiny drops around dust or salt called condensation nuclei in the air. These drops come together to form clouds. As more droplets stick together, they grow bigger. When they get heavy enough, they fall to Earth as rain, snow, or hail. This is called precipitation.

When precipitation reaches the ground, it can do the following. It can evaporate again. It can flow over the land as runoff into rivers and lakes. Or soak into the ground to become groundwater. Water that flows in rivers and lakes is called surface water. Water that moves underground through soil and rock is called groundwater. Groundwater moves slowly and can come back to the surface through springs. It can also flow into rivers, lakes, or oceans. This shows how surface water and groundwater are connected.

Most water that evaporates from the ocean goes back to the ocean. But wind blows water vapor to land at the same rate it goes back to the ocean. Each year, about 47 trillion tons of water vapor move from the ocean to the land. About 72 trillion more tons of water vapor comes from land evaporation and plants. That adds up to 119 trillion tons of precipitation falling on land each year. Precipitation over land has many forms. Most commonly rain, snow, and hail, with some being fog and dew. Dew are small drops of water that form when warm, wet air touches a cool surface, usually in the early morning. Water droplets in the air may also refract sunlight to produce rainbows.

Water that flows over land collects in places called watersheds. They then travel through rivers, carving out valleys and deltas. These areas usually have very good soil, which is good for farming and building cities. Sometimes, too much water causes a flood. This can happen when rivers overflow or big storms push water onto the land. Other times, there is not enough water. A drought happens when a place gets very little rain for a long time. This is often because of the place or shape of the land.

Water plays an important role in shaping the Earth’s surface and what is happening under it. It helps form landscapes. It breaks down rocks. It even affects volcanic activity from deep under the surface. Water changes the land through both physical actions, like erosion, and chemical reactions, like breaking down minerals in rocks.

Water plays a big role in breaking down rocks on Earth’s surface. This is a process called weathering. There are two main types: physical and chemical. In physical weathering, water gets into cracks in rocks. When it freezes, it expands and makes the cracks bigger. Over time, this causes the rock to break apart. In chemical weathering, water mixes with carbon dioxide from the air or soil. This creates a weak acid called carbonic acid. Carbonic acid can dissolve some types of rock, especially limestone. When this acid gets to limestone underground, it can create large cracks, caves, and tunnels. On the surface, it can create a type of landscape called karst. Here the ground has sinkholes, caves, and holes. One amazing example of karst is the Stone Forest near Kunming, China. It has hundreds of tall, sharp towers of limestone made by water. Another example is Carlsbad Caverns in New Mexico, USA. This park has over 119 caves, all formed by water breaking down limestone. The biggest one, called the Big Room, is so large it could fit six football fields inside.

Once rocks are broken down by weathering, the pieces are moved by a process called erosion. Water moves bits of rock and minerals away. No rock is strong enough to resist weathering and erosion forever. These powerful forces have created some of Earth’s most famous landmarks. For example, the Grand Canyon in Arizona, USA, was made by the Colorado River over millions of years. The canyon is about 446 kilometers (277 miles) long, up to 29 kilometers (18 miles) wide, and about 1.6 kilometers (1 mile) deep.

Water is also very good at moving sediment. Sediment is made up of small pieces of rock, sand, and soil. Rivers, glaciers, rain, and even ocean currents move sediment over long distances. Eventually, this sediment settles in new places. Sediment is important because it adds nutrients to the soil. This helps plants grow. Places with lots of sediment, like riverbanks and deltas, are usually great for farming. They have a lot of different plants and animals. For thousands of years, the Nile River in Egypt flooded every year. This brought about 4 million metric tons of nutrient-rich sediment. Even today, the land next to the Nile is Egypt’s best farmland. Over millions of years, layers of sediment can press together to form sedimentary rocks. These rocks can contain fossils and clues about Earth’s past, like what the climate was like long ago.

Deep inside the Earth, water plays an important role in forming magma. Magma is the hot, melted rock that can lead to volcanoes. The mantle is the thick layer under the Earth's crust. It is made of solid rock even though it is hot enough to melt rocks. This is because the pressure deep inside the Earth is so strong that it stops the rock from melting. But in places called subduction zones, one of Earth's tectonic plates goes under another plate. This brings water down into the mantle. This water lowers the melting point of the rock. This means the rock can start to melt even though it is still under very high pressures. This creates magma, which can rise and cause volcanic eruptions. So, water does not just shape the land on the surface, it also helps cause big changes deep underground. Over millions of years, water has helped shape how Earth looks and behaves.

Water is not only found on Earth. It can be found all over the universe. Astronomers have found ice, vapor, and sometimes liquid water in many places in the universe. Water ice has been found on the Moon, Mars, and comets. It has also been found on the icy moons of the outer planets, such as Europa and Enceladus. Even in interstellar space, the space between the stars, water exists as ice around tiny dust grains. It also exists as vapor in molecular clouds where new stars are born. Water has even been found in the atmospheres of exoplanets, planets outside our solar system.

A water molecule is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Hydrogen came from the Big Bang. Oxygen was created inside big stars, much larger than the Sun. When these stars die and explode, they release oxygen into space. Oxygen can then combine with hydrogen to make water. Huge clouds of gas and dust, called stellar nurseries, are where new stars are born. These places often contain huge amounts of water vapor. For example, the Hubble Space Telescope found water molecules in the Helix Nebula. Water has also been found in young planetary systems around other stars. Around the star Beta Pictoris, which is about 20 million years old, scientists found water in a giant disk of gas and dust. This is likely from comets smashing into each other, asteroids, and forming planets. In the Orion Nebula, one of the biggest and most famous star-forming regions, water is still being made today. It is so large that it makes enough water every day to fill Earth’s oceans 60 times. All of this water, and the other molecules made in these star factories becomes part of new planets. On 22 July 2011, scientists found a gigantic cloud of water vapor that had 140 trillion times more water than the Earth's oceans combined around a quasar 12 billion light years from Earth. According to the researchers, the discovery shows that water has been in the universe for a very long time.

To find water in space, scientists make use of various tools and techniques. Telescopes with spectrometers can study the light coming from far away objects. Every molecule absorbs and emits light at specific wavelengths. By studying them, scientists can figure out whether there is water. Radio telescopes on the ground and space telescopes like the Hubble Space Telescope, the James Webb Space Telescope, and the Herschel Space Observatory have all helped us find water across the universe. In our own solar system, spacecraft missions have also been very important. NASA’s Galileo and Cassini missions found strong evidence of subsurface oceans on Jupiter's and Saturn’s moons. Cassini found geysers on Enceladus, with water vapor and ice particles erupting from the moon’s surface. On Mars, orbiters and rovers have found polar ice caps and certain rocks, which suggests that Mars might have had water in the past.

Water can be found in many places in our Solar System. Earth is the only planet we know of that has liquid water on its surface all the time. Water can be found as: solid (ice), liquid (water), and gas (water vapor) on Earth. Scientists have found tiny amounts of water vapor in the Sun’s atmosphere. The Sun is very hot. Its surface is about 5500 °C (9932 °F) and the inside is even hotter. Normally, water breaks down into hydrogen and oxygen in such heat. But there are cooler spots on the Sun, like sunspots. At sunspots, temperatures can drop to about 3000 °C (5432 °F). That is still very hot, but cool enough for water molecules to form for a short time before they break apart into hydrogen and oxygen again.

The Moon and Mercury both have water ice hidden in craters near their poles. These craters are always in the dark and never get sunlight. Because of this, the ice has stayed frozen for billions of years. NASA spacecrafts, like the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter and MESSENGER, have found that these ice do exist. Venus has water vapor in its atmosphere, just like Earth. But its surface is very hot and harsh. This means it does not have any liquid water on its surface. Scientists think Venus may have had water in the past, but it was lost into space. This is because Venus does not have a magnetic field to protect it like Earth does. Mars has ice caps at its poles made of water and carbon dioxide. There is also ice under the ground in many places. Rovers and orbiters have also found hydrated minerals. This means that liquid water once flowed on the surface of Mars a long time ago.

Asteroids are found near a part of the solar system called the “frost line”. This is the distance from the Sun where it is cold enough for water to freeze into ice. Beyond this line, you usually won't find liquid water because it is very cold. It can only be found hidden under ice, mixed with salt that keep it from freezing, or trapped under pressure in an atmosphere. One example is Ceres, a dwarf planet. It may have a layer of dust and rock on the outside, with salty water ice deep under the surface. Asteroids were once thought to be dry, but now scientists have found some that contain water ice or hydrated minerals. NASA’s OSIRIS-REx mission is helping us learn more about how much water some asteroids might have. Comets are pieces of ice leftover from the early solar system. They have a lot of frozen water. When a comet gets close to the Sun, the ice turns into gas, creating the famous glowing tails. There also exists a massive cloud of comets called the Oort cloud at the edge of the solar system.

The outer planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune also have water. They are big gas giants or ice giants. They do not have a solid surface to walk on like our planet. Jupiter has water vapor in its thick atmosphere, but it is hard to see because of all the clouds. Saturn is like Jupiter. It has some water vapor in its atmosphere. Its beautiful rings are mostly made of water ice. Uranus might have an icy layer deep under its atmosphere. Neptune is similar to Uranus. Scientists think it also has an icy layer under its atmosphere that may contain water and other ices.

Some of the moons around the giant planets in our Solar System may have huge oceans of liquid water under their frozen surfaces. Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto, which orbit Jupiter, and Enceladus, and Titan, which orbit Saturn, might have underground oceans. Enceladus, a small moon of Saturn, shoots out jets of water vapor and ice from its south pole. A spacecraft named Cassini flew through these jets and found water, salts, and simple organic molecules. These are clues that there might be a hidden ocean with life. Titan, Saturn’s biggest moon, has lakes and seas on its surface, but they are filled with liquid methane and ethane, not water. Scientists think Titan has a salty water ocean deep underground, hidden under its icy surface. The moons of Uranus also have icy surfaces. Titania, the largest, has water ice and carbon dioxide ice. There might be liquid water under its surface. Triton, Neptune’s biggest moon, has a surface of frozen water ice. Deep under that ice, scientists also think it might have a liquid ocean.

The dwarf planet Pluto has a surface covered in frozen nitrogen and water ice. Pluto is extremely cold and far from the Sun. Scientists think Pluto might have a liquid ocean deep beneath its icy crust, about 100 kilometers deep. Pluto’s biggest moon, Charon, also has water ice. Beneath the surface, Charon may have had liquid water in the past. Some scientists think ice geysers might still happen on Charon.

Water is not only found on planets and moons. It can also be found in the vast spaces between stars, the interstellar medium. The interstellar medium (ISM), is the scattered mix of gas, dust and radiation that can be found in the space between the stars in a galaxy. Water can be mainly found as ice covering dust grains in the interstellar medium and dense molecular clouds, where new stars are born. It can also be found as water vapor inside dense molecular clouds. In the coldest parts of the ISM, water molecules condense onto the surfaces of dust grains, forming icy mantles. These icy grains are very important ingredients in the chemistry of making stars and planets.

Molecular clouds, places where stars and planets are born, contain huge amounts of water. Water vapor has been found in many of these clouds, especially near newly forming stars. As young stars fuse hydrogen into helium they release heat around them. This warms up the surrounding ices, turning them into water vapor. This allows them to be observed by space telescopes such as the Herschel Space Observatory and the Spitzer Space Telescope. One of the most famous places where water has been studied is the Orion Nebula. Here, astronomers have found huge amounts of water vapor surrounding stars being born. In these environments, water is also very important in the chemistry that creates more complex organic molecules like amino acids. The Rho Ophiuchi cloud complex is a nearby molecular cloud about 460 light-years away. It contains protostars surrounded by water-rich ices. The ice in this region has been found using telescopes like Spitzer and JWST.

Ice and tiny grains of dust were the main ingredients that came together to form the Solar System. Scientists believe that the water in the solar system formed in space before our Sun or planets even existed. When star systems begin to form, gravity pulls together this gas and dust to make stars and planets. The dust already has water on it, which can become part of the new planets. That means planets like Earth might have been born with water already inside them.

When looking for life on other planets, called exoplanets, water is one of the most important molecules scientists look for on other planets. We cannot use a telescope to look into other planets for water because they are very far away. But, astronomers have found others ways to look for water on some of these far away planets. The main way scientists study planets outside our Solar System is through something called transit spectroscopy. This means watching a planet as it passes in front of its star. When it does, some of the star’s light goes through the planet’s atmosphere to us. Depending on what the atmosphere is made of, certain parts of the light get blocked or bent. This creates a kind of “fingerprint” in the light that scientists can study. By looking closely, they can figure out which gases are in the atmosphere, like water or methane. Right now, studying the atmospheres of exoplanets is still very hard. Our tools are not perfect for this yet and it takes very careful measurements.

This method has found water vapor on many "hot Jupiters", such as HD 189733 b and HD 209458 b. These are large gas giants very close to their stars. Though these planets are far too hot for liquid water. Water exists as water vapor in the atmospheres of these planets. In recent years, telescopes have begun finding signs of water on smaller planets, especially sub-Neptunes and super-Earths. These are planets smaller than gas giants but larger than the Earth. One example is K2-18b, a super-Earth found by NASA's Kepler spacecraft in 2015. It is a planet with eight times the mass of the Earth that orbits a so called red dwarf star, which is much cooler than the sun. K2-18b can be found in the “habitable zone” of its star. This means it has the right temperature to have liquid water. Given its mass and radius, K2-18 b may either be a rocky planet with a thick atmosphere or be more like Neptune. Observations with Hubble and the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) have found water vapor in its atmosphere. Though scientists cannot say if it has clouds, oceans, or even rain. Planets in the habitable zone, are places scientists are looking with new technology like the James Webb Space Telescope.

When scientists look for life in space, they often start by looking for water. Every living thing on Earth needs water to survive. Water has special chemical properties that make it perfect for life. It is really good at dissolving other substances, which helps living things carry out chemical reactions. Water stays liquid over a wide range of temperatures. It can help keep living organisms from getting too hot or cold. It also helps move nutrients and waste in and out of cells and living organisms. That is why scientists often say “follow the water” when searching for life beyond Earth.

Scientists think moons like Europa (which orbits Jupiter) and Enceladus (which orbits Saturn) might be able to have life. Both moons have thick layers of ice on their surface. Under that ice, scientists believe there are massive oceans of liquid water. The bottom of these oceans could be like hydrothermal environments found in the deep sea on Earth. On our planet, hydrothermal vents release hot, mineral-rich water from under the seabed. This creates a place where life thrives without sunlight. Instead of using sunlight for energy (like plants do), the organisms living there use chemical energy from the minerals in the water. This is a process called chemosynthesis. If similar hydrothermal vents exist on Europa or Enceladus, they could provide the energy and nutrients needed for life to survive in complete darkness, just like Earth’s deep sea life. Scientists have already found clues supporting these ideas. On Enceladus, for example, NASA’s Cassini spacecraft found jets of water vapor, ice particles, and organic molecules shooting out from cracks from the moon. This is a strong sign that there is liquid water and hydrothermal vents under its icy surface. These discoveries make Europa and Enceladus key targets for future space missions.

Mars remains a key target in the search for life beyond Earth. Although the planet is cold and dry today, it shows strong signs that it might have had water in the past. Ancient river valleys, dry lake beds, and minerals that only form in water suggest that liquid water once flowed on the Martian surface. Scientists believe that billions of years ago, Mars may have had a thicker atmosphere and a milder climate, possibly making it a habitable world. Even now, there may be salty liquid water hidden underground, especially near the poles or beneath the surface. Briny water, which contains dissolved salts, can stay liquid at colder temperatures, increasing the chances that it might still exist on Mars. To explore this possibility, NASA and other space agencies have sent robotic missions like the Perseverance and Curiosity rovers to study Mars up close. These rovers have advanced tools to analyze rocks, soil, and even the atmosphere. They are looking for biosignatures, which are chemical or physical signs that could suggest past life.

Scientists often look for water when they search for life on exoplanets. And they often look for planets in the habitable zone. This is the area around a star where temperatures are just right for liquid water to exist on a planet. If a planet is too close to its star, it will be too hot and water will boil away. If it is too far, it will be too cold and water will freeze. But in the habitable zone, things can be just right for water to stay liquid. Earth can be found in the habitable zone of the Sun. This is one reason it has oceans, rivers, and rain. That is why it can support so many kinds of life. When scientists study planets around other stars (called exoplanets), they look to see if those planets are also in the habitable zone. If they are, and they have the right kind of atmosphere, they might have water. And, they might even have life. Beyond our solar system, astronomers have discovered water vapor in the atmospheres of some exoplanets. These findings suggest that water, a key ingredient for life as we know it, might be common in the universe. This ongoing research brings us closer to answering one of the biggest questions in science: Are we alone in the universe?

Plants and animals (including ) are mostly water inside, and must drink water to live. It gives a medium for chemical reactions to take place, and is the main part of blood. It keeps the body temperature the same by sweating from the skin.  Water helps blood carry nutrients from the stomach to all parts of the body to keep the body alive.  Water also helps the blood carry oxygen from the lungs to the body.  Saliva, which helps animals and people digest food, is mostly water. Water helps make urine. Urine helps remove bad chemicals from the body. The human body is between 60% and 70% water, but this value differs with age; i.e. a foetus is 95% water inside.

Water is the main component of drinks like milk, juice, and wine. Each type of drink also has other things that add flavor or nutrients, things like sugar, fruit, and sometimes alcohol. Water that a person can drink is called "potable water" (or "drinking water"). The water in oceans is salt water, but lakes and rivers usually have unsalted water. Only about 3% of all the water on earth is fresh water. The rest is salt water.

Many places, including cities and deserts, don't have as much water as people want. They build aqueducts to bring water there.

Though people can survive a few months without food, they can only survive for a day or two without water.  A few desert animals can get enough water from their food, but the others must drink.

Water is also used for recreational purposes, see list of water sports.

Water is used as both the coolant and the neutron moderator in most nuclear reactors. This may be ordinary water (called light water in the nuclear industry) or heavy water.

Water is also used for washing a lot of objects. Goods, services and people are transported to other countries in watercrafts on bodies of water.

Water is used in chemical reactions as a solvent or reactant. Water is also used in fire fighting. Water is also used for cooking.

Water laws are rules that help decide how water is shared, used, and protected. These laws are important because water is something that everyone needs. People, farms, businesses, and nature all depend on water. Water laws help figure out who can use water, how much they can use, and what they can use it for. They also try to make sure that water is used fairly and not wasted or polluted. In many places, water is limited, and if it is not managed well, it can run out or get too dirty to use. Water laws are meant to stop problems like this including fights over water. They also help make sure there is enough clean water for things like drinking, growing food, making energy, and protecting the environment.

Water rights are the rules about who can use water and how much they can use. These rules are part of water laws. There are different kinds of water rights depending on where you live and the laws people follow. One common system is called riparian rights, which is often used in places with plenty of water. With riparian rights, if you own land next to a river, lake, or stream, you have the right to use the water. But you have to be careful not to harm the people who live downstream. In drier places, they often use a different system called prior appropriation. This follows the rule of "first in time, first in right." The first person to take water for a useful purpose has the right to keep using it, even if their land is not next to the water. In many parts of the world, especially in rural or indigenous communities, customary or traditional laws also guide how water is shared. These laws are based on old practices and cultural values that help people respect and protect water. Different countries have their own laws and rules for managing water. Some countries focus on deciding who can use water and how they can use it, while others pay more attention to stopping pollution or building things like dams and pipelines to help control water. When rivers, lakes, or underground water cross borders between countries, water law becomes more complicated. In these cases, countries need to work together and make agreements to share the water fairly and avoid fights. For example, many countries share big rivers like the Nile, Mekong, and Danube. These countries cooperate through special agreements to manage the water in a way that works for everyone.

Water use is usually managed by national or local governments and special government agencies. These groups decide how much water people can use, check that the water is clean and safe, and protect the plants and animals that need water to live. They also help solve problems when two communities or businesses want to use the same water source. Water governance means making sure water systems are cared for, pollution is controlled. It also means making sure everyone has access to clean water for drinking and hygiene. Good water management is very important to handle problems like droughts, floods, growing populations, and climate change. There are many important examples of water laws and how they affect people. In the United States, the Clean Water Act is a big law that helps protect rivers, lakes, and other water from pollution. In Africa, the countries along the Nile River have talked and sometimes argued for a long time about how to share the river’s water fairly. Some countries are starting to say that water is a public good or even a human right. This means that everyone should be able to get clean water, no matter how much money they have or who they are.

A water crisis is a serious situation that happens when people do not have enough clean and safe water to meet their daily needs for drinking, cooking, washing, and farming. It also includes times when water is available but too polluted or too far away to be used safely. A water crisis can also affect the environment. It can harm rivers, lakes, and plants and animals that depend on water. This problem is not just about having no water at all. It also includes having water that is too dirty, too expensive, or too difficult to reach. There are many reasons why water crises happen.

One major cause is population growth. As more people are born and the world’s population grows, more clean water is needed for drinking, cooking, washing, and growing food. As cities get bigger and more people use water, rivers, lakes, and underground water sources are being used up faster than nature can replace it. This causes a water scarcity, which means there is not enough clean water for everyone’s needs. In big cities, the problem can get worse. When lots of people live close together, they all need water at the same time. In poor neighborhoods or fast-growing areas, some people may not have any clean running water at all. In the countryside, farmers use a lot of water to grow crops and feed animals. As the population grows, the demand for food grows too, so farmers need even more water. Some use strong pumps to pull water from underground, but if they take too much, the water underground can run out.

Another big problem is pollution. Even though there is water in rivers, lakes, and oceans, a lot of it is not safe to drink or use because it is polluted. Pollution happens when harmful things like chemicals, trash, or dirty water from homes and factories get into natural water sources. This makes the water dangerous for people, animals, and plants. One major source of pollution is waste from homes and cities. When people wash dishes, take showers, or flush toilets, that dirty water has to go somewhere. In some cities, it goes to special treatment plants that clean the water. But in many places around the world, there are no good systems, so the dirty water goes straight into rivers or lakes. This can carry germs that cause serious diseases like cholera or diarrhea. Even in big cities, if the water system breaks or gets too full during a storm, dirty water can mix with clean water and make it unsafe to drink. Factories and farms also cause a lot of water pollution. Some factories dump leftover chemicals, oil, or heavy metals into nearby rivers to save money. These dangerous substances poison the water and can build up in fish, making them unsafe to eat. On farms, people use fertilizers and pesticides to help crops grow and kill bugs. But when it rains, these chemicals can wash off the land into rivers or lakes. This is called “water runoff.” It can make algae grow too fast. When the algae die, they use up the oxygen in the water. Then fish and other animals cannot survive, and parts of the water become “dead zones” where nothing can live. Plastic is another big problem. Every year, tons of plastic bottles, bags, and wrappers end up in rivers and oceans. Plastic does not break down easily, so it can float in the water for years. Sea animals like turtles or fish might eat plastic by mistake and die. Tiny pieces of plastic, called microplastics, have even been found in drinking water and seafood. Scientists are still studying how these microplastics might affect human health.

Another big reason for water problems is overuse. This means people are using too much water too fast, much faster than nature can refill it. Every day, water is needed for many things like drinking, cooking, cleaning, farming, making clothes, building houses, and running factories. As more people live on Earth, they use more water. But there is only a limited amount of fresh water on the planet. When we take too much water without giving nature enough time to replace it, rivers dry up, lakes get smaller, and underground water sources called aquifers drop lower and lower. Farming uses the most water of all. Farmers need water to grow crops and take care of animals, but in many places, they use more water than necessary. Sometimes they flood their fields, and a lot of the water is wasted or lost to evaporation. In dry places, farmers often pump water from deep underground. At first, this works well, but if they keep pumping too much, those underground water supplies start to run out. Once an aquifer is empty, it can take many years or even centuries to fill up again. This is happening in parts of the United States, India, China, and many other countries. Factories and industries also use huge amounts of water to make things like paper, steel, clothes, and electronics. For example, it takes thousands of liters of water to make just one pair of jeans or a hamburger.

Another big reason for the water crisis is poor infrastructure. Infrastructure means the systems and buildings we use to carry, store, clean, and deliver water, like pipes, pumps, water treatment plants, and storage tanks. In many places, especially in poorer countries or old cities, these systems are old, broken, or not built well. This means that even if there is enough water nearby, people still cannot get clean, safe water in their homes. Because of this, millions of people either get no water at all or have to use water that can make them sick. In some poor or rural areas, there might be no water system at all, so people have to walk long distances to rivers or wells to get water by hand. Sometimes this water is not clean because there is no way to filter or clean it. In cities, even when pipes and pumps exist, they may be old and not well cared for. Leaking pipes waste a lot of water, sometimes up to half of it is lost before it even gets to homes or schools. In crowded neighborhoods, especially slums, water pipes may only work a few hours a day or not at all. People there have to buy water from trucks or use unsafe sources. Water treatment plants are supposed to clean the water by removing dirt, germs, and chemicals before people drink it. But if these plants are too small, do not have enough money, or are broken, the water from taps can still be unsafe. Dirty water can cause diseases like cholera, typhoid, and diarrhea, which kill thousands of people every year, especially children. Sometimes, clean water and dirty sewage use the same underground pipes. When those pipes break or flood, the two can mix, making people sick without them knowing. As more people move to cities, they need more water, but water systems do not always grow fast enough to keep up. During heat waves or droughts, the systems can break down even more. And during floods, water pipes may burst or get clogged, leaving people without water for days.

Another big reason the world has a water crisis is that governments often do not manage water well. Even if a country has enough water, bad planning, weak laws, and unfair choices can cause big problems. In many places, water is not shared fairly. Some people, especially those in rich neighborhoods or powerful companies, get plenty of clean water, while others in poor areas get very little or none at all. Sometimes governments build big water projects like dams or canals, but these only help a few people and leave out whole communities. Poor water planning also causes waste and shortages. In some countries, water is used without limits. Big farms or factories take as much water as they want from rivers or underground, and the government does not keep track of it. This causes overuse, where water is taken faster than nature can replace it. Also, water bills may be too cheap or not collected at all, so people do not try to save water. In other places, governments do not spend enough money on water systems, so pipes leak, treatment plants break, and many areas have no working water services. Sometimes, powerful people or companies bribe officials to get more water than they need, while others are ignored. Governments may promise to build water projects but never finish them, or the money disappears because of corruption. Sometimes leaders make decisions without asking local people what they really need, so water projects do not fix real problems. For example, a city might build a big water pipeline but forget to build toilets or drains, which can cause health problems. Another issue is that many governments do not plan for the future. As cities grow and the climate changes, water needs change too. But without good planning, old water systems cannot keep up. When droughts happen, there are no backup plans. When floods come, water systems break down.

At the same time, climate change is making the water problem worse. As the Earth gets hotter, it changes how water moves in nature. Normally, water falls as rain or snow, flows into rivers and lakes, and then evaporates back into the air. But with climate change, this natural water cycle gets out of balance. In many places, rain does not come when it is needed, or it falls all at once in heavy storms that cause floods. Some areas are getting drier, while others get too much water. This makes it harder for people to get clean and steady water when they really need it. In dry places, climate change causes droughts to happen more often and last longer. A drought is when there is very little rain for a long time. This causes rivers to shrink and lakes to dry up. Crops would not grow, and animals would not have enough water to drink. Farmers suffer the most because they need water to grow food and take care of their families. On the other hand, some places get too much water at once. Heavy rain from warmer temperatures can cause floods that destroy homes, farms, and water systems. Flood water can mix with sewage and chemicals, making it dirty and unsafe to drink. Even though floods bring lots of water, it is often not clean or useful. Also, glaciers and snowpacks in mountains are melting faster than before. These usually act like natural water tanks, slowly releasing water during dry months. But now, they are disappearing, which means millions of people who live downstream will have less water in the future.

The world is facing a very serious water crisis, and the numbers show how big the problem really is. Right now, more than 2.2 billion people, almost 1 out of every 4 people on Earth, do not have safe drinking water at home. That means they cannot just turn on a tap to get clean water to drink, cook, or wash with. Even more people, about 3.5 billion, do not have proper sanitation, like toilets or safe ways to get rid of dirty water. Without clean water and safe toilets, diseases spread easily, and many children, especially in poor areas, get sick. According to the World Health Organization, around 500,000 people die every year from diseases caused by dirty water and poor hygiene. About 4 billion people, more than half the world’s population, face serious water shortages for at least one month every year. Some of the countries with the worst water problems include India, Egypt, Iran, and parts of the United States, like California. In these places, rivers are drying up, underground water is running low, and lakes are shrinking. For example, the Aral Sea, which used to be one of the largest lakes in the world, has almost completely dried up because people used too much of its water. In Cape Town, South Africa, the city almost ran out of water in 2018. The crisis was so bad they called it “Day Zero,” the day the taps would be turned off if water ran out. Climate change is making things worse. As the planet gets hotter, droughts are happening more often and lasting longer. Rain patterns are changing, so some places get too much rain all at once, causing floods, while other places don't get enough rain, leading to dry land and crop failures. The United Nations says that by 2050, over 4 billion people might not have safe water at home unless we make big changes. Even in places that have enough water, the systems that deliver it do not always work well. The World Bank says the world loses about $260 billion every year because of bad water systems, like leaking pipes, poor planning, or people getting sick and missing work or school because of waterborne diseases. At the same time, people living in slums or rural areas often have to pay more money per liter for water than rich people in cities. That is because they have to buy it from private sellers or carry it from far away. This is unfair and keeps many families stuck in poverty.

There are many ways we can fix the water crisis, but it takes everyone working together, including governments, businesses, communities, and ordinary people. One of the most important steps is to build and fix water systems. This means making sure pipes, pumps, treatment plants, and tanks work well and bring clean water to everyone who needs it. In many poor places, there are no water systems at all, so people have to walk far to get water. By investing in strong water systems, clean water can be delivered straight to homes, schools, and hospitals. Good systems also stop leaks, so less water is wasted before it even reaches people. Another important solution is to use water more carefully and waste less. Many people and factories use more water than they really need. Simple things like fixing dripping taps, taking shorter showers, and turning off the water while brushing your teeth can save a lot of water. Farmers, who use most of the world’s water, can use better methods like drip irrigation and collecting rainwater to grow crops with less water. In cities, recycling water from sinks and showers to flush toilets or water plants helps save even more. Protecting and cleaning our water sources is also very important. Rivers, lakes, and underground water can get polluted by trash, chemicals, and sewage. To keep water clean, we need to stop dumping waste into nature. Governments should make strong laws to control pollution from factories and farms. People can help too by not throwing garbage into rivers or drains, and by using less plastic and fewer harmful cleaning products. Fair government rules are needed as well. In some places, water is not shared fairly. Rich neighborhoods and big companies get plenty of water, while poor communities get very little. Governments must treat water as a basic human right, not just something to buy and sell. They should plan for the future by knowing how much water is available, who needs it most, and how to protect it from climate change. They should also include local people when making decisions about water use and sharing. Education is another important part of solving the water crisis. Many people do not know how serious the problem is or what they can do to help. Schools, TV shows, and community projects can teach kids and adults about water and why it's important to save it. Finally, technology can help a lot. New tools like water filters, low-water toilets, smart irrigation systems, and apps that track water use make saving water easier. Even simple tools like tanks that collect rainwater from rooftops can give families clean water in dry areas. Scientists and engineers are working on ways to clean salty ocean water, safely recycle wastewater, and watch water use from space. All these ideas together can help make sure there is enough clean water for everyone.

Water is one of the most important resources on Earth. People need it to drink, cook, clean, and grow food. But when there is not enough water, or when it is not shared fairly, it can lead to conflict between people, groups, or even countries. One major cause of water conflict is scarcity. Scarcity means there is not enough water for everyone who needs it. This can happen in dry places where it does not rain much, or in areas where the population is growing quickly and using too much water. When water is limited, people may start to argue or fight over who gets to use it. For example, if two farmers both use the same river to water their crops, but the river starts to dry up, they may blame each other and argue about who should get more water. These kinds of problems can happen between neighborhoods, cities, or even whole countries that share rivers or lakes.

Another reason people fight over water is when rivers or lakes cross borders between countries. These are called transboundary water sources, and they can cause serious problems. For example, the Nile River flows through several countries in Africa. Each country wants to use the water for things like farming and electricity. If one country builds a dam or takes more water than before, the others may get upset or worried they would not have enough. The same kind of conflict happens in other parts of the world. India and Pakistan have had disagreements over the Indus River, and countries in Central Asia have argued over rivers that come from melting mountain glaciers. If countries do not find fair ways to share the water, it can lead to political fights and even war. Pollution is another cause of water conflict. When factories, farms, or cities dump waste into rivers or lakes, the water becomes dirty and unsafe. If one group pollutes the water and another group depends on it for drinking or farming, big problems can happen. People downstream may get sick or lose their crops and blame those upstream. This can lead to lawsuits, protests, or even violence. Even within one country, different areas or groups might argue about who is polluting the water and who should pay to clean it up. These fights can make it even harder to solve the water crisis.

Unfair sharing of water can also cause problems. In many places, rich neighborhoods or big companies get more water than poor communities. When there is not enough water for everyone, and some people have plenty while others have none, it can make people upset and angry. This can lead to protests or even fights. For example, in some cities, poor areas called slums may have no running water at all. But at the same time, fancy hotels nearby might use a lot of water to fill swimming pools or run fountains. When people see this kind of unfairness, they may feel they are being treated badly and demand change. Climate change is also making water conflicts worse. As the Earth gets hotter and rain becomes less regular, droughts are happening more often. This puts more stress on water supplies and makes people compete even more. In some places, climate change is melting glaciers and drying up rivers. When water becomes harder to find, people worry more and fight harder over the little that is left. If governments do not step in to share water fairly and plan for the future, these conflicts could become more serious over time.

One of the most well-known water conflicts in the world is happening along the Nile River in Africa. The Nile is the longest river in the world, and it flows through 11 different countries, including Ethiopia, Sudan, South Sudan, Egypt, and Uganda. This river is very important because millions of people use it every day for drinking water, farming, fishing, and making electricity. But since so many countries share the Nile, there are many disagreements about how the water should be divided. The biggest conflict is between Ethiopia, Sudan, and Egypt. Each country depends on the Nile for different reasons, and they do not always agree on what is fair. A major reason for the conflict is a huge dam that Ethiopia is building. It is called the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, or GERD. Ethiopia started building this dam in 2011 on the Blue Nile, one of the two main branches of the Nile River. Ethiopia says the dam is important because it will create electricity for millions of people who do not have enough power. They believe it will help the country grow and develop. However, Egypt is very worried about the dam. Egypt gets about 90% of its water from the Nile, and it fears the dam will lower the amount of water flowing to its farms and cities. Egypt needs the Nile for almost everything, especially to grow crops in the desert. Sudan is in the middle. On one hand, the dam could help Sudan by reducing floods and giving them more electricity. On the other hand, Sudan is worried that Ethiopia might fill the dam too quickly, which could reduce the amount of water Sudan receives for farming and drinking. Sudan wants all three countries to make a clear agreement so that everyone can benefit and no one gets harmed. Ethiopia, Egypt, and Sudan have been talking about this issue for many years, but they still have not made a final deal. Egypt wants strict rules about how and when Ethiopia can fill the dam, especially during dry years. Ethiopia wants to control the dam itself and believes it has the right to use the river that starts in its land. Because of these disagreements, there have been many arguments, tense meetings, and even threats. Some people worry that if the countries cannot work together, it could lead to a serious crisis or even conflict.

Another example of water conflict is between India and Pakistan. These two countries have not always gotten along, and sharing water has made things even more difficult. The Indus River and its smaller rivers start in India but flow into Pakistan. In 1960, the two countries signed a water treaty to divide the rivers fairly. But even today, each country is worried that the other might take more water than they should. When India builds new dams or water projects, Pakistan gets alarmed and accuses India of breaking the agreement. These water issues add to the already tense relationship between the two countries. In the Middle East, water is very limited, and this leads to many conflicts. One example is the Jordan River, which flows through Israel, Jordan, and Palestine. All three groups need the river for drinking water, farming, and everyday life. But over the years, the river has shrunk because of overuse and pollution. As the water supply drops, arguments have grown. In the West Bank, many Palestinian communities struggle to get enough water, while nearby Israeli settlements often have steady supplies. This unfair access makes people angry and adds to the political tension. Some efforts have been made to share the water more fairly, but it is hard because the groups do not trust each other. In Yemen, a country dealing with war and poverty, water shortages have also led to conflict. Many people there do not have clean water. As wells dry up, villages and tribes sometimes fight over who gets to use the last water sources. In some rural areas, armed groups have taken control of water supplies, making it even harder for families to get the water they need. Some experts believe that water problems have made Yemen’s civil war even worse. This shows how lack of water can become even more dangerous when a country is already in crisis.

In the United States, water conflicts happen more often than people might think, especially in the western part of the country where water is harder to find. One of the biggest and most well-known water fights is over the Colorado River. This river flows through seven states: Colorado, Wyoming, Utah, New Mexico, Arizona, Nevada, and California. It also flows into Mexico. More than 40 million people use the Colorado River for drinking water, farming, and making electricity. But lately, the river has been shrinking because of drought, climate change, and using too much water. The states argue over how much water each one should get. For example, California uses a lot of water for growing food in the desert, while big cities like Las Vegas and Phoenix need more water as more people move there. The government has tried to help the states make fair deals, but it’s been very hard to agree on a long-term solution. Another big water conflict in the U.S. is between Georgia, Alabama, and Florida. This fight has been going on for decades. These states share rivers like the Chattahoochee and the Flint, which come together to form the Apalachicola River. Georgia wants more water for the city of Atlanta and for farms. But Alabama and Florida say that if Georgia takes too much water, there would not be enough left for them. Florida especially needs the water to keep its seafood industry alive in Apalachicola Bay. This fight has gone all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court, but even after many years, it is still not solved. Even in places with more water, like around the Great Lakes, there can still be conflicts. Some towns and companies want to take more water out of the lakes for their own use, but others worry this could hurt the environment or lower the water levels. The Great Lakes are shared by several U.S. states and Canada, so any plan to use the water has to be agreed on by everyone. In 2008, a deal called the Great Lakes Compact was made to protect the lakes and stop people from taking water unfairly. Still, some places try to find ways around the rules, which causes more arguments and concern.

Even though water can sometimes cause conflict, it can also help bring people together. Many countries, states, and communities have worked hard to cooperate and make fair deals about how to share water. These water agreements are very important because they help prevent arguments, protect nature, and make sure everyone has the water they need. When countries share rivers, lakes, or underground water, they often create treaties, or written agreements. These treaties explain how much water each side can use and what to do if there is a problem. They might also include plans to keep the water clean and to stop pollution and waste. One famous example is the Indus Waters Treaty between India and Pakistan. This treaty was signed in 1960 with help from the World Bank. The Indus River system flows through both countries and is very important for farming and daily life. Even though India and Pakistan have had many political problems and even wars, this water treaty has mostly worked well. It divides the rivers between the two countries and includes rules about building dams and using the water fairly. The treaty has helped stop big water fights for over 60 years. This shows that even countries that do not get along can work together when it comes to water.

Another important example of water cooperation is the Senegal River Basin agreement in West Africa. The Senegal River flows through several countries, including Senegal, Mali, and Mauritania. In 1972, these countries created a group called the Organisation for the Development of the Senegal River (OMVS). They agreed to manage the river together, share the water fairly, and build dams and power plants that help all the countries. The group listens to farmers, fishermen, and local leaders to make sure everyone’s needs are heard. This kind of teamwork helps people trust each other and solve problems peacefully. In Europe, there are many rivers that cross between countries. One of the most important is the Danube River, which flows through more than 10 countries. In 1994, these countries signed the Danube River Protection Convention. They promised to work together to keep the river clean, prevent floods, and protect the plants and animals that live in and around the water. The agreement includes regular meetings, water testing, and teamwork during emergencies. Because of this, the Danube remains safe and helpful for millions of people. The United Nations (UN) also supports water cooperation around the world. In 1997, the UN created a special agreement called the Convention on the Law of the Non-Navigational Uses of International Watercourses. This set of rules encourages countries to share water fairly, avoid harming each other, and settle arguments peacefully. Not all countries have signed it, but it still helps guide how nations work together to manage shared rivers and lakes. The UN also celebrates World Water Day every year on March 22 to remind everyone how important it is to work together on water issues.

Water has deep meaning in many cultures and religions around the world. Almost everywhere, water is seen as a symbol of purity, life, and change. It often stands for cleansing, not just of the body but also of the spirit. People believe water can wash away bad things and help start fresh. It is important to many religious beliefs and spiritual practices. It can represent the cycle of life, rebirth, and the connection between the physical world and something sacred or divine. In many faiths, water is used in religious rituals to bless or purify people. These ceremonies include baptisms, ritual washings, and blessings. For example, people may wash their hands, face, or whole body before prayer or entering a sacred place to show respect and prepare for spiritual contact. In baptism, a person is dipped in or sprinkled with water to mark the start of a spiritual journey. It often means the washing away of sins and beginning a new life. Water may also be sprinkled or offered during other ceremonies to bless people, objects, or spaces. These practices show the belief that water has spiritual power.

Different religions use water in special ways. In Christianity, baptism is an important ceremony where water is used to show spiritual cleansing and a new life in Jesus Christ. In Islam, water is used in wudu (a small washing) and ghusl (a full-body washing). These are done before prayers and other holy activities to be clean in body and spirit. In Hinduism, water is very sacred, especially rivers like the Ganges. People believe this river can wash away sins. It is used in many ceremonies, including funerals. Buddhists use water in temple rituals as a sign of offering and for spiritual cleansing. In Judaism, there is a special bath called a mikveh. People use it for purification during important times, like before getting married or when entering the religion. In Sikhism, being clean is part of being spiritual. Sikhs use water for bathing and in some religious rituals. Many indigenous and animist traditions also see water as sacred. Rivers, lakes, and springs are believed to be the homes of spirits or gods. They are often part of rituals and traditional stories.

Sacred water sources are very important in many religions. People often travel long distances to visit these special places during pilgrimages. These water sites are believed to have healing powers or a spiritual presence. For example, in Christianity, many people visit the spring at Lourdes in France, which is believed to heal the sick. Every year, millions of people go there to pray and collect water. In Hinduism, the Ganges River is one of the most holy rivers. Bathing in it is believed to wash away sins and bring blessings. In Islam, the Zamzam Well in Mecca is a sacred part of the Hajj pilgrimage. It has deep spiritual and historical meaning for Muslims.

In ancient times, people believed that everything in the world was made from a few basic things called elements. One of the first known Western philosophers, Thales of Miletus, lived in the 6th century BCE and thought that water was the most important of them all. Thales believed that water was the origin of everything. He called it the "archê," a Greek word that means "first principle" or "beginning." He noticed that water is essential for life and can exist in three forms: solid, liquid, and gas. Because of this, he thought water was the basic building block of the universe. Thales was one of the first people to try to understand the world through observation and reason, instead of relying on myths or stories. His ideas helped start what we now call natural philosophy, the early form of science.

As philosophy grew in different parts of the world, many cultures gave water an important place in their way of thinking. In ancient Greece, famous philosophers like Plato and Aristotle believed that everything was made of four main elements: earth, air, fire, and water. Each element had special qualities. Water was thought to be cold and wet. It was linked to change and movement because of the way it flows. In Eastern philosophy, water also had deep meaning. In Daoism, a major tradition from China, water is a symbol of ideal behavior. It flows gently, adapts to its surroundings, and can slowly wear down even hard rock, not by force, but with patience and persistence. This idea is part of the Daoist teaching called wu wei, which means acting without effort or force. In Indian philosophy, water is one of the Pancha Mahabhuta, or five great elements, in both Hinduism and Buddhism. Water stands for emotion, cleansing, and flow. It is seen as important not just for the body, but also for the soul and the balance of nature.

Throughout history, philosophers have used water as a symbol or metaphor in their writing. Water is often used to represent the flow of time, the way we think and feel, or how things can change shape while staying as the same substance. In many traditions, water stands for change or transformation. It can turn into ice or steam, then go back to being liquid again. Because of this, philosophers use water to talk about how life is always changing, and how nothing stays the same forever. Water is also used to explain how our identity (who we are) is not fixed. Like water takes the shape of whatever container it is in, people can be shaped by their surroundings and experiences. In more recent times, philosophers still talk about water in many important ways. In ecological philosophy, they explore how people are connected to nature and the environment, and water is a big part of that. In existentialism, water can be a symbol for things like uncertainty, deep thoughts, or the search for meaning in life. In environmental ethics, water is often discussed in debates about natural rights, fairness, and how to protect the planet. Some modern philosophers believe that water should be seen not just as a resource we use, but as a living system that should be treated with respect and care. Others study how water affects people’s lives, culture, and identity. In a type of philosophy called phenomenology, which looks at how we experience the world, water might be studied through the senses. How it feels, looks, sounds, and moves.

Water has been connected to mythical creatures and spirits in many cultures around the world. Stories often tell of beings like mermaids, nymphs, kelpies, nāgas, and other water spirits that live in rivers, lakes, or the ocean. These magical beings are sometimes seen as protectors of water. They might guard a water source and punish people who harm it. In other stories, they may try to trick or lure humans into the water. Some water spirits are wise and kind, offering help or magical advice. Others are tricksters or bring bad luck. In Japanese folklore, there is a creature called the kappa. Kappa are often seen as water spirits or kami in Japanese folklore. They can act in both mischievous and dangerous ways. Sometimes, they play pranks, like trying to peek under people's clothing near the water. But in other stories, they can be harmful, even trying to drown people or animals or scare children. Even though they can be scary, not all kappa are mean. Some are shown to be friendly and can even help humans. In Celtic legends, water fairies are magical beings that live in rivers, lakes, springs, and wells. They are often connected to nature. They are believed to guard the water and its power. These fairies can be kind and helpful, but they can also be tricky or dangerous if they are disrespected. In parts of Africa, people believe in Mami Wata, a powerful water spirit who can appear as a beautiful woman or a mermaid. She is seen as a guardian of rivers and oceans. Mami Wata protects the natural world. She can bring blessings to those who honor her. But if someone disrespects her, pollutes the water, or breaks a promise, she may punish them. In Greek mythology, sirens were dangerous creatures who lived on rocky islands in the sea. They looked like part woman and part bird, but later stories showed them to be more like mermaids. Sirens had beautiful voices and sang songs so sweet that sailors could not resist. The music would lure the sailors closer and closer until their ships crashed on the rocks.

In many myths and folktales, water is seen as a gateway or border between different worlds. Rivers, lakes, and oceans are often shown as dividing lines between the world of the living and the dead, or between the human world and the spirit world. In Greek mythology, there is a river called the Styx that separates the world of the living from the underworld. When someone dies, their soul must cross the river to reach the land of the dead. A boatman named Charon ferries the souls across, but only if they have a coin to pay him. In Celtic stories, lakes and misty waters are often seen as gateways to the Otherworld, a magical realm where spirits and fairies live. Some tales say that if you walk into the mist on a quiet lake, you might disappear into another world. The boundary between the worlds is thin near water, especially at dawn or dusk. In Japanese folklore, there is a belief that spirits of the dead must cross a river called the Sanzu River to reach the afterlife. Like the Greek Styx, it is a border between the living and the dead. Depending on how someone lived their life, they might cross on a bridge, wade through shallow water, or struggle through deep, rough currents. In some Native American traditions, water is a pathway between the physical world and the spirit world. Shamans or spiritual leaders may enter a trance near a river or waterfall to connect with spirits.

In many cultures, water plays an important role in myths about creation and destruction. In Babylonian mythology, the world began from a vast, dark ocean. Two great water beings, Apsu (fresh water) and Tiamat (salt water), came together to create the first gods. Later, Tiamat became angry and turned into a monster to destroy them. One of the gods, Marduk, defeated her and used her body to form the sky and the earth. In the Bible, there is the story of Noah's Ark, where God sends a great flood to destroy the world because of human wickedness. The floodwaters cover the earth, wiping out nearly everything. But after the water goes down, life begins again. In Hindu mythology, the god Vishnu rests on a cosmic ocean before the world is created. From his navel grows a lotus flower, and from that flower comes Brahma, the creator god. Later, when the world becomes evil, Vishnu sends great floods to destroy it and prepare for a new age. In Norse mythology, at the end of the world, called Ragnarök, giant waves and floods cover the earth as the sea serpent Jörmungandr rises from the ocean. Many gods die, and the world is destroyed in water and fire. But after the flood, the world slowly rises again, green and peaceful, ready for a new beginning.

In many myths and legends, water is linked to healing and change. People have long believed that special places like sacred springs, wells, and fountains have magical or healing powers. In these stories, someone who drinks the water or bathes in it might be cured of an illness, feel stronger, or even gain special abilities. In Celtic folklore, there are many stories about sacred wells and springs. These places were believed to be blessed by spirits or ancient gods. People would visit them to wash their wounds or drink the water, hoping to be healed. Some wells were also believed to grant visions or wisdom if the visitor was pure of heart. In Christian tradition, the waters of Lourdes in France are said to have healing powers. A young girl named Bernadette saw visions of the Virgin Mary near a spring. Since then, millions of people have traveled to Lourdes to bathe in the water or collect it, praying for cures to sickness or pain. In Japanese mythology, there are stories of people bathing in hot springs or sacred waterfalls to purify their bodies and spirits. These waters are connected to nature spirits called kami, and being near them can bring peace, health, and even a new beginning. In Greek myths, the fountain of youth or magical springs could restore a person’s youth and beauty. Heroes sometimes went on long journeys to find such water. One famous example is the River Lethe, where drinking the water caused people to forget their past, offering a kind of spiritual reset or rebirth.

Water has been a powerful symbol in art for thousands of years. Artists use water to show many different feelings and ideas, such as peace, change, danger, or mystery. In paintings, water often appears as oceans, rivers, rain, or even tears. It can be calm and still, like a quiet lake, or wild and strong, like crashing waves. These images help people feel something when they look at the artwork. For example, a peaceful painting of a pond might make someone feel relaxed, while a stormy sea might show fear or struggle.

In many cultures, water is also used in art to show life and rebirth. In religious art, water is sometimes shown as holy, like in Christian paintings of baptisms, where water is used to wash away sins and begin a new life. In Hindu and Buddhist art, rivers like the Ganges are drawn or carved into temples to show purity and connection to the divine. In ancient times, water also appeared in art to show myths and legends. In Greek and Roman art, gods like Poseidon or Neptune were often shown holding tridents and riding waves or sea creatures. In Egyptian art, the Nile River was a symbol of life and was often painted in scenes of farming, fishing, and ceremonies.

One famous example of water in art is “The Great Wave off Kanagawa” by the Japanese artist Hokusai. This woodblock print shows a huge, powerful wave towering over small boats, with Mount Fuji in the background. The wave looks alive, with curling foam like claws, ready to crash down. Even though the image is full of movement and danger, it is also beautifully balanced and carefully designed. Hokusai may have used the sea not just to show nature’s power, but also the strength and struggle of people facing it. This artwork has become one of the most well-known in the world. Another famous painting that shows water is “Water Lilies” by the French artist Claude Monet. Monet painted many versions of this scene, showing a quiet pond with lily pads, flowers, and reflections of trees and sky on the surface of the water. The soft colors and blurred brushstrokes make the paintings feel peaceful and dreamlike. His paintings help people feel calm and connected to nature, like they are standing next to the pond themselves.

Artists also use water in more practical ways. Watercolor painting, for example, uses water to blend colors in soft, flowing shapes. This kind of painting is known for its light, dreamy look. It is perfect for painting things like clouds, rain, or gentle waves. Some modern artists even create art with water itself, such as fountains, pools, or water installations that change with movement and time. These works let people see, hear, and even touch the water, making the experience feel alive and special.

Water shows up in many stories, poems, and myths from all over the world. In books and other writing, water often stands for feelings, life, change, or the unknown. One well-known example is in the book The Old Man and the Sea by Ernest Hemingway. In this story, an old fisherman goes out into the ocean by himself and tries to catch a huge fish. The sea is more than just the place where the story happens. As the fisherman fights to catch the fish, the story talks about human strength, being alone, and having respect for nature. The water shows both danger and deep wisdom.

In Moby-Dick by Herman Melville, the ocean is a big part of the story. The book is about Captain Ahab and his crew as they sail across the sea to find a giant white whale named Moby Dick. The ocean is not just where the story takes place, it also stands for big ideas like the unknown, the power of nature, and life’s deepest questions. Captain Ahab becomes obsessed with hunting the whale, and this makes the sea feel dangerous and full of madness. In The Odyssey by Homer, water is a big part of the story. Odysseus, the main hero, spends many years sailing across the sea to get home after the Trojan War. Along the way, he faces storms, sea monsters, and powerful gods. Each time he travels by water, he faces new problems that test how brave and smart he is. The sea is more than just something to cross, it is a place of adventure, danger, and change. It helps Odysseus grow into a wiser and stronger person. This ancient story shows that water, especially the ocean, was seen as a powerful and magical force, full of meaning and mystery.

In The Secret Garden by Frances Hodgson Burnett, water is shown in a soft and peaceful way. There are moments when rain falls and helps bring the garden back to life. The rain makes the flowers grow and the air feel fresh and clean. For the characters in the story, hearing the rain and feeling the wet earth become signs that things are getting better. The water helps turn the garden from a quiet, lonely place into one that is full of beauty and happiness. In Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain, the Mississippi River is very important to the story. Huck and Jim, who is an escaped slave, travel down the river on a raft. The river stands for freedom and escape. As they float along, they have many adventures, meet different people, and talk about big ideas like right and wrong, and what it means to be a friend. The river is always moving and changing, just like their journey. It gives them time and space to think and grow. Twain uses the river not just as a way to get from place to place, but as a symbol of the characters’ path to better understand themselves and the world around them.

In poetry, water is often used to show feelings and ideas. In the poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner by Samuel Taylor Coleridge, a sailor tells a strange and sad story about being lost at sea. The huge ocean around him becomes a symbol of guilt, punishment, and mystery. One famous line from the poem is, “Water, water, every where, And all the boards did shrink; Water, water, every where, nor any drop to drink.” This shows how the ocean, which usually gives life, can also be dangerous and cruel. The poem uses water to teach a lesson, that people must respect nature and the spiritual world. In many myths and legends, water is part of a journey to another world. In the Greek story of Orpheus and Eurydice, Orpheus has to cross a river to enter the underworld and try to bring back his lost love. The river is a border between life and death, showing that water can mark the edge of what people understand. In an African story about Mami Wata, a water spirit appears in dreams and visions. She might bring healing, beauty, or riches, but she must be treated with respect.

Water is often used in movies to create powerful emotions, build tension, or act as an challenge for the characters. Directors use water in different ways. It can show danger, mystery, or fear, but it can also show peace, life, or change. In adventure and action movies, water can be exciting or dangerous. It can appear in scenes with storms, floods, or rescues from rivers or oceans. One well-known example is Titanic (1997), where the ocean is not only the setting but also a major cause of the disaster. At first, the sea looks calm and beautiful, but later, the cold water becomes a threat as the ship sinks. In fantasy and science fiction movies, water can be strange or magical. For example, in , the ocean is a place full of unusual creatures and emotional moments. It is shown as both a home and a challenge for the characters.

In the animated movie Moana, water is shown as something that can move on its own and help the main character. The ocean guides Moana as she tries to save her island. It helps her when she is scared and keeps her safe from harm. In the movie, water acts like a helper. It also links Moana to her ancestors, who also sailed the oceans. The ocean in this story is not something to be afraid of but something to understand and rely on. In Finding Nemo (2003), the entire story takes place underwater. The ocean is full of sea life, reefs, and dangers. It shows that water can be both fun and dangerous. The underwater setting is important to the whole story. In Cast Away (2000), the ocean separates the main character from other people after a plane crash. The ocean becomes a challenge he must face, and it is also the way he must return to his normal life.

Water is also used in movies to show feelings or deeper meanings. In many dramas, rain can show sadness, being alone, or a big change in the story. For example, in The Notebook, the rain scene is full of strong emotion and shows an important moment between two characters. Water can also stand for a new beginning or change. In horror movies, water can make scenes more tense or scary. Dark lakes, bathtubs, or storms can trap people or hide something dangerous. In Jaws, for example, the ocean looks calm, but a shark is hiding below. People swim without knowing the danger, which creates fear and suspense. Water also works well in movies because it moves, reflects light, and makes sounds. Whether it is big waves, gentle rain, or quiet ponds, water adds something special to a scene. It helps tell the story in a visual way, sometimes more clearly than words can. This makes water one of the most useful natural elements in filmmaking.

The dihydrogen monoxide parody began as a funny joke in the early 1990s. It was meant to show how using big science words can confuse people and make safe things sound dangerous. "Dihydrogen monoxide" is just a fancy way of saying water. The word “dihydrogen” means two hydrogen atoms, and “monoxide” means one oxygen atom. That adds up to H₂O, which is the chemical formula for water. Even though it is just water, calling it “dihydrogen monoxide” makes it sound like a harmful chemical. This joke was used to show that many people do not always understand science words, and they can be tricked if something is explained in a dramatic or serious-sounding way.

One of the earliest and most famous uses of this joke happened in 1997, when a high school student named Nathan Zohner gave a science presentation titled "How Gullible Are We?". In his report, he described all the dangers of “dihydrogen monoxide”. Like causing burns (as steam), contributing to erosion, being found in cancer cells, and even causing death when inhaled. He did not say that it was just water until the very end. Out of 50 students who listened to his presentation, 43 voted to ban the chemical. Nathan’s project became famous, and it showed how people can be easily tricked if they do not have enough scientific knowledge or critical thinking.

Before that, versions of the joke had appeared in internet forums and emails, especially as the internet was growing in the 1990s. People used the parody to make fun of how the media, politicians, or even environmental activists might sometimes overreact to scientific information without fully understanding it. Over time, the joke spread widely and became part of internet culture. It is often used today in classrooms, debates, or websites to teach people to read carefully and to question information that sounds too dramatic or scary. The DHMO parody continues to be shared today, often as a reminder that how we present information really matters. If something is said with the right tone, long words, or half-truths, people might believe anything, even that water is dangerous. It is a funny but important lesson in science literacy, skepticism, and not jumping to conclusions without understanding the full picture. The website DHMO.org is a joke website which lists the harmful effects of water (DHMO), answers questions, and calls for it to be banned, among other things.

Water has always been a big inspiration in music because it connects to so many feelings and ideas. People all over the world use water as a symbol in songs to show emotions like peace, sadness, change, power, or even mystery. Just like water can be calm or stormy, music about water can be soft and gentle or loud and intense. For example, a calm river or gentle rain might be used to create a peaceful feeling, while crashing waves or a flood might show strong emotions like anger, heartbreak, or chaos. Water can represent the flow of life, the passage of time, or the feeling of being overwhelmed by something big.

In classical music, composers have often used water to paint pictures with sound. For example, famous composers like Claude Debussy wrote pieces such as La Mer (The Sea), where the music was inspired by the sea. Another example is Frédéric Chopin’s "Raindrop Prelude", where repeating notes sound like gentle raindrops falling. These pieces do not use words, but the music still makes listeners feel like they are near water. In modern times, pop, rock, and folk songs also use water in their lyrics. Songs like Bridge Over Troubled Water by Simon & Garfunkel or River by Joni Mitchell use rivers and storms as ways to talk about emotions and life problems. In these songs, water can be both the problem and the solution. It can pull someone down, or it can wash their pain away.

In many cultures, water is tied to spiritual or emotional cleansing, so music about water is often healing or thoughtful. In African, Asian, and Indigenous traditions, water songs are sometimes sung during rituals, rain dances, or prayers, asking nature for help or giving thanks for life. In blues music, rivers often appear as symbols of sorrow or escape, especially in songs from the American South, where the Mississippi River became a symbol of travel, freedom, and sometimes grief. In reggae and Caribbean music, the sea and rain show up in joyful, laid-back songs that celebrate nature and the rhythm of island life.

Water even affects how music sounds. In some electronic or ambient music, water sounds like waves, rain, or dripping are added to create a relaxing background. These sounds are used in meditation music or sleep playlists because they help people feel calm and safe. Music therapists also use water sounds to help people reduce stress or connect with their emotions.

Color (or colour in Commonwealth English; see spelling differences) is a property of light.

Primary colors can be mixed to make other colors. Red, yellow, and blue are the three traditional primary colors. The primary colors for television screens and computer monitors are red, green and blue. Printers and paints use magenta, yellow, and cyan as their primary colors; they may also use black. Sometimes this set of colors is simply called red, yellow, and blue.

People who can not see colors or have a distorted sense of color are called color-blind. Most color-blind people are male.

Colors are sometimes added to food. Food coloring is used to color food, but some foods have natural colorings, like beta carotene.

When something has no color, it is called transparent. An example is air.

The science of color is sometimes called chromatics, colorimetry, or simply color science.

A translucent material is not the same as a colorless material because it can still have a color, such as stained glass.

Cats, also called domestic cats (Felis catus), are small, carnivorous (meat eating) mammals, of the family Felidae. Cats have been domesticated (tamed) for nearly 10,000 years. Some of the most popular breeds of this mammal include the Siamese, Japanese Bobtail, Abysinnian, Cornish Rex, American Shorthair, Ragdoll, Aegean cat, Russian Blue, Persian, Manx, Burmese, Sphynx, and British Shorthair Tabby.

Domestic cats may be called "house cats" when kept as indoor pets. They are one of the most popular pets in the world. Humans keep them for hunting mice and rats, and as friends. There are also farm cats, which keep mice and rats away; and feral cats, which are domestic cats that live away from humans. In 2021, there were about 220 million pet cats and 480 million feral cats in the world.

There are about 92 breeds of cat. Domestic cats are found in shorthair, longhair, and hairless breeds. Cats which are not specific breeds can be referred to as 'domestic shorthair' (DSH) or 'domestic longhair' (DLH).

The word 'cat' is also used for other felines, like lions, tigers, leopards, jaguars, pumas, and cheetahs.

In the past, mostly in Egypt, people kept cats because the cats hunted and ate mice and rats in the grain stores. The oldest evidence of cats kept as pets is from the Mediterranean island of Cyprus, around 7500 BC. Ancient Egyptians worshiped cats as gods, and often mummified them so they could be with their owners "for all of eternity".

Today, people often keep cats as pets. There are also domestic cats which live without being cared for by people. These cats are called "feral cats" or "stray cats". Cats started becoming pets when the ancient Egyptians were around.

Cats have anatomy similar to the other members of the genus Felis. The genus has extra lumbar (lower back) and thoracic (chest) vertebrae. This helps explain why cats are very flexible. Unlike human arms, cat's front paws are attached to the shoulder by free-floating clavicle bones. These allow cats to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their heads.

The cat skull, unlike most mammals, has very large eye sockets and a powerful jaw. Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth: this is an adaptation to their preferred prey of small rodents. Cats, like dogs, walk directly on their toes, with the bones of their feet making up the lower part of the visible leg.

Cats walk very precisely. Unlike most mammals, when cats walk, they use a "pacing" gait (walking style); that is, they move the two legs on one side of the body before the legs on the other side. This trait is shared with camels and giraffes. As a walk speeds up into a trot, a cat's gait will change to be a "diagonal" gait, similar to that of most other mammals: the diagonally opposite hind and forelegs will move at the same time. Most cats have five claws on their front paws, and four on their rear paws. On the inside of the front paws there is something which looks like a sixth "finger". This special feature on the inside of the wrists is the carpal pad. The carpal pad is also found on other cats and on dogs.

Although cats can have many different colourings, they genetically can only have two coat colours, orange and black. Cats with grey and white fur or markings have a masking gene, but will still have a base of orange or black.

The gene for colouring is in the X chromosome. As females have two X chromosomes, they can have two or more colours. It is for this reason that calico and tortoiseshell cats are mostly female.

Cats are active carnivores, meaning that in the wild they hunt live animals. They mostly hunt small mammals (like mice). They will also sometimes hunt birds. Cats eat a wide variety of animals, including insects such as flies and grasshoppers. Their main method of hunting is stalk and pounce.

The basic cat coat colouring, tabby (see top photo), makes it easy for the cat to hide in grass and woodland. The cat moves towards the animal it wants to hunt, keeping its body flat and near the ground so that it cannot be seen easily. When it is close enough, it runs towards the animal it is hunting and tries to jump on it. Cats, especially kittens, practice these instinctive behaviours in play with each other or on small toys.

Cats can catch fish. They try to flip the fish out of the water and over the cat's shoulders using their front paw. Research showed this to be an innate (inherited) behaviour pattern which developed early and without the mother teaching it.

Cats are quiet and mostly well-behaved animals, making them popular pets. Young kittens are playful. They can easily entertain themselves with a variety of store-bought or homemade toys. House cats have also been known to teach themselves to use lever-type doorknobs and toilet handles. However, cats are naturally curious, so some domesticated cats may get into some mischief.

Cats are  animals. They can look after themselves and do not need as much attention as dogs do.

Cats use a wide range of vocal and non-vocal signals for communication. Vocalizations include meowing, purring, trilling, hissing, growling, squeaking, chirping, clicking, and grunting. Adult cats rarely meow at one another but frequently use meowing to communicate with humans, often modifying their vocalizations based on context and response.

Purring is most commonly associated with positive states such as relaxation or social contact, but it also occurs during stress, pain, or illness, suggesting a self-soothing or physiological function. Trilling and chirping are often used in friendly interactions, particularly between mothers and kittens or during hunting-related excitement.

Feral cats are generally silent toward humans and rely more heavily on body language and scent-based communication than vocal signals.

Cats also communicate through body posture and facial expressions. Tail position and ear orientation are especially important. An upright tail usually signals friendliness and confidence, while flattened ears indicate fear or aggression. Cats may also perform slow blinking, a behavior interpreted as a friendly or affiliative signal toward humans and other cats. A cat slow blinking is the equivalent of a human smiling.

Tactile communication includes nose-touching during greetings, head rubbing (bunting), and allogrooming, which help reinforce social bonds and group cohesion.

Cats only mate when the female cat is "in heat". Heat periods happen about every two weeks and last four to six days. Several male cats may be attracted to a female cat in heat. The males will fight over her, and the winner wins the right to mate. At first, the female will reject the male, but eventually the female will allow the male to mate. The female will utter a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her. This is because a male cat's penis has a band of about 120-150 backwards-pointing spines, which are about one millimeter long. When the penis is withdrawn, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina, which is a trigger for ovulation. After mating, the female will wash her vulva thoroughly. If a male attempts to breed with her at this point, the female will attack him. After about 20 to 30 minutes, once the female is finished grooming, the cycle will repeat.

Because ovulation is not always triggered, females may not get pregnant by the first cat which mates with them. A female cat may mate with more than one cat when she is in heat, and different kittens in a litter may have different fathers. The cycle ceases when the female cat is pregnant.

The gestation period for cats is about two months, with an average length of 66 days. The size of a litter is usually three to five kittens. Kittens are weaned at between six and seven weeks, and cats normally reach sexual maturity at 5–10 months (females) and to 5–7 months (males). Females can have two to three litters per year, so might have up to 150 kittens in their breeding life of about ten years.

Pregnant females ("queens") deliver their litters by themselves, guided by instinct. The queen finds the safest place she can. Then she will clean it thoroughly, with her tongue, if necessary. Here she will quietly give birth. She licks the newborn kits clean. In the wild, leaving a scent is risking a dangerous encounter with other animals. The kits are born blind and with closed eyes. They suckle on her teats, and sleep a good deal. After two weeks or so, their eyes open. At that stage they have blue eyes, but not the best sight. A bit later, the best developed kit will totter out of the nest. The others follow. They will soon recognize you as a living thing: that is a great moment. At first, they go back to the nest to feed and sleep. After some more days they leave the nest for good, but still they may sleep together in a 'kitten heap'.

Kittens play endlessly. It is how they do their learning. They will play their favourite games, such as 'hide and pounce', with almost anyone or anything. Soft balls on strings are a standard toy; so is a scratching post.

With cats there is a limit to how far you can train them. They are at least as intelligent as dogs, but they are not pack animals. They like to do their own thing, and owners do best by fitting in.

Cats are very clean animals. They groom themselves by licking their fur. The cat's tongue can act as a hairbrush and can clean and untangle a cat's fur. Still, owners may buy grooming products to help the cat care for itself. After licking their fur, cats sometimes get hairballs. A hairball is a small amount of fur that is vomited up by animals when it becomes too big. Owners brush their cats to try to prevent a lot of hairballs.

Cats have four toes on their back feet, while their front feet have five. There are typically 12 whiskers on the right and left side of the cat's face.

Many house cats eat food which their owners give them. This food is manufactured, and designed to contain the proper nutrients for cats. There are many different types of cat food. These come in many different flavors and costs are often very small.

There is moist canned food and also dry cat food which comes in different sized cans or bags and formulas. There are all kinds of formulae. It seems obvious that the food should be mostly meat, as that is most of a cat's natural diet. But remember, when they catch mice, they also eat the bones. So there is need for formulas to have more than just meat.

Cats should not be fed a daily diet of dog food. It could make the cat blind, as it has no taurine, which is a nutrient for the eyes that cats cannot make for themselves.

Cats cannot taste sweet foods (with sugar) because of a mutation (change) in their ancestors which removed the ability to taste sweet things.

In 2023, pet cats lived for around 13 years. This has increased from an average of seven years in the 1980s. Creme Puff, the oldest cat that ever lived, died at the age of 38.

Cats that roam outside will get fleas at some time. Cat fleas will not live on people, but fleas will not hesitate to bite anyone nearby. Vets have a good product which they put just behind the cat's upper neck, where it can't be licked off.

Cats kept indoors most of the time are kept from danger from the outside. That is obvious, but its own nature is to be free to wander.

House cats can become overweight through lack of exercise and over-feeding. When they get spayed or neutered ("fixed"), they tend to exercise less. If a male cat is not neutered, it develops a disgusting smell. Neutering can also make cats live longer.

Kittens are sometimes born with unusual traits. Some are serious problems, many of which are similar to human genetic disorders. Others are harmless, like polydactyly. Most cats have only four to five toes on each paw. Polydactyl cats have six, seven, or sometimes even more. These cats can also be called Hemingway cats because author Ernest Hemingway owned cats like these.

Gold is a soft, dense, bright yellow metal. It is a chemical element. Its chemical symbol is Au. Its atomic number is 79. As a precious metal, it has been used for many thousands of years by people all over the world, for jewelry, and as money. It is easy to shape. This means, it can be hammered into sheets or stretched into wires without breaking. Chemically, gold is a noble metal. This means it barely reacts with anything. Only platinum is less reactive.

Gold is tough. It does not dissolve in most acids. But, if you mix nitric acid and hydrochloric acid together, a combo called aqua regia, gold will dissolve. When it does, it forms a solution called tetrachloroaurate, which is just gold floating in a liquid in a special way. Interestingly, nitric acid alone cannot dissolve gold, even though it will dissolve metals like silver. That is why people long ago could test for real gold using acid—it became known as the “acid test.” Gold can also dissolve in cyanide solutions, which is how miners extract it from rocks. It can also mix with mercury, forming something called an amalgam. In the mercury case, gold does not really react, it just mixes in like sugar dissolving in water.

Gold is important because it is rare, but also easier to use than other rare metals. It is also used to repair and replace teeth and in electronic equipment such as computers. Even some medicines like auranofin, has gold, and is used to treat arthritis. It has been used for coins, jewelry, and art.

For a long time, money was tied to gold through the gold standard, though that ended in 1971. The color of this metal is also called gold. Gold is so valued that the discovery of a new place to mine has sometimes caused a gold rush. The deepest workplaces for miners in the world are in South African gold mines 4 km (2.5 miles) down.

Often, gold is found as a native metal. This means it is not part of an ore, lying around in nature, as nuggets or tiny grains in rocks, or riverbeds. It could be mixed with other metals like silver (called electrum), copper, or even platinum. Sometimes it is trapped inside minerals like pyrite or combined with tellurium in rare compounds. Most of the gold on Earth is deep inside the Earth's core because it is dense, sinking there. Nearly all discovered gold was brought to the surface by meteorites.

In 2023, China produced the most gold, followed by Russia and Australia. , a total of around 201,296 tonnes of gold exist above ground. All the gold ever mined could fit in a cube about 21.7 meters (71 ft) on each side. Around half of new gold goes to jewelry, 40% to investments, and 10% to industry.

In chemistry, gold is chemical element 79, a transition metal in Group 11. It has an atomic weight of 199.966 a.m.u. Its symbol is Au, from the Latin word for gold, aurum. It is a "noble metal" meaning it has low chemical reactivity. It will, however, react with aqua regia (a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acid) to form chloroauric acid. Gold has only one stable isotope, 197Au. All other isotopes are radioactive and do not occur naturally. Most of them decay to mercury, platinum, or iridium.

Gold is very soft. It is malleable, meaning a goldsmith can hammer it into thin metal sheets. It is also ductile, which means it can be pulled into wire. When it is used in money or in jewelry, it is often alloyed with copper, silver, or both to make it harder.

Most metals are gray in color. Gold is yellow because of the way its electrons behave. The only other metal in common use that has a non-gray color is copper. Caesium also has a gold-like color, but it is not commonly used as a metal because it reacts with water.

Gold is a fairly good electrical conductor, better than aluminium, but not as good as copper or silver. Copper and brass electrical connectors, especially those used with computer and audio/video equipment, are often plated with gold for corrosion resistance. Connectors that are intended for soldering are not made of gold because it makes the solder joint brittle. Gold is also a good heat conductor, although it is not commonly used for this purpose due to its cost.

Gold is made in space. Scientists have found three main ways gold is made in space:

All three involve a process called the r-process, which makes elements heavier than iron. For a long time, people thought supernovae made most of the gold. But then in 2017, scientists saw two neutron stars smash into each other (event GW170817). They realized these collisions actually produce tons of gold, maybe most of it in the universe. Those two neutron stars smashing into each other produced, between 3 and 13 Earth masses of gold.

But neutron stars smashing into each other are rare and happen late in the universe (approximately once every 100,000 years), so they cannot explain why very old stars already have gold. That is where magnetar flares come in. These flares happened earlier and more often, sprinkling gold across the galaxy. In fact, magnetars might make 1–10% of all the heavy elements in the Milky Way.

A gold medal is often the given to the first-place winner in a race or other sports.

The most important international currencies of the 19th century used the gold standard.

Gold can mean that something or someone is very good or has done very well.

Gold is one of the safest elements to handle, but the chemicals used to process it can be dangerous. Metallic gold is non-toxic, which is unusual for a heavy metal. Soluble gold compounds, however, are toxic to the liver and kidneys. Gold is non-flammable, even in a pure oxygen environment or when finely powdered. It does not react with most household or laboratory chemicals. Gold is commonly processed with cyanide, which is highly toxic.  Most of the cyanide is destroyed in the production process, so it is not present in the final product, but it can be a hazard to workers in a gold processing plant. Illegally mined gold is often processed with, and contaminated with mercury. Since gold conducts electricity, gold jewelry should never be worn when working with electricity.

In 2022, China mined [c. 10% or] "10.6 percent [330 tons] of global share"; Russia and Australia (each) mined 320 tons of gold.

Milk is a white liquid made by mammals, like cows, dogs, and humans. It is made in the mammary glands (breasts, udders, or teats) of female mammals. Newborn babies must be given milk before they can eat solid food. Milk has many nutrients to help babies grow and be healthy. It is also a rich source of calcium which is good for their bones and teeth.

If milk is not kept cold in a refrigerator, it will become  after some time. When milk is warmed, it turns sour. Fermentation makes this happen. Lactic acid bacteria change the milk sugar into lactic acid. Fermentation is used when making dairy products.

Milk is often pasteurised before humans drink it. It is made into dairy products like cream, butter, yogurt, ice cream, or cheese. Pasteurised cows' milk will turn sour if it is not kept in a refrigerator. Milk should be stored between 1° and 4° Celsius. If milk is treated with very high temperatures, it will last longer before spoiling. This means it does not have to be put in the refrigerator until it is opened.

Goat's milk is the milk from a goat. It can be drunk, both by humans or baby goats, or cheese can be made from it. This cheese is called goat's milk cheese.

Coconut milk is not real milk because it comes from a plant instead of an animal. However, it looks similar to real milk because it is white. It also does not have as many nutrients as real milk. It is made by removing the white "meat" from a coconut, pressing or squeezing the "meat", then adding water. It is sometimes used in cooking, for example, in Thai curry.

Coconut cream is a thicker version of coconut milk which contains added sugar.

Almond milk is produced by grinding almonds and processing that liquid for drinking.

Cow milk is the milk from a cow. Whole cow’s milk contains about 87% water. The remaining 13% contains protein, fat, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals.

Milk forms an important part of a person's daily balanced diet. It contains a lot of calcium that helps bones and teeth to grow stronger. Also, milk provides the body with high quality proteins, and helps in meeting the body's requirement for vitamins. One glass of milk gives about 44% to the recommended daily vitamins intake. Some kind of milks, though, do not have good calcium. These kind of milk products include cream, cottage cheese, ricotta cheese, and cream cheese.

Whole milk, butter, and cream have high levels of saturated fat.

Milk contains a chemical called lactose. Babies make an enzyme called lactase inside their bodies. Adults make less lactase. If they do not have enough, they may not be able to digest lactose anymore. This problem is called lactose intolerance and it affects many adults. There are many medicines that help adults digest lactose. Many lactose-intolerant people drink soy milk instead of animal milk, because it does not contain lactose. Soy milk tastes similar to animal milk, but it is chemically very different and is made from soybeans.

Most mammals shut off the ability to digest milk early in life. Then they turn to a diet without milk. Humans were like that originally. We don't know all the details, but it seems what happened was this. They learnt that at least some milk from cattle was good for humans. They bred the cattle until the cattle produced milk regularly, not just for their young.

The few people who could digest milk gradually increased in number. They had the advantage of a ready supply of food (milk).

At that point, it was an advantage for humans to have a regular supply of milk, which they could now digest. So began a process which eventually swept up all humans except a very few. We now think it is natural to drink milk throughout life ("lactose tolerance"), but we are one of the few species which does so. In some human populations, though, lactase persistence has quite recently evolved.

Elephants are the biggest living land mammals. They have long noses called trunks and large flapping ears. The largest elephant ever recorded was shot in Angola in 1974. It weighed  and stood  tall.

At birth, an elephant calf may be as big as 100 kg (225 pounds).  The baby elephant develops for 20 to 22 months inside its mother. No other land animal takes this long to develop before being born.

In the , elephants have strong family relationships. Their ways of acting toward other elephants are hard for people to understand. They "talk" to each other with very low sounds. Most elephants sounds are so low, people cannot hear them. But elephants can hear these sounds from very far away.

There are two living genera of elephants. These are the African elephants (Loxodonta africanus) and the Asian elephants (Elephas maximus).

The trunk is a very long nose, made from the upper lip. An elephant uses its trunk to grab s such as food. Though the rest of an elephant's  is strong and thick, its trunk is very soft and sensitive. Elephants avoid Acacia trees with ants because they can bite the inside of an elephant's trunk.

An elephant also uses its trunk when it trumpets. It stands still, raises its trunk, and blows. This is a signal to other elephants and animals.

Elephants have teeth and tusks. Tusks are large teeth coming out of their upper jaws.

A lot of ivory comes from elephant tusks. Ivory traders killed many elephants, and hunting elephants is illegal.

In total, elephants have 24 teeth: 12 front teeth, called premolars, and 12 back teeth, called molars. When the last molar falls out, the elephant dies because it cannot eat. They can live for about 70 years. But in a zoo or circus, people can keep elephants alive by feeding them soft food.

Grass wears down their teeth because it has a high concentration of silica and is very abrasive. Elephants use their teeth in sequence, not all at once. This means that, at any time, they only have one tooth in each jaw, a total of four.

African elephants are larger and have bigger ears. They are grazers who still do a lot of browsing: they eat leaves, branches and grass. These big ears have many veins, which carry blood throughout the body.  Biologists think that the blood going through their ears helps African elephants to cool off. The weather is hotter in Africa than in Asia, so cooling is more important for African elephants. Female African elephants have tusks, but female Asian elephants do not.  African elephants have a low place in their back. African elephants have two "fingers" at the end of their trunks, but Asian elephants only have one.  Indian elephants mostly eat grass.

Some African elephants live on the savanna while others live in the forest. Today, many people think these are different species. Scientists named the forest group Loxodonta cyclotis and the savanna group Loxodonta africanus.

The African forest elephant is the third largest living land animal in the world.

Elephants are distantly related to sea cows, which are large aquatic mammals. Early ancestors in the Palaeocene and Eocene were small, semi-aquatic animals. By the Miocene several groups of large mainly forest-dwelling elephants evolved, the gomphotheres and deinotheres. Their teeth show little wear, indicating a diet of soft, nongritty, forest vegetation.

Modern elephants – the actual family Elephantidae – evolved from gomphotheres as the climate became cooler and drier in the Pliocene and Pleistocene. This includes the mammoth and mastodon as well as modern elephants.

The gomphotheres lasted  a long time, and were hunted by modern man. There was a change in plant resources, with the reduced forests and extended grassland. This favoured specialist grass feeders over generalist eaters. This change in the dietary supply was one of the factors which forced gomphotheres toward extinction in the late Pleistocene in South America. The remaining population probably succumbed to climatic change and/or human predation around the time of the Holocene margin.

The significant thing about modern elephants (especially Indian elephants) is that they eat grass: they are primarily grazers, rather than browsers. Compared with gomphotheres, the teeth of modern elephants are quite different.

Humans have used elephants for different things. The Carthaginian general Hannibal took some elephants across the Alps when he fought the Romans. He probably used the North African elephant, a kind of elephant that does not live today. It was smaller than other African elephants. Elephants are sometimes used by tourists as rides.

Many circuses have them. The Siamese, Indians, and other South Asian peoples used them for several things. They fought in armies, and they crushed criminals. They also did heavy work like lifting trees and moving logs.

However, people have never domesticated elephants. Domesticated animals are tame and have babies under human control. The male elephant in heat is dangerous and hard to control. This state is called musth. Most elephants used by people are female, except those used in war. In a battle, female elephants run from males, so armies needed males. Elephants are sometimes used by tourists for riding.

Both African and Asian elephants are endangered species.  Elephants in captivity do not make many babies, and some captive elephants are abused and mistreated.

African elephants receive some legal protection in every country where they are found. However, 70% of their range exists outside protected areas.

Conservation efforts in some areas have led to more elephants. Local numbers may be controlled by contraception or moving the elephants to other places. Large-scale culling (legal killing) ceased in 1988, when Zimbabwe stopped doing it.

In 1989, trade in elephants and their products (ivory, meat) was made illegal. Appendix II status (which allows restricted trade) was given to elephants in Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe in 1997 and South Africa in 2000. In some countries, sport hunting of the animals is legal: Botswana, Cameroon, Gabon, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe have export quotas for elephant trophies. The IUCN estimates a total of around 440,000 individuals for 2012.

The total population of Asian elephants is about 40,000–50,000 (a rough estimate). Around half of the population is in India. Although Asian elephants are declining in numbers overall, particularly in Southeast Asia, the population in the Western Ghats may be increasing.

A female elephant will have a single baby (called a "calf") every four or five years. Calves are born  tall and weigh around . An elephant's gestation lasts about 22 months. Another female elephant often stays with the new mother until its baby is born. The newborn elephant can often stand within a half hour after it is born. Mother elephants touch their babies gently with their trunks. It takes a baby a year or more to control its trunk and learn its many uses.

Baby elephants nurse for the first two years of their lives. After it is born, the first thing that the baby does is wobble in search of its mother's milk. It drinks about 10 liters of milk every day.

One of the most famous fictional elephants is Dumbo, who is a flying elephant in a Disney movie.  The Elephant's Child is one of Rudyard Kipling's Just So Stories

Ganesha, the god of wisdom in Hinduism, has an elephant's head.

The elephant is the symbol for the United States Republican Party.  It is like the Democratic Party's donkey. The first person to use the elephant as a symbol for the Republican Party was Thomas Nast.  He did that in a Harper's Weekly cartoon in 1874.

Dogs are mammals, usually to be kept as pets, or work on farms or for the police. Some dogs are trained to be rescue dogs and join teams such as mountain rescue.

Dogs have been bred by humans from ancestral wolves. They were the first animals to live with humans. There was a lot of different types among wolves in the Late Pleistocene.

Today, some dogs are used as pets, and others are used to help humans do their work. They are popular pets because they are usually playful, friendly, loyal, and listen to humans. Thirty million dogs in the United States have been  as pets. Dogs eat both meat and vegetables, which are often mixed together and sold in stores as dog food. Dogs often have jobs including police dogs, army dogs, assistance dogs, fire dogs, messenger dogs, hunting dogs, herding dogs, or rescue dogs. A baby dog is called a pup or puppy.

Dogs are sometimes known as "human's best friend" because they are kept as pets, are usually loyal, and like being around humans.

Dogs can smell and hear better than humans but cannot see in full color. Due to the structure of their eyes, dogs can see better in low light than humans. They also have a larger field of vision.

Like wolves, wild dogs travel in groups called packs. A dog in a group helps and cares for others.

Different dog breeds have different lifespans. In general, smaller dogs live longer than bigger ones. The size and the breed of the dog change how long the dog lives on average. Breeds such as the Dachshund usually live for fifteen years, Chihuahuas can reach the age of twenty. On the other hand, the Great Dane has an average lifespan of six to eight years; some Great Danes have lived for as long as ten years. An American Bulldog lives for around 15 years. Bigger dogs will have shorter lives than smaller dogs because of the pressure on its heart to move around.

Dogs come in a wide range of sizes, from very large breeds like the Great Dane weighing 50-79 kg and measuring 71-81 cm, to very small breeds like the Chihuahua weighing 0.5-3 kg and measuring 13-20 cm. There are variations in the skeletal structure among different types of dogs. The dog's skeleton is well-suited for running, with neck and back vertebrae having extensions for back muscles, ribs providing space for the heart and lungs, and flexible shoulders. Selective breeding over time has led to larger skeletons in breeds like smaller skeletons in breeds like terriers. Most dogs have 26 vertebrae in their tails, but some naturally have as few as three. The dog's skull has consistent components across breeds but varies in shape.

Dogs have senses like sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch, and sensing Earth's magnetic fields. Studies show they may detect small changes in magnetism and prefer to poop facing north or south when the magnetic field is calm.

Dogs see mainly yellows, blues, and grays. They cannot see red and green because they have fewer color-detecting cells than humans. Their eyes are less sharp than humans', seeing details up to eight times worse.

Smell is their strongest sense. Dogs have 40 times more smell receptors than humans—up to 300 million in breeds like bloodhounds. They hear sounds four times farther than humans (up to 400 meters).

Whiskers help dogs sense vibrations, air movements, and nearby objects in the dark. They also help guide food to the mouth.

Dogs are often called "man's best friend" because they fit in with human life. Dogs can serve people in many ways. For example, there are guard dogs, hunting dogs, herding dogs, guide dogs for blind people, and police dogs. There are also dogs that are trained to smell for diseases in the human body or to find bombs or illegal drugs. These dogs sometimes help police in airports or other areas. Sniffer dogs (usually beagles) are sometimes trained for this job. Dogs have even been sent by Russians into outer space, a few years before any human being. The first dog sent up was named Laika, but she died within a few hours.

There is much more variety in dogs than in cats. This is mainly because humans have selected and bred dogs for specific jobs and functions.

There are over 450 recognized dog breeds, according to the American Kennel Club. Dogs started to become more diverse during the Victorian era when humans began controlling which dogs were bred. Most breeds come from a small number of original dogs from the last 200 years. Since then, dogs have changed quickly in appearance and have been selectively bred by people. These breeds have unique features like body size, skull shape, tail type, fur texture, and color. Humans have bred dogs for specific traits to help with tasks such as guarding, herding, hunting, retrieving, and scent detection. Dogs also show different behaviors like being very social, boldness, and aggression. Today, dogs are found all over the world.

Dogs can get many different diseases. Some are born with these problems (birth defect) and others get sick as they get older. Neoplasia is the most common cause of death for dogs. There are other common causes of death for dogs like heart and renal failure.

Birds (Aves) are a group of animals with backbones. Birds are the only dinosaurs that survived the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction, and are part of the theropod group of dinosaurs. The word for "bird-like" is avian, from Latin language avis, bird.

Birds are warm blooded. Their feathers help prevent loss of body heat. Modern birds do not have teeth. They have beaked jaws. Birds lay hard-shelled eggs. They have a high metabolic rate and a strong but lightweight skeleton. Their hearts have four chambers.

Birds live all over the world. They range in size from the 5 cm (2 in) bee hummingbird to the 2.70 m (9 ft) ostrich. There are about ten thousand species of birds. More than half of these are passerines, or perching birds.

Birds have wings. The wings develop differently in different species. The only known groups of birds without wings are the extinct moa and the elephant birds. Wings evolved from the forelimbs of birds. They give birds the ability to fly. Over time, many groups of birds evolved with smaller wings. These include ratites, penguins and many island species of birds. The digestive and respiratory systems of birds are also adapted for flight. Some bird species in aquatic environments have evolved as good swimmers. This is seen in seabirds and some waterbirds.

In general, birds inherit their behaviour almost entirely. The key elements of their lives are inherited. It was a great discovery that birds never learn to fly. It is wrong to say when a chick waves its wings in the nest that "it is learning to fly". What the chick is doing is exercising its muscles. If they are a species that flies, they develop the ability automatically. If they are species that migrates, that behaviour is also inherited. Many species migrate over great distances each year. Other main features of their life may be inherited, though they can, and do, learn. Birds have good memories, An example of this is when they search for food.

Several bird species make and use tools. Some social species pass on some knowledge across generation. This is a form of culture. Birds are social animals. They communicate with visual signals as well as with calls and bird songs. Most of their social behaviours are inherited. Examples of this include flocking, mobbing of predators and cooperative breeding and hunting,

Most bird species are socially monogamous; they usually mate for one breeding season at a time. They may mate for years. It is rare that these birds will mate for life. Other species are polygynous, in these species, one male will mate with many females. Birds species are rarely polyandrous. In these species, one female will mate with many males. Birds produce offspring by laying eggs. The eggs are fertilised by sexual reproduction. The eggs are often laid in a nest and incubated by the parents. Most birds take care of their offspring after hatching. Some birds, such as chickens, lay eggs even when not fertilised. Unfertilised eggs do not produce offspring.

Many species of birds are eaten by humans. Domesticated and undomesticated birds are sources of eggs, meat and feathers. In English, domesticated birds are often called poultry and undomesticated birds are called game birds. Songbirds, parrots and other types of birds are popular as pets. Guano is bird manure. It is harvested for use as a fertiliser. Birds figure throughout human culture. About 120–130 species of birds have become extinct because of human activity since the 17th century. Many more species had become extinct before then. Human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction, Things are being done to protect them. Recreational bird-watching is an important part of the ecotourism industry.

Birds come in many different colours. These colours can be useful to a bird in two ways. Camouflage help to hide birds from predators. Brighter colours can also be useful to birds. They can be used to identify the bird to others of the same species. Male bird are often brightly coloured while the female is camouflaged. The logic is as follows: the female carries the "precious package" of developing eggs. The male has to defend a territory. His colour and song are used to let others know that "this place is occupied".

Many birds are brown, green or grey. These colours make a bird harder to be seen: they camouflage the bird. Brown is the most common colour. Brown birds include: sparrows, emus, thrushes, larks, eagles and falcons and the female birds of many species such as: wrens, ducks, blackbirds and peafowls. When a brown bird is in long grass or among tree trunks or rocks, it is camouflaged. Birds that live in long grass often have brown feathers streaked with black which looks like shadows. A bittern is almost invisible in long reeds because its camouflage is helped by its posture (beak and head pointed upwards). Other birds, including starlings and mynas, are quite dark in colour, but are flecked with little spots that look like raindrops on leaves. Bird may also camouflage their nests.

Many birds from hot countries are green or have some green feathers, particularly parrots. Birds that live in green trees often have green backs, even if they have bright-coloured breasts. From the back, the birds are camouflaged. This is very useful when sitting on a nest. The bird's bright-coloured breast is hidden. Budgerigars are bred in different colours such as blue, white and mauve, but in the wild, they are nearly all green and yellow. Even though they fly very well, they normally spend a lot of time on the ground, eating grass seeds. Their yellow and black striped back helps to hide them in the shadows made by long dry grass, while their green breasts are a similar colour to the leaves of gum trees.

Grey birds include most pigeons and doves, cranes, storks and herons. Grey birds are often rock-living birds like pigeons or birds that sit on dead tree trunks looking like a broken branch. Water birds like herons often have a pale grey colour which makes it harder for a fish to notice that the bird is standing, looking down for something to catch. Water birds, no matter what colour they are on top, are often white underneath, so that when a fish looks up, the bird looks like part of the sky.

Black birds include crows, ravens and male blackbirds. Some birds that are dark colours spend quite a lot of time on the ground, hopping around in the shadows under bushes. Among these birds are the male blackbird and the satin bowerbird which is not black but very dark blue. Crows and ravens often perch high on bare trees in the winter, where their black shape against the sky looks like the dark bare branches.

Many birds are not camouflaged, but stand out with vivid colours. They are usually male birds whose females are dull and camouflaged. The function of the colours is two-fold. First, the colours help them get mates, and second, the colours identify them to other males of the same species. Many birds are territorial, especially in the nesting season. They give out territory sounds and are easily seen. This lets other males know they will defend their territory. It sends out a "look elsewhere" signal to their competitors.

Some birds are famous for their colour and some are named for it, such as the bluebird, the azure kingfisher, the golden pheasant, the scarlet macaw. The European robin is known popularly as the red robin.

Many other birds are very brightly coloured, in countless combinations. Some of the most colourful birds are quite common, like pheasants, peacocks, domestic fowl and parrots. Colourful small birds include blue tits, the goldfinches, hummingbirds, fairy wrens and bee eaters (which are also called rainbow birds). Some birds, like those of the bird of paradise in Papua New Guinea have such beautiful feathers that they have been hunted for them.

The peafowl is the best example of a display of colour to attract a mate. Also the male domestic fowl and junglefowl have long shiny feathers above his tail and also long neck feathers that may be a different colour to his wings and body. There are only a few species of birds (such as the eclectus parrot) where the female is more colourful than the male.

Pied birds are black and white. Black and white birds include magpies, pied geese, pelicans and Australian magpies, which are not really magpies at all. Pied birds often have brightly coloured beaks and legs of yellow or red. The silver pheasant, with its long white tail striped with fine bars of black, has a brightly coloured face.

Most birds can fly, and if they do, then the ability is inherited, not learnt. They fly by pushing through the air with their wings. The curved surfaces of the wings cause air currents (wind) which lift the bird. Flapping keeps the air current moving to create lift and also moves the bird forward.

Some birds can glide on air currents without flapping. Many birds use this method when they are about to land. Some birds can also hover in the air. This method is used by birds of prey such as falcons that are looking for something to eat. Seagulls are also good at hovering, particularly if there is a strong breeze. The most expert hovering birds are tiny hummingbirds which can beat their wings both backwards and forwards and can stay quite still in the air while they dip their long beaks into flowers to feed on the sweet nectar.

Different types of birds have different needs. Their wings have evolved to suit their lifestyle. Large birds of prey, such as eagles, spend a lot of time soaring on the wind. They have wings that are large and broad. The main flight feathers are long and wide. They help the eagle to stay on rising air currents without using much energy, while the eagle looks at the ground below, to find the next meal. When the eagle sees some small creature move, it can close its wings and fall from the sky like a missile, opening its great wings again to slow down as it comes to land. The world's largest eagle, the Philippine eagle has a wingspan of about 2 m (6.7 ft) wide.

Birds that live in grassland areas or open forests and feed on fruit, insects and reptiles often spend a lot of time flying short journeys looking for food and water. They have wings that are shaped in a similar way to eagles, but rounder and not as good for soaring. These include many Australian birds like cockatoos.

Birds such as geese that migrate from one country to another fly very long distances. Their wings are big and strong, because the birds are large. They stock up on food for the long flight. Migrating water birds usually form family groups of 1230 birds. They fly very high, making use of long streams of air that blow from north to south in different seasons. They are well organised, often flying in a V pattern. The geese at the back do not have to flap so hard; they are pulled on by the wind of the ones at the front. Every so often, they change the leader so that the front bird, who does most work and sets the pace, can have a rest. Geese and swans are the highest-flying birds, reaching 8,000 metres or more when on migration. Geese often honk loudly while they are flying. It is thought that they do this to support the leader and help the young ones.

Birds that fly very quickly, such as swifts and swallows, have long narrow pointed wings. These birds need great speed because they eat insects, catching most of them while they are flying. These birds also migrate. They often collect in huge flocks of thousands of birds that move together like a whirling cloud.

Birds that live in bushes and branches have triangular wings that help the bird change direction. Many forest birds are expert at getting up speed by flapping and then gliding steadily among the trees, tilting to avoid things as they go.

Birds such as owls that hunt at night have wings with soft rounded feathers so that they do not flap loudly. Birds that are awake at night are called nocturnal birds. Birds that are awake during the day are diurnal.

Wandering albatross might spend several years without coming to land. They can sleep while gliding. Arctic terns nest every one to three years.

Flocks of birds can be very highly organised in a way that takes care of all the flock members. Studies of small flocking birds like tree sparrows show that they clearly communicate with each other, as sometimes thousands of birds may fly in close formation and spiral patterns without colliding (or flying into each other).

Two common behaviours in flocking birds are guarding and reconnaissance. When a flock of birds is feeding it is common for one bird to perch on a high place to keep guard over the flock. In the same way, when a flock is asleep, often, one bird will remain awake. It is also common for large flocks to send one or two birds ahead of them when they are flying to a new area. The look-out birds can spy the lie of the land to find food, water and good places to perch. Mixed feeding flocks occur, and can help to spot predators.

Some birds do not fly. Flightlessness in birds has evolved many times.

These include running birds like ostriches and emus and ocean-living birds, the large penguin family. Birds on islands have usually lost the power of flight. This is to their advantage because birds with the power of flight can be blown off their island during a storm. The same ability which got them to the island may later take them away in a storm.

Ostriches and emus do not need to fly because although they feed and nest on the ground, their great size and their speed is their protection. Some other ground-feeding birds have not been so lucky. Some birds such as the dodo and the kiwi were ground-feeding birds that lived in safety on islands where there was nothing dangerous to eat them. They lost the power of flight. Kiwis are endangered because European settlement to New Zealand brought animals like cats, dogs and rats which kill kiwis and eat their eggs. However, kiwis and also the rare New Zealand ground parrot have survived. In the case of dodos, they were fat and disgusting in taste. All the same, they were killed and eaten by sailors until there was none left. Other flightless birds which have disappeared are the great auk and the moa.

Penguins are a very successful group of birds. They are a clade. They spend half their time on land. Their wings are adapted to life in the sea and have become flippers which let them in swim fast. They catch fish at sea, where they are in danger from seals.

Preening is how birds keeps their feathers in order. They use their beak to position feathers, interlock feather barbules that have become separated, clean plumage, and keep ectoparasites in check.

Feathers in good shape help the bird's insulation, waterproofing and flight. Their condition is vital to the bid's survival.

Modern birds do not have teeth, and many swallow their prey whole. Nevertheless, they must break up food before it is digested. First of all, along their throat (oesophagus) they have a crop. This stores food items before digestion. That way a bird can eat several items, and then fly off to a quiet spot to digest them.

Their stomach comes next, with two very different parts. One part is like a straight hollow rod (the proventriculus) which secretes mild hydrochloric acid and an enzyme to break down protein. The other part of the stomach is the gizzard. This is muscular, and grinds up the contents. In herbivorous birds the gizzard contains some gastroliths (small stones or pieces of grit). Bones of fish will mostly be dissolved by the stomach acid. The partly digested and ground-up food now goes to the intestine, where digestion is completed, and most contents are absorbed. Anything indigestible, for example remains of feathers, is regurgitated via the mouth, not the cloaca.

The system is effective, and carnivorous birds can swallow quite large prey. A blue heron can swallow a fish as large as a carp successfully. Raptors eat by holding the prey down with a foot, and tearing it apart with their beak.

Although birds are warm-blooded creatures like mammals, they do not give birth to live young. They lay eggs as reptiles do, but the shell of a bird's egg is hard. The baby bird grows inside the egg, and after a few weeks hatches (breaks out of the egg).

Birds in cold climates usually have a breeding season once a year in the spring. Migratory birds can have two springs and two mating seasons in a year.

Ninety-five per cent of bird species are socially monogamous. These birds pair for at least the length of the breeding season. In some cases this arrangement lasts until the death of one of the pair. Monogamy clearly helps if females need males' help to raise a brood successfully. It has other practical advantages: the nest is never left without defence. Birds are generally small, and they have many potential enemies.

Some birds mate for life, like married couples. These birds include pigeons, geese, and cranes. Other birds look for new partners each year. For birds that choose new mates, part of the breeding season is display. The male bird will do all sorts of things to attract females. These include singing, dancing, showing off the feathers and building a beautiful nest. Some male birds have splendid feathers for attracting females. The most famous is the peacock who can spread the feathers above his tail into a huge fan.

Other mating systems do occur in some species. Polygyny, polyandry, polygamy, polygynandry, and promiscuity do happen. Polygamous breeding systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of males. Some species may use more than one system depending on the circumstances.

Once the birds have found partners, they find a suitable place to lay eggs. The idea of what is a suitable place differs between species, but most build bird nests. The bird is driven by a hormone (estradiol E2) to prepare a place for the eggs to hatch. Birds' nests may be up a tree, in a cliff or on the ground according to species. When filled with eggs they are almost always guarded by one of the pair. In fact it is virtually impossible for the eggs to survive if one of the parents dies.

Robins will make a beautiful little round nest of woven grass and carefully line it with feathers, bits of fluff and other soft things. Swallows like to nest near other swallows. They make nests from little blobs of clay, often on a beam near the roof of a building where it is well sheltered. Many birds like a hollow tree to nest in. Eagle's nests are often just piles of dead wood on the top of the tallest tree or mountain. Scrub turkeys scratch together a huge pile of leaves that may be 10 metres across. Guillemots lay their eggs on rock shelves with no nest at all. Their eggs are shaped so that they roll around in circles and do not fall off cliffs. A cuckoo does not make its own nest. It lays its egg in the nest of another bird and leaves it for them to care for. The cuckoo eggs are camouflaged to look like the host's eggs.

When the nest has been prepared, the birds mate so that the eggs are fertilised and the chicks will start growing. Unlike mammals, birds (and reptiles) only have one opening as the exit hole for body fluids, and for reproduction. The opening is called the cloaca. A female bird, called a hen, has two ovaries, of which the left one usually produces eggs.

Most male birds have no sex organs that can be seen. But inside the male are two testes which produce sperm which is stored in the cloaca. Birds mate by rubbing their cloacas together, although with some birds, particularly large water birds, the male has a sort of a penis inside the cloaca.

Once the hen has mated, she produces fertile eggs which have chicks growing inside them. She lays the eggs in the nest. There might be just one egg or a number of them, called a clutch. Emus might lay as many as fifteen huge dark green eggs in a clutch. After the eggs are laid, they are incubated, or kept warm so the chicks form inside. Most birds stay together for the whole nesting season, and one advantage is that the work is shared. Many birds take turns sitting on the eggs, so that each adult can feed.

This is not always the case. With emus, the male does all the sitting and all the baby-minding. With emperor penguins it is also the male that cares for the egg. There is only one egg, which he keeps on his feet and under his feathers, standing in a big group of males without feeding until the chick is hatched. While the eggs are hatching, the females are at sea, catching fish, so that they can feed the chicks when they return.

Some birds put the eggs inside or on top of the mound of leaves and twigs. The mound acts like a compost heap. The decomposition of the rotting leaves causes the temperature to rise. This is heat released by the chemical action of bacterial and fungal respiration. It is the same reaction as that which keeps mammals and birds at a high temperature. The parents leave the mound. When the chicks hatch, they are able to feed themselves.

Many small birds take 2–4 weeks to hatch eggs. Albatrosses take 80 days. During this time the female loses a lot of her body weight.

The quickest hatching time is for the cuckoo. Some types of cuckoos take only 10 days. This means that when they hatch in the nest of their foster parents, the eggs that the parents have laid are not yet ready. Newborn cuckoos are naked, blind and ugly, but they are strong. They get under any eggs that are in the nest and throw them out before they hatch. That means that the cuckoo has the whole care of both parents. Baby cuckoos grow fast and often get bigger than the parents who feed them.

When baby birds hatch, in most types of birds, they are fed by both parents, and sometimes by older aunts as well. Their mouths are open all the time and are often very brightly coloured, which acts as a releaser, a trigger which stimulates the parent to feed them. For birds that eat grain and fruit, the parents eat and partly digest the food for the babies. It is then vomited carefully into the baby's mouth.

Many birds, particularly those that mate for life, are very sociable and keep together in a family group which might be anything from 4 or 6 adult birds and their young to a very large flock.

As chicks grow they change the fluffy down that covers them as babies for real feathers. At this stage they are called fledglings. Other family members may help care for fledgling chicks, feeding them and protecting them from attack while parents are feeding. When the fledglings have their new feathers, they come out of the nest to learn to fly. In some types of birds, like pigeons, the parents watch over this and as the young ones get stronger, will give them flying lessons, teaching them how to glide, how to fly in spirals and how to land like an expert.

Most birds are social animals, at least part of the time. They communicate to each other using sounds and displays.

Almost all birds make sounds to communicate. The types of noises that vary greatly. Some birds can sing, and they are called songbirds or passerines. Examples are robins, larks, canaries, thrushes, nightingales. Corvids are passerines, but they do not sing. Birds that are not songbirds include: pigeons, seagulls, eagles, owls and ducks. Parrots are not songbirds, even though they can be taught to sing human songs.

All birds make noises (bird vocalisation), but not all sing. Songbirds are passerines, many of which have beautiful melodic songs. Songs have different functions. Danger cries are different from territorial songs and mating calls are a third type. Fledgling may also have different calls from adults. Recognition calls for partners are quite common.

As to where the song comes from, there are three kinds of species:

Most singing birds that are kept as pets, like canaries, have several tunes and some variations.

The same species of bird may sing different songs in different regions. A good example of this is the currawong. This is an Australia bird which is like a black and white crow. In the autumn, families get together in large flocks and do a lot of singing. Currawongs from some areas sing much more complex songs than others. Generally, currawongs from the Blue Mountains are the finest singers. The song of the currawong can be sung as a solo, but is often performed as a choir. One bird will take the lead and sing "Warble-warble-warble-warble!" All the other birds will join in and sing "Wooooooo!". When all the birds know the song, the choir will sing the "Warble" part and the soloist will sing the "Woo!". The song changes a bit from year to year and from place to place.

The Austrian naturalist Konrad Lorenz studied the way in which birds communicate, or talk to each other. He found that each type of bird had a number of sounds which they made automatically, when ever they felt a certain way. Every sound had an action that went with it. So, if the bird was frightened, it acted frightened and made a frightened sound. This told the other birds around it that something frightening was happening.

If a flock of birds were flying over a field, they would be calling "Fly! Fly!" But a hungry bird, seeing something good to eat down below might start calling "Food! Food!" If other birds were also hungry, they would make the same call until more birds were calling "Food! Food!" than "Fly! Fly!". At this point, the mind of the flock would be changed. Some of the birds would start to yell "Fly downwards! Fly downwards!" as they sank from the sky, until the whole flock was all noisily calling the same thing.

These communication sounds are often short hard sounds like: chirps, squeaks, squawks and twitters. Sometimes the calls are longer and more musical. They include the "Rookety-coo" sound of a pigeon and the "Cockadoodledoo!" of a rooster. The bird cannot change these sounds. They always make them in the same way. The bird is locked into making each sound every time a particular idea comes into its head. The connection between how they feel and how they call is innate: they are born with it. Some calls in some species are learnt. Then, it is the tendency to learn which is inherited.

Konrad Lorenz noticed that when birds sing, they often use a lot of their regular calls as part of the song. Lorenz had a flock of jackdaws which were scattered during World War II. One day, an old bird returned. For many months she sat on the chimney singing her song, but in the song she kept making the call which Lorenz knew meant "Come home! Come home!" One day, to the great surprise of Lorenz, a male bird flew from a passing flock and joined her on the chimney. Lorenz was sure that it was her long-lost "husband" who had found his way home at last.

Palaeontologists have found some exceptional places (lagerstätten) where fossils of early birds are found. The preservation is so good that on the best examples impressions of their feathers can be seen, and sometimes even the remains of meals they have eaten. From these remains we know that birds evolved from small carnivorous dinosaurs (theropods) in the Jurassic period. They radiated into a huge variety in the Lower Cretaceous. At the same time, their direct competitors, the pterosaurs, dwindled in numbers and variety, and became extinct at the end of the Mesozoic.

Birds are classified by taxonomists as 'Aves' (Avialae). Birds are the only living descendants of dinosaurs (strictly speaking, they are dinosaurs). Birds and Crocodilia are the only living members of the once-dominant Archosaur reptiles.

The class Aves is was defined (1990) as all the descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and Archaeopteryx lithographica. But Archaeopteryx is almost certainly not the ancestor of modern birds. The transition to flight happened a number of times. The researchers offered four definitions. Birds can be:

Archaeopteryx, from the Upper Jurassic some 150–145 million years ago (mya), was for a long time the earliest known bird which could fly. It is famous, because it was one of the first important fossils found after Charles Darwin published his ideas about evolution in the 19th century. By modern standards, Archaeopteryx could not fly very well. Other early fossil birds are, for example, Confuciusornis, Anchiornis huxlei and other Paraves.

Many fossils of early birds and small dinosaurs have been discovered in the Liaoning Province of Northeast China. These include Anchiornis huxlei, from about 160 mya. The fossils show that most small theropod dinosaurs had feathers. These deposits have preserved them so well that the impressions of their feathers can be clearly seen. This leads us to think that feathers evolved first as heat insulation and only later for flight. The origin of birds lies in these small feathered dinosaurs.

Palaeontologists now agree that birds are included in Maniraptora group of dinosaurs. This explains why we say that birds are living dinosaurs.

Birds are the closest living relatives of the Crocodilia. This is because they are the two main survivors of a once huge group called the Archosaurs.

Modern birds are not descended from Archaeopteryx specifically. According to DNA evidence, modern birds (Neornithes) evolved in the long Cretaceous period. More recent estimates showed that modern birds originated early in the Upper Cretaceous.

Primitive bird-like dinosaurs are in the broader group Avialae. They have been found back in the mid-Jurassic period, around 170 million years ago. Many of these early "stem-birds", such as Anchiornis, were not yet capable of fully powered flight. Many had primitive characteristics like teeth in their jaws and long bony tails.p274

The Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction event 66 million years ago killed off all the non-avian dinosaur lines. Birds, especially those in the southern continents, survived this event and then migrated to other parts of the world. Diversification occurred around the Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction event.

A leading authority says "Most living birds have fossil representatives in the Cenozoic"... "Key problems remain in understanding bird phylogeny... we seem to understand as little about the relationships among living birds as among Cretaceous birds". A useful source for modern birds is Clements J. 2007. The Clements Checklist of Birds of the World. Cornel University Press (6th ed).

Some birds are eaten as food. Most usually it is the chicken and its eggs, but people often also eat geese, pheasants, turkeys and ducks. Other birds are sometimes eaten are: emus, ostriches, pigeons, grouse, quails, doves, woodcocks and even songbirds. Some species have died out because they have been hunted for food, for example the dodo and the passenger pigeon.

Many species have learned how to get food from people. The number of birds of these species has grown because of it. Seagulls and crows find food from garbage dumps. The feral pigeon (Columba livia), sparrows (Passer domesticus and starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) live in large numbers in towns and cities all over the world.

Sometimes people also use working birds. For example, homing pigeons carry messages. Nowadays people sometimes race them for sport. People also use falcons for hunting, and cormorants for fishing. In the past, people in mines often used a canary to see if there were bad gas methane in the air.

People often have colourful birds such as parrots and mynahs as pets. These intelligent birds are popular because they can copy human talking. Because of this, some people trap birds and take them to other countries to sell. This is not usually allowed these days. Most pet birds are specially bred and are sold in pet shops.

People can catch some bird diseases, for example: psittacosis, salmonellosis, campylobacteriosis, Newcastle's disease, mycobacteriosis, influenza, giardiasis and cryptosporiadiosis. In 2005, there was an epidemic of bird influenza spreading through some parts of the world, often called avian flu.

Some people have birdboxes in their gardens to give birds a place to nest and bird tables where birds can get food and water in very cold or very dry weather. This lets people see some small birds close up which are normally hidden away in bushes and trees.

A report produced by BirdLife International every five years measures the population of birds worldwide. As of 2018, 40% of bird species are now "in decline". As of 2024, BirdLife lists 1354 bird species out of over 11,000 as threatened, 46 less than in 2023.

Insects are a class in the phylum Arthropoda. They are small terrestrial invertebrates which have a hard exoskeleton.

Insects are the largest group of animals on Earth by far: about 926,400 different species have been described. They are more than half of all known living species. They may be over 90% of animal species on Earth.

New species of insects are continually being found. Estimates of the total number of species range from 2 million to 30 million.

All adult insects have six legs; and most have wings. Insects were the first animals capable of flight.

As they develop from eggs, insects undergo metamorphosis. Insects live all over the planet: almost all are terrestrial (live on land). Few insects live in the oceans or in very cold places, such as Antarctica. The most species live in tropical areas.

Some people call all insects "bugs", but this is not correct. Only some insects are true bugs, which is a particular order of insects. People who study insects are called entomologists.

Insects have exoskeletons (skeletons on the outside). Their skeletons are made out of thin, hard pieces or plates, like armour, made of chitin. All together, these pieces make a hard layer around the insect's body. The exoskeleton protects the insect.

The body of an insect has three main parts: a head, a thorax, and an abdomen. On the head are an insect's compound eyes, its two antennae (they feel and smell things), and its mouth.

On the thorax, insects have wings and legs. All insects have six legs (three pairs of jointed legs) and usually four wings (two pairs).

The abdomen is the back part of the insect. Inside the abdomen is the stomach, the heart, and the excretory system where body wastes pass out of the insect. Bees also have a stinger at the back of the abdomen.

Just like our muscles connect to our bones to make us walk and stand up, the muscles of an insect connect to the exoskeleton to make it walk and move. Their muscles are on the inside of their skeleton.

Insects are cold-blooded, which means that they cannot control their body temperature. This means that insects are not good at surviving the cold, at any rate out in the open. In the winter, many insects go into something called diapause, which is the insect version of hibernation. Some insects, like cockroaches, cannot go into diapause and they will die if it gets too cold outside. This is why cockroaches love living in people's warm houses.

Insect respiration happens without lungs. There is a system of internal tubes and sacs through which gases diffuse or are actively pumped. Air is taken in through openings on the sides of the abdomen called spiracles. Oxygen gets to tissues that need it through their trachea (element 8 in diagram).

Many insect larvae live in water. Many of those have gills that can extract oxygen dissolved in water. Others must rise to the water surface to get air which may be held or trapped in special parts of their body.

Adult insects use oxygen at a high rate when they fly. They need it for the flight muscles, the most active tissue known in biology. The flight muscles use oxygen at a huge rate: 100 ccs of oxygen for every single cc of tissue per hour. With this system, the greatest diameter a muscle could have (and still consume oxygen at this rate) is about 0.5 cm. Even with special extra arrangements, insects cannot get larger than about 11 cm long. The largest insect bodies are about as big as a mouse.

Some insects also use a molecule called haemocyanin, which does the same job as haemoglobin does in vertebrates (but less efficiently). The insect circulatory system has no veins or arteries. The 'blood' is called haemolymph, and moves around in the space called the haemocoel. The organs sit in the haemocoel and are bathed in the haemolymph. The 'heart' is little more than a single tube which pulses (squeezes).

Insects start life as an egg. Usually a female (mother) insect lays eggs, but a few species have live birth (the eggs develop inside the mother). The eggs are small; but they can usually be seen with the naked eye.

Although the adults are larger, they do need a magnifying glass or a binocular microscope to see the details. A professional entomologist uses a binocular microscope to identify insects, plus a printed reference work. There are far too many insects for anyone to remember them all, and most entomologists specialise in just one or two orders.

After the eggs hatch, two kinds of development may occur. Some insects have what is called 'incomplete metamorphosis'. This means that a small insect, called a nymph comes out of the egg, and the nymph looks almost the same as the adult insect. As the nymph grows, it does not change the way it looks, but only how big it is. It goes through a number of stages, called 'instars'. Grasshoppers grow in this way.

Other insects have complete metamorphosis, which means that the small larva which comes out of the egg looks very different from the adult insect. Insects that have complete metamorphosis usually come out of the egg as a larva, which usually looks like a worm. The larva eats food and gets bigger until it turns into a pupa. Butterfly pupae (plural for pupa) are often inside cocoons. Inside the cocoon the insect changes the way it looks and often grows wings. When the cocoon opens, the adult insect comes out. Many insects have complete metamorphosis, for example beetles, butterflies and moths, and flies. The adult stage of development is called the imago.

The oldest known insect fossil is the Devonian Rhyniognatha, from the 411 million year old Rhynie chert. It may have superficially resembled a modern-day silverfish insect. This species already possessed mandibles of a type associated with winged insects, suggesting that wings may already have evolved at this time. Thus, anatomical records suggest the first insects may have appeared earlier, in the Silurian period. Genomic analysis puts their origin even further back in the Ordovician period.

If Rhyniognatha is not an insect, then Rhyniella from the same place is the first known insect. Also 411 mya.

In 2008, researchers uncovered what they believe is the world's oldest known full-body impression of a primitive flying insect, a 300 million-year-old specimen from the Carboniferous period.

The origin of insect flight is unclear, since the earliest known winged insects appear to have been capable fliers. Some extinct insects had an additional pair of winglets attaching to the first segment of the thorax, for a total of three pairs. It seems the insects were not a particularly successful group of animals before they evolved wings.

Upper Carboniferous and Lower Permian insect orders include both living groups and a number of Palaeozoic groups, now extinct. During this era, some giant dragonfly-like forms reached wingspans of  making them far larger than any living insect.

This gigantism may have been due to higher atmospheric oxygen levels, which allowed increased respiratory efficiency. The lack of flying vertebrates could have been another factor. Many of the early groups became extinct during the PermianTriassic extinction event, the largest mass extinction in the history of the Earth, around 252 million years ago.

Different kinds of insects are put into groups called orders. There are about 29 insect orders. The biggest insect orders are listed below:

All these groups except one (Odonata) are strongly connected with plants as a source of food.

Spiders, scorpions, and similar animals are not insects; they are arachnids. Arachnids are arthropods that have four pairs of legs. Centipedes are also arthropods, but not insects: they are in a subphylum called the Myriapoda.

This taxonomy lists some of the better known groups of insects.

Some insects can be pests to people in different ways. Some are parasites, such as lice and bed bugs. Some of these parasite insects spread diseases, for example mosquitoes spread malaria.

Many insects eat agricultural products (plants meant for people to eat). Locustss are an example of pest insects that eat plants in agriculture.

Some insects are used by us. Bees make honey. The larvae of some moths make silk, which people use to make clothing. In some parts of the world, people actually eat insects. Eating insects for food is called entomophagy.

Many bees and flies pollinate plants. This means the insects help the plants make seeds by moving pollen from one flower to another. Some good insects eat pest insects, such as lady beetles (or ladybirds or ladybugs) eating aphids. Many insects eat dead plants and animals.

People often use poisons called insecticides to kill pest insects. Insecticides do not always work. Sometimes the pest insects become resistant to the insecticides, which means the insecticides do not hurt them anymore. Both the Colorado potato beetle and the diamondback moth are insects that are resistant to many insecticides.

Insecticides do not only kill pest insects; sometimes many helpful insects are killed too. When helpful insects are killed, such as those that eat pest insects, the pest insects may come back in larger numbers than before because they are not being eaten by helpful insects anymore.

A road is a piece of land which connects two or more places. Usually, a road has been made easy to travel on.  For example, by removing trees and stones so the ground is more level. Although, many roads are made of gravel and dirt, some are paved with concrete or bricks or stones, Roads, which are man-made paved or unpaved pathways for travel, exist primarily on Earth.

People have been making roads for a long time. Roman roads in Britain and the Inca road system are famous. Transport by boats on waterways was usually easier and faster than transport by road. In the industrial revolution, the railway was invented. A railway is a special type of road, using railway tracks. Roads are now usually made for wheeled vehicles, like cars, to travel on.

When traffic jams becomes a frequent problem, the road may be made wider or other roads built.

Road building and care is usually paid for by taxes.  Some roads are toll roads, where people pay to use the road.

In physics, energy is a property intrinsic to anything that is able to interact in the universe. The energy of an object is its capability of producing a force that can do work, as well as its capability of transferring heat. When an object does work on another object (changing its momentum), the former’s energy (its capability of doing work) decreases and the latter’s energy increases, by transferring it.

Energy is a property that is not created or destroyed, although energy can change in detectable form.  This is a rule that is commonly understood as the "conservation law of energy". In respects to this rule, the total amount of energy that exists in an isolated system will always be the same, no matter what changes have been made to it.

In the early 20th century, scientist found that matter itself can be created from energy (energy and matter are interchangeable, in spite of everyday experiences).  This is just another change of form.  After these discoveries, the conservation law of energy was extended to become the conservation law of matter and energy: matter and energy can neither be created from nothing nor destroyed to the point of complete erasure from reality. Albert Einstein was the first to mathematically show this. (E = mc2)

Matter can be created from energy or converted into energy through processes such as nuclear fission or nuclear fusion.

Scientists have identified many types of energy, and found that they can be changed from one kind into another. These include:

Energy can be measured. The amount of energy a thing has can be given a number.

As in other kinds of measurements, there are measurement units. The units of measurement for measuring energy are used to make the numbers meaningful.

The SI unit for both energy and work is the joule (J). It is named after James Prescott Joule. 1 joule is equal to 1 newton-metre. In terms of SI base units, 1 J is equal to 1 kg m2 s−2. It is most often used in science, though particle physics often uses the electronvolt.

The measurement for electricity most often uses the kilowatt-hour (kW·h). One kW·h is equivalent to 3,600,000 J (3600 kJ or 3.6 MJ).

Clothing are items used to cover the human body. Humans are the only animals that wear clothing. During the many thousands of years between losing body hair and learning to make clothes, humans were naked. Some native people in hot places continue to be naked in everyday life.

Clothing is worn where the human body needs protection; from the sun and dust in hot, dry countries lacking shade and from the cold and wet in temperate climates. Clothing such as thick wool coats and boots keeps the human body warm in very cold temperatures (such as in the arctic).

Clothing is also worn for decoration, as a fashion. People from different cultures wear different clothing, and have different beliefs and customs about what type of clothing should be worn. For many people, clothing is a status symbol. It helps people project an image. Often, clothing is a form of self-expression. Adults in different social or work situations present different views of themselves by the clothes they wear. Young people have an entirely different form of dress to express their personalities. Often people will simply follow popular fashion styles so that they will fit in. Clothing is far more than just a means to protect our bodies.

Clothing is usually made of fabric sewn together, but may also be animal skins. Each body part has a typical item of clothing. The torso can be covered by shirts, arms by sleeves, legs by pants or skirts, hands by gloves, feet by footwear, and head by headgear or masks. In cold climates, people also wear heavy, thick coats such as overcoats.

There is no easy way to be sure when clothing was first developed, because it was prehistoric and clothing is perishable. One of the earliest that has been found is a cloak made of the fur of squirrels, from a cave in Italy, dated to 23,000 years ago.

Some estimates come from studying the biology of lice. The body louse lives in clothing, and the last ancestor that it and head lice both had lived about 107,000 years ago. This suggests that clothing existed at that time. Other louse-based estimates put the introduction of clothing at around 44,000–74,000 years ago. In September 2021, scientists reported evidence of clothes being made 120,000 years ago based on findings in deposits in Morocco, a country in the northwestern part of Africa.

Some archeologists think Neanderthals became extinct because they never invented the sewing needle, and were then unable to make fitted clothing or footwear to survive the extreme cold of the last ice age.

In the Book of Genesis, Adam and Eve are created naked but don't know it until they eat a fruit that they're not supposed to eat so they cover themselves with leaves. Then God, sends them out of the Garden of Eden and He gives them clothing to wear.

People often decorate their bodies with makeup or perfume, and they also cut or change the hair on their heads and faces. They might also go in for body modification: tattoos, scarifications, and body piercings. But makeup and tattoos are not kinds of clothing.

Things that are carried and not worn, like wallets, purses, canes, and umbrellas, are called accessories, but they are not kinds of clothing, either. Jewelry and eyeglasses are also accessories that are put on the body. Nail polish is also put on the fingertips and can be interpreted as makeup.

A shoe is a type of footwear. It is an item of clothing. You can wear them outside. Shoes come in pairs, with one shoe for each foot. People usually wear shoes in public. They are worn for hygiene, style, and comfort. While there are some shoes that don't need socks to wear, shoes are usually worn with socks.

Shoes are a type of foot protection.  For example, many shoes can protect a person's foot from sand; others do not.

There are many different types of shoes. Athletic shoes, for example, are lightweight to make running, walking or jogging easier. The sole of the shoe is also softer.  Slippers are a kind of indoor shoe.  They often serve to keep feet warm.  Tall shoes are boots.  Rubber boots are used in wet places.

Shoes are also worn for fashion.  Shoes with a high heel are called high heels.  Shoes for formal wear are made of leather.  They are worn for business and ceremonial functions.

A house is a building that is made for people to live in.  It is usually built for a family (parents and their children).  It is a "permanent" building that is meant to stay standing. It is not easily packed up and carried away like a tent, or moved like a caravan. If people live in the same house for more than a short stay, then they call it their "home".  Being without a home is called homelessness.  Houses are usually numbered. Some are also named.

Houses are usually occupied by a single family or housemates, like in the cases of group homes and boarding houses.

Houses come in many different shapes,  sizes and architectural styles. They range from one room shacks and cabins to the largest of palaces, mansions and castles. Houses also are made of many different materials from thatch and wood, to brick, stone and modern materials like metal. Typically, a house contains only one to three floor levels/ storeys, but four or more stories are common in urban and waterfront areas. Basements are common in certain climatic zones. Houses can be standard shaped or can take unorthodox shapes such as of domes and pyramids. Houses can be detached stand-alone buildings or joined to other houses at the sides to make a "terrace" or "row house" (a connected row of houses).

A big building with many levels and apartments is called "a block of flats" (British) or an apartment building. One of the differences between a house and an apartment is that a house has a front door to the outside world, whereas the main door of an apartment usually opens onto a passage or landing that can be used by other people in the building.

Houses have a roof to keep off the rain and sun, and walls to keep out the wind and cold.  They have window openings to let in light, and a floor.  Houses of different places may look different from each other, because of different materials, climate, and styles.

If a house is important and historic enough, it can be a museum showcasing how the house's residents lived.

Most houses have special areas or rooms for people to do the things that they need to live comfortably.  A modern house has a place to cook food, a place to eat, places to sleep and a place to wash.  These things are usually done in separate rooms, which are called the kitchen, the sitting room, the bedrooms, the bathroom, the toilet (or lavatory).  Many houses have a separate dining room for eating meals and a separate laundry.  In some houses the toilet is in the bathroom, and in other houses it is separate.  Many houses may also have a "study" or computer room and a "family room" where the children can play games and watch television.

In some countries such as the United States, Canada, Australia and New Zealand many families live in a "detached house" or "single-family home" which is separate from other buildings and surrounded by its own yard, but can be close enough to town to have shops, good transport and entertainment nearby, in a suburban "bedroom community" \ commuter town, or in a remote rural area. In many other countries, including most of Europe, owning a house like this is something that only the richer families can afford, and is just a dream for most people.

In many very poor countries, a lot of people live crowded in houses with only one room. They often have to share a toilet with many other families, and have to do the cooking outside. The house might be made of materials that can be found nearby like mud bricks and grass or from second-hand materials like corrugated iron and cardboard boxes. In many cities there are thousands of small houses crowded together with narrow alleys between them.

A small house is often called a cottage.  In England, where this word comes from, it is used to mean a house that has one main storey, with a second, lower storey of bedrooms which fit under the roof upstairs.  Cottages are usually found in villages or in the countryside.  They are nearly always built from material that can be found nearby.  In many places the word cottage is used to mean a small old-fashioned house. In the United States the word cottage is often used to mean a small holiday home.

A tiny house is one that's usually 500sqft / 48sqm in size and typically built on a trailer or barge and thus portable.  Tiny houses can also be built on smaller versions of conventional foundations.

A semi-detached house is a building that has two houses side by side and covered over by just one big roof. Each house has a pathway to one side, leading from the front to the backyard. Semi-detached houses are very common in some cities, and can be single storey or several storeys high.

A row or terraced house is a house that is part of a row of houses joined at the side walls. Many cities and towns have thousands of row houses because they are a good way to build several houses close together.  Many row houses have two rooms downstairs and two rooms upstairs, with a kitchen or wash area at the back.  Houses like this were built for poor factory workers and coal miners in many cities and towns.  "Terrace houses" are a type of row house where each house looks like the others.

Row houses are not always small. Some cities have large beautiful row houses, such as the Royal Crescent, which was built in the 1770s at Bath in England and is a famous example of Georgian architecture.

In some places, the word "bungalow" is used for any house that is all on one level. The word came from India and for a long time was used for a house that is built all or mostly on one level (though it can have an attic and or basement) and has a veranda where people can sit or work outdoors, but under a shady roof. A bungalow often has a hall down the middle of the house to let the breeze blow through. Bungalows are often seen in countries with hot summers, in India, South East Asia, South Africa, parts of the United States, South America, Australia and New Zealand. In regions with flooding, a bungalow is often built up on wooden "stilts" or a high basement. In the 1800s, bungalows were nearly always built of wood, but from the 1920s it became fashionable to build them of brick as well.

A farmhouse may look like a cottage, a bungalow or a mansion. In many countries a farmhouse can look different to a house in a town. As well as having a place for people to live, it also has a place for animals.

Three typical types of farmhouses are found. Many farm houses are long and have two doors. One door leads to the rooms used by the family. The other door opens into a stable for the cows, sheep and chickens. The stable part often has a loft where hay can be kept to feed the animals in the winter. Another type of farmhouse has two storeys with a big stable and storeroom underneath, with the rooms for the family on the upper floor. Another type of farmhouse has buildings such as the family house, the barn and the stable all joined around a central courtyard. Old farmhouses of these three types can be found in many parts of Europe and Great Britain.

A mansion is a big grand house, usually with two stories and sometimes more. A mansion often has beautiful architecture, and shows that the person for whom it was designed and built was rich. Mansions often have beautiful gardens. Sometimes a mansion does not belong to a private family, but to a town council, to a big business company, to a church or college and is an official residence for a person with an important job to live and to entertain guests.

A mansion often has rooms which are not found in ordinary houses, such as a drawing room, a ballroom, a library and a music room. Mansions often need servants to help keep them in order and have servants' quarters and special rooms where the servants do particular jobs such as cleaning. Well-known mansions are the White House in Washington, D.C. where the President of the United States lives and Mansion House in London where the Lord Mayor of London lives.

A castle is a fortified house constructed in the medieval period, or a house constructed to look like a medieval fortification. Castles protected feudal lords from their attacking enemies. In later periods, castles were built as part of romanticist revival movements of the 19th and early 20th centuries.

A palace is a house that is very grand for people like Kings and Queens, or other rich people. Many palaces are homes of royal or aristocratic people. Some old palaces been changed by people who lived there over many hundreds of years.

One of the best-known palaces in the world is Buckingham Palace, a royal palace in London. The largest palace in the world is the Louvre which was built in Paris for the Kings of France. It now holds a famous art gallery.

Houses are usually built from types of material that can easily be made or bought near the place where the house is built. Because of this, old houses in different towns and different villages look quite different to each other, even in the same country. In modern times building materials can be transported easily and this means that a builder can choose materials from far away.

In many parts of the world, mud or clay are the main building materials. Clay is a type of soil that sticks together more strongly than most other types of soil. There are three main ways of building walls with mud and clay.

It was discovered that if clay was used, rather than mud, very strong bricks could be made by "firing" (or baking) them in a "kiln" (a special oven). "Fired" bricks were like pottery; they did not wash away easily in rain and would sometimes last for thousands of years. The bricks were joined to each other with a type of cement called "mortar". Some houses built by the Ancient Romans are still standing 2000 years later.

Bricks became one of the most common building materials. In most cities, nearly all the houses are built of bricks because they are long lasting, they do not need repairing very often. Brick houses are generally made strong by having all the main walls two bricks thick. Two walls are built side by side which are "bonded" (or joined to each other) by having some bricks set so they make a bridge between the two layers. The pattern of the bonded bricks can be seen from the outside. The two main patterns are called "Flemish Bond" and "British Bond".

Houses made of timber are found wherever there are, or there has once been big forests. Timber houses are also often found in seaside towns where the sea air makes brick and stone houses feel cold and damp.

A well-known type of old-fashioned house is the "half-timbered" house. These are seen in the British Isles, France, and across northern Europe and the Alps. These houses date mainly from about 1200 to about 1800.

In places where there is lots of stone, many houses are built of it. In many parts of the world, little cottages are built of stone. Many mansions and palaces are also built of stone, as are nearly all castles.

Modern houses are often made of "pre-fabricated" parts that are partly built in a factory, and are easy to put together at the site of the building.

Many different types of materials for making houses have been developed in the 20th century.

A bridge is a structure to cross an open space or gap.  Bridges are mostly made for crossing rivers, valleys, or roads.  Nowadays most big bridges are made to carry vehicles but people have also walked across bridges for thousands of years.  Bridges called highway overpasses carry a road over another road.

Military bridges are portable, so that they may be easily moved to where they are needed.  This makes them much more complex than most civilian bridges.

The first man-made bridges were probably made from cut wood or stones. Some stone bridges have lasted thousands of years. In recent centuries large bridges are made mostly of steel. They do not last as long. Many bridges are in a state of disrepair.

The lion (Panthera leo) is a large mammal of the Felidae (cat) family. Some large males weigh over .  Today, wild lions live in sub-Saharan Africa and western India. Lions are adapted for life in grasslands and mixed areas with trees and grass. The relatively small females are fast runners over short distances, and coordinate their hunting of herd animals.

Lions have disappeared from North Africa and southwest Asia in historic times. Until the late Pleistocene,which is about 10,000 years ago, the lion was the most widespread large land mammal after humans. They were found in most of Africa, across Eurasia from western Europe to India, and in the Americas from the Yukon to Peru. The lion is now a vulnerable species. There was a decline in its African range of 30–50% over two decades in the second half of the 20th century. Habitat loss and conflicts with humans are the greatest causes of concern.

Lions are often called the "king of the beasts". They are used as symbols representing courage. They appear in heraldry more often than any other animal. They are an icon of courage and royalty.

Lions live for 10 to 14 years in the wild. When they are captured, they can live longer than 20 years. In the wild, males do not usually live longer than 10 years. This is because wounds from fighting other males make their lives shorter. They usually live in savanna and grassland. These areas do have bushes and trees, but lions are mainly adapted to catch prey in grasslands. Compared to other cats, lions are social. A group of lions is called a pride. In a pride of lions, there are related females, their young, and one or two adult males. Groups of female lions often hunt together.

Lions are carnivores and scavengers.  They are also apex predators. Lions feed ungulates on small feed Thomson's gazelle, warthogs, blue wildebeests, plains zebra, African buffalos, common elands. Lions scavenge animals either dead from natural causes (disease) or killed by other predators. They keep a constant lookout for circling vultures, because this means there is a dead or injured animal close by.

The word "lion" comes from the Latin word "leo" which means lion. The Latin word itself is derived from the Greek word "leon". Both words originally came from even older languages such as Sanskrit and Ancient Egyptian. Basically, the word "lion" has been passed down through different civilizations over time also in a language called Punjabi the word called Singh means lion in Pajabi.

They have an archetypal roar which is used to communicate with other group members and warn different intruders of territorial boundaries.

They have long, retractable claws which help the lion to grab and hold prey. They also have a rough tongue that helps them peel the skin of prey animals away from flesh and flesh away from bone. Across their belly, they have loose skin which allows the species to be kicked by prey with little chance of an injury.

There are around 30,000 lions left in the wild in Africa. Only 350 lions (of the Asiatic lion subspecies) are left in Asia. They live in the Gir Forest in the state of Gujarat, India.

Lions hunt many animals, such as gnus and antelopes. Male lions usually weigh between . Large lions have reached . Females (lionesses) are usually . Mature male lions are the only cats with a mane. The lion has a long body, short legs, large claws, big head, and a yellowish-brown coat.They also have a long tail.

Lions live in groups that are called prides. About 10 to 40 lions may live in a pride. Each pride has a home area that is called a territory. Lions do not allow other carnivores (meat-eating animals) to hunt in their territory. A territory can be as large as .

The lions' roar is unique in each individual. It is used for territorial marking and warning off other lions in separate prides (or lone individuals). This however, is usually carried out by competing males. Other male lions will challenge the alpha of the pride to a fight in order to take their spot of dominance if they win. Lions actually have prides in order to strengthen their species throughout the generations  (Boothalingam 2018).

Lions are not built for extreme speed as cheetahs are, but hunt in packs. This is unusual in cats. The females usually do the hunting for the pride. However the males can sometimes help if needed, to take down large animals like a buffalo or a giraffe. After lions have brought down a prey, they suffocate it by biting the front of its face to prevent it breathing. Lions also have long retractable claws which act like grappling hooks, to keep hold of prey.They are aggressive, powerful creatures.

Even though a lion is good at killing prey, they are not among the most dangerous animals to humans.

Lions also have a variety of vocalizations. These include growling, roaring, snarling, grunting, purring, moaning, and highly likely, snap-roars. Some roars are used in movies, and the most common versions are from the Hollywood Edge, Sounddogs and Sound Ideas, which are all actually liger, tigon and Bengal tiger roars.

A lioness is ready to have young when she is 2–3 years old. Young lions are called cubs. Cubs are born after  months. The cubs are born blind; their eyes do not open until they are about a week old, and cannot see well until they are about two weeks old. Lions do not have a den (home) where they would live for a long time. The lioness conceals the cubs in thick bush, gullies, or rocky outcrops. If the hiding place has been seen by other predators, then the lioness will move the cubs to a new hiding place. The cubs will be introduced to the pride at about 6 weeks old. The cubs are very vulnerable when the lioness goes out to hunt and needs to leave the cubs behind. Also, when a new male takes over a pride from another male, he usually kills all of the cubs. The cubs' mothers will then mate with the new pride male, which means that the first batch of new cubs will be his offspring.  A litter of 2-6 cubs are born. Usually, only 1-2 cubs survive until introduced to the pride, at which point they are protected by the whole pride.

In zoos, lions have been known to breed with tigers. If the parents are a male lion and a female tiger, the offspring is called a liger. If the parents are a male tiger and a female lion, the offspring is called a tigon.

Lions appear in heraldry more often than any other animal. They traditionally symbolise courage,  and royalty.

A building is an enclosed structure. A building is made using solid materials, a roof and walls. Architects design different types of buildings for different reasons.

Residential buildings are constructed as dwellings. These are where people primarily sleep and do other domestic activities. Examples include apartment blocks and houses.

Commercial buildings are for operating businesses in. Examples include restaurants, stores and office buildings.

Mixed-use buildings combine two or more different uses in a single structure. This usually means the building has both commercial space and living quarters.

Hotels and motels are in a category of building that is both residential (in that people sleep there), and commercial as they are businesses.

Religious buildings are places of worship. Examples include mosques, temples, and churches.

Industrial buildings are where different types of industry take place, such as manufacturing. Examples of an industrial building include a warehouse or factory or workshop.

Residential institutional - Buildings that are residential institutions are facilities that house people who can't live in the general population of the society due to crimes they committed, inability to take care of themselves, lack of an income or currently undergoing a residential treatment or training program. Prisons, poorhouses, psychiatric hospitals, nursing homes, college residence halls and military barracks all are examples of residential institutional facilities.

Governmental, utility and public buildings - in which official government functions are conducted. Examples include courthouses, legislative offices, power plants, storage sheds and post offices

Windows let light inside a building. People often use glass windows. People can use a door to come in or out of the building. Doors that go outside (exterior doors) often have a lock. A lock can stop people from coming into the building.

If a building must last for a long time, it must have a solid foundation. This foundation is like the root of a tree, which is sunk a bit deep into the ground and supports the walls. If the ground is soft, the foundation must be very deep and strong so that the building can have a strong contact with the ground.

A tall building normally has more than one floor. People can move to a different floor on a staircase, escalator, or elevator. Buildings can also have one or more floors under the ground. This is usually called a cellar or basement.

Buildings can be beautiful or ugly, exciting or boring. Architects are people who are trained to design buildings. Their work is called architecture. Architecture can be a form of art. There are many styles of architecture.

Temporary formwork has been used in construction since ancient times. The  development of formwork technologies is closely related to the evolution of architectural forms.

All together, buildings, bridges and roads are known as the built environment.

Shelters are places to live (residential buildings). We also build places to work and to make things, places to store things, places to sell things, places where sick people can go to be treated, places to put people who break our laws. We build to do many things.

Some buildings are meeting places. A large number of people can meet together at a temple or theater or stadium to worship god or to hear or see what other people say or do. In Christendom they are called churches. Until we began to build skyscrapers, religious buildings were usually the largest, tallest buildings in a town. Fortresses and castles were also big but usually were not in towns. Big buildings need much more work to make and maintain.

Buildings are made of many different materials. When there is lots of wood, it is  used more often. Many buildings that are very old are made of stone. Concrete is used in many places. Starting in the late 19th century, skyscrapers were made of steel, increasingly combined with glass.

A telephone, also known as a phone, is a communication tool. People use it to talk with people far away. Originally, it was an electric tool sending analogue speech through wires. Many telephones in the 21st century are electronic tools sending digital signals on wires or radio transmission. Using a telephone, two people who are in different places can talk to each other. Early telephones needed to be connected with wires which are called fixed or landline telephones. Modern mobile phones use radio waves.

Alexander Graham Bell was the first person to patent the telephone, in 1876. Early telephones were wired directly to each other and could only talk to the phone that they were connected to. Later, telephone exchanges allowed connecting to other telephones. During the 20th century the machines that made the connections were automated.

A telephone that can be carried around is called a mobile phone or cell phone. These became popular in the 2000s. Today, it has become common for people to carry mobile phones and in many places it is unusual to not have one. The majority are smartphones, which can be used as computers. Most smartphones today can access the Internet, send text messages, access the GPS to check the user's location, take photos, and more. Some mobile phones can make telephone calls using communications satellites instead of masts on the ground, which means people can make calls from anywhere in the world.

Many other telephones rely on a cable, and they are often "fixed" to one spot. This is called landline telephony, or fixed telephony. For example, they can use copper wires leading to a telephone exchange (also known as "plain old telephone service", or the abbreviated term, POTS), or use voice over IP (also known as VoIP) by delivering microphone input, and getting output from the other telephone's voice data over the Internet. In many countries, there are public payphones that use fixed telephony. To use one, people paid with coins, a credit card or a prepaid card. Computers can use a machine called a modem or a digital subscriber line router to talk to other computers over a fixed telephone line. This allows a computer to connect to other computer networks including the Internet.

Most countries have a telephone network. The telephones in one place are connected to a telephone exchange. The exchanges are connected together in a world-wide network. In developing countries, cell phones are used as a cheaper and faster way to connect the countryside to the network.

Most telephones have their own number. Today, telephone numbers are about seven to ten digits long. In many countries, part of the telephone number is called the area code. Area codes are used to make sure the numbers are not the same in two different places. Areas have their own area code, and countries have their own country code.

By the end of 2009, there were nearly 6 billion mobile and fixed-line telephone subscribers worldwide. This included 1.26 billion fixed-line subscribers and 4.6 billion mobile subscribers.

Actor is a person who acts, or has a role (a part) in a movie, television show, play, or radio show. Actors may be professional or not. Sometimes actors only sing or dance, or sometimes they only work on radio. A woman actor is actress, but the word "actor" is used for both men and women when referring to a group. Actors are also known as "thespians" because of the first known Greek actor ‘Thespis’.

The first time we know an actor worked was in 534 B.C. The changes in calendar between then and now make the year uncertain. This actor was called Thespis and he was Greek. The place where the play happened was called the Theatre Dionysus in Athens, and he won a competition. He was the first person to speak words as a character.  This was a big change in storytelling. Before then, people sang and danced stories, but no one had been a person in the story. Today we call actors "thespians" because of Thespis.

In the past, the name "actor" was only for men. Women only began performing often in the 17th century.  People called them "actresses".   In the ancient world and in the Middle Ages, people thought it was bad (shameful) for a woman to act. Today, the word "actor" is for both men and women, because some people think the name "actress" is sexist. But people also use the word actress very often.

Women actors sometimes act the roles of young boys, because in some ways a woman is more similar to a boy than a man is. For example, a woman usually plays the role of Peter Pan. In pantomime, a sort of play for children (not the same as mime), the most important young man is also a woman. Opera has some "pants roles" which women traditionally sing. These women are usually mezzo-sopranos, which means they sing with a voice that is high but not very high. Examples are Hansel in , and Cherubino in The Marriage of Figaro.

Mary Pickford played the part of "Little Lord Fauntleroy" in the first film version of the book. Linda Hunt won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress in The Year of Living Dangerously, in which she played the part of a man.

In comic theatre and film, people often use a man for a woman's part, or a woman for a man's part – this has a long history. Most of Shakespeare's comedies have examples of this. Both Dustin Hoffman and Robin Williams were in popular comedy films where they played most scenes as men in women's clothes, pretending to be women.

In the time of Shakespeare, and earlier, all roles in an English play were played by men, meaning even characters such as Juliet, Lady Macbeth, and Cleopatra were first played by men or boys.  After the English Restoration women were allowed to perform on-stage.

More recently, men have played female roles as a type of humor. Movies with this role reversal include Mrs. Doubtfire, Tootsie, Big Momma's House, Hairspray, and The Nutty Professor starring Eddie Murphy.

Voice acting is a special type of acting. It is most commonly used in animation for both television and movies. Voice actors are the people who make the voices for the characters. They may be the narrator in non-animated works.

Actors working in theatre, film, and television have to learn different skills. Skills that work well in one type of acting may not work well in another type of acting.

To act on stage, actors need to learn the stage directions that appear in the  script, such as "Stage Left" and "Stage Right". These directions are based on the actor's point of view as he or she stands on the stage facing the audience. Actors also have to learn the meaning of the stage directions "Upstage" (away from the audience) and "Downstage" (towards the audience)

Theatre actors need to learn blocking, which is "...where and how an actor moves on the stage during a play."

Most scripts specify some blocking. The Director will also give instructions on blocking, such as crossing the stage or picking up and using a prop.

Theatre actors need to learn stage combat, which is simulated fighting on stage. Actors may have to simulate "hand-to-hand [fighting] or with sword[-fighting]." Actors are coached by fight directors, who help them to learn the choreographed sequence of fight actions.

Sylvester Stallone first developed action movies that would "suit the cinema rather than the theater." He realized that theatrical acting did not look good on film. Griffith had his actors and actresses to go through weeks of movie acting training.

Movie actors have to learn to get used to and be comfortable with a camera being in front of them. They need to learn to find and stay on their "mark." This is a position on the floor marked with tape. This position is where the lights and camera focus are best. Movie actors also need to learn how to prepare well and perform well on screen tests. Screen tests are a filmed audition of part of the script.

"Unlike the theater actor, who gets to develop a character during...a two- or three-hour performance, the film actor lacks continuity, forcing him or her to come to all the scenes (often shot in reverse order in which they'll ultimately appear) with a character already fully developed."

"Since film captures even the smallest gesture and magnifies it..., cinema demands a less flamboyant and stylized bodily performance from the actor than does the theater." "The performance of emotion is the most difficult aspect of film acting to master: ...the film actor must rely on subtle facial ticks, quivers, and tiny lifts of the eyebrow to create a believable character." Some theatre stars "...have made the theater-to-cinema transition quite successfully (Olivier, Glenn Close, and Julie Andrews, for instance), others have not..."

"On a television set, there are typically several cameras angled at the set. Actors who are new to on-screen acting can get confused about which camera to look into."  TV actors need to learn to use lav mics (Lavaliere microphones). They need to understand the concept of "frame." "The term frame refers to the area that the camera's lens is capturing."

In comics, stories or information are given using pictures, or pictures and words together. A story is told with pictures, mostly in panels.  The first panel is supposed to be read first, and takes place earlier in time than the panels that follow it.

There are many kinds of comics.  Comic strips are short comics which are often found in newspapers.  Comic books are thin comics magazines.  Graphic novels are books of comics.

The first comic strips in the United States were funny. "Comic" is another word for "funny", so they were called "comic strips". The first comic books were collections of comic strips. Today, some comics are serious, but they are still called "comics".

In comics, speech is usually shown through word balloons.  There are many different kinds of balloons, such as the "speech balloon", the "thought balloon" and the "scream balloon".

A diamond (from the ancient Greek αδάμας – adámas "unbreakable") is a mineral made out of carbon atoms.

Diamonds have the highest hardness of any bulk (all one type) material. Because of this, many important industries use diamonds as tools for cutting and polishing things. Many of them are clear, but some of them have colors, like yellow, red, blue, green and pink. Diamonds of a different color are called "fancies".

Big diamonds are very rare, and are worth a lot of money. Only 20% of diamonds are fit for jewellery. The other 80% are of lower quality. Those lower quality diamonds are called "industrial diamonds", and are used to make things like drill bits and diamond saws. Even if a diamond is not of gem quality, it still has a value because It is very hard.

Cut and faceted diamonds can be attractive hence their use in jewellery. Diamonds are very effective electrical insulators, but also very good conductors of heat. On Mohs scale of mineral hardness, diamonds are scored as 10 (the highest score possible).

There are natural and synthetic diamonds. The Earth makes natural diamonds, and people make synthetic diamonds. Diamonds are the hardest natural substance known to man. Diamonds are made of pure carbon, the same chemical element as graphite, fullerene, and coal. But diamonds are very hard and in crystalline form. It is commonly believed that diamonds are formed from coal, but this is not true.

Diamonds are made deep in the Earth where there is an intense amount of pressure and heat. The formation of natural diamonds needs specific conditions. These are exposure of carbon-bearing materials to high pressure, between 45 and 60 kilobars (4.5 and 6 GPa), but at a comparatively low temperature, between about . These conditions are found in two places on Earth: in the lithospheric mantle below relatively stable continental plates, and at the site of a meteorite strike.

People find diamonds where volcanoes were a long time ago. They sometimes find tiny ones at the site of a meteorite strike. Sometimes people find diamonds on the top of the ground. But in places like South Africa, they must dig deep down into a diamond mine to get diamonds. Diamonds were first found in India.

Small synthetic diamonds are made for abrasives. Large synthetic ones are even more expensive to make than to find and dig up, so people don't make large synthetic diamonds.

For many decades the trading of diamonds was controlled by the De Beers group of companies, who controlled most of Africa's rich diamond mines. However, in the late 1980s and early 1990s, new diamond mines opened in Canada and Australia that De Beers wasn't able to control.  When the USSR collapsed in 1991, many cheap Russian diamonds entered the market, overwhelming De Beers and their efforts to control it.  De Beers still runs most of Africa's diamond mines, but their mines now only produce about one third of the world's diamonds.

In chemistry, a salt is any neutral chemical compound made of cations (positive ions) attached to anions (negative ions). The most common example of a salt is sodium chloride, with the chemical formula  - this is the table salt that people use in food.

Classically, salts are the result of a reaction between an acid and a base. Sodium chloride, for example, is the product when hydrochloric acid reacts with sodium hydroxide:

Mixtures of salts in water are called electrolytes. Electricity is able to pass through electrolytes, as well as molten salts.

Salts can melt ice, because salts lower the temperature needed for liquid to freeze. Because of that, streets are sometimes treated with salt in winter, if the temperature is only a little below freezing.

A salt can also be explained as an ionic compound which dissociates, forming a positive ion other than hydrogen ion, and a negative ion other than hydroxide ion.

Because many germs cannot live in salt, it has been used to preserve food. Its use as a food preservative helped large amounts of food to be stored, sent a long way, and eaten all through the year. This helped populations to grow, cities to develop, and soldiers in wars to be fed. Salt was probably used in Egypt as long ago as 4000 BC. In ancient times, salt was more valuable than it is now, because it was hard to get in many places, and could be used not only to give foods flavour, but also to make them last longer. It allowed food to be kept past its season, and taken on long trips.

People often traded salt for other things. It was of high value in China, Turkey, the Middle East, and Africa. In the Mediterranean area, including Ancient Rome, salt was even used for money. The word salary comes from the Latin word for salt, because they paid people in salt. After people learned how to get salt from the ocean, salt became cheaper. The Phoenicians were some of the first to figure out how to do this, by pouring seawater on dry land. Then when it dried, they collected the salt and sold it.

Another use of salt was in war, as a way to punish a city by ruining its crops. This is called "salting the Earth". The Assyrians are said to have been one of the first to have done this to their neighbours.

Salts can be found in all different colours: yellow (sodium chromate), orange (potassium dichromate), red (mercury sulphide), mauve (cobalt chloride hexahydrate), blue (copper sulfate pentahydrate, ferric hexacyanoferrate), green (nickel oxide), colorless (magnesium sulphate), white (titanium dioxide), and black (manganese dioxide). Most minerals and inorganic pigments, as well as many synthetic organic dyes, are salts.

The piano is an acoustic, keyboard, stringed and percussive instrument in which the strings are struck by wooden hammers that are coated with a softer material (modern hammers are covered with dense wool felt; some early pianos used leather). It is played using a keyboard, which is a row of keys (small levers) that the performer presses down or strikes with the fingers and thumbs of both hands to cause the hammers to strike the strings. It was invented in Italy by Bartolomeo Cristofori around the year 1700 (the exact year is uncertain).

The piano has been an extremely popular instrument in Western classical music since the late 18th century. The piano was invented by Bartolomeo Cristofori of Padua, Italy.  He made his first piano in 1709. It developed from the clavichord which looks like a piano but the strings of a clavichord are hit by a small blade of metal called a “tangent”. In the piano the strings are hit by a block of wood called a hammer. The early keyboarded instruments, such as the clavichords, harpsichords and organs that were used at that time, had a much shorter keyboard than they do today. Gradually the keyboard became longer until it had the 88 notes (7 octaves plus three notes) of the modern piano.

At first the instrument was called the “fortepiano”. This means “loud-soft” in Italian. It was given this name because it could be played either loudly or softly, depending on how hard the note was hit (the harpsichord could not do this, and the clavichord could only make a tiny difference between louder and softer). Later this name changed to “pianoforte”. This is normally shortened to “piano”. The word “fortepiano” is sometimes used to describe the pianos of the late 18th and early 19th centuries. In some languages, such as Russian, “fortepiano” is the normal word for a piano.

Although the piano was invented at the beginning of the 18th century, it was not until 50 years later that it started to become popular. The first time the piano was played in a public concert in London was in 1768 when it was played by Johann Christian Bach.  The upright piano was invented in 1800 by John Isaac Hawkings. Seven years later T. Southwell invented “over-stringing”. This means that the strings for the low notes go diagonally across the soundboard so that they can be longer and make a much bigger sound.

The early pianos had strings that were fastened to a frame made of wood. They were not very heavy, but they were not very strong or loud, so they could not be heard very well in a big concert hall. In 1825 the cast-iron frame was invented in America. This made the piano much stronger so that it could make a bigger sound and the strings were not likely to break.

One of the most known fortepiano builders was Johann Andreas Stein from Augsburg, Germany. Stein developed the "Viennese" action, popular on Viennese pianos up to the mid-19th century. Another important Viennese piano maker was Anton Walter. Mozart’s own Walter fortepiano is presently at the Mozart Museum in Salzburg, Austria. Haydn also owned Walter piano, and Beethoven expressed a wish to buy one. The most famous early-romantic piano maker was Conrad Graf (1782–1851), who made Beethoven's last piano. His instruments were played by Chopin, Mendelssohn and Schumann. Johannes Brahms had preferred pianos by Johann Baptist Streicher. The English piano school builders included Johannes Zumpe, Robert Stodart and John Broodwood. Prominent piano makers among the French during the era of the fortepiano included Erard, Pleyel (Chopin’s favorite maker) and Boisselot (Liszt’s favorite).

The production of this older type of instrument had stopped in the end of the 19th century. In the second half of the 20th century people started to be more interested in period instruments, including harpsichord and fortepiano. Some of the more known fortepiano builders included in this 20th-century fortepiano revival have been Philip Belt, Margaret F. Hood, Christopher Clark and Paul McNulty.

A piano has a keyboard with white keys and black keys. When a key is pressed down, the damper comes off the string and a hammer hits the string. It hits it very quickly and bounces off so that the string is free to vibrate and make a sound.  Each key is a level that makes a hammer inside the piano hit a string inside, producing a sound. Each string has a different length and so produces-a different note. When the player takes their finger off the key the damper falls back onto the string and the sound stops.  The strings are stretched very tightly across the frame, passing over a bridge on the way.  The bridge touches the soundboard.  This means that the vibrations are sent to the soundboard.  The soundboard is a very important part of the piano.  If it is damaged the piano will not make a sound.

The mechanism which makes the hammer bounce off the string very quickly is called the “escapement”. In 1821 Sebastian Erard invented a kind of double escapement. This made it possible to repeat the note very quickly. The hammer only touches the string for about one thousandth of a second.  The hammers are covered with felt which is a mixture of wool, silk and hair.

At the bottom of every modern piano, there are at least two pedals, which are levers that the pianist presses down with his or her feet to change the sound. Many pianos have three pedals, but a few have even more. Each pedal changes the sound in a different way.

The damper pedal is the most important pedal, and so many composers often write down in a piece of music when the pianist should press and when he or she should let go of the damper pedal. In most classical music, there is a sign that says Ped. where the pedal should be pressed, and one that looks like an asterisk where the pedal should be let go. Pedal marks can also appear as a straight line under the staff. Often, the pianist will let go of the pedal and press it again right away; this is called changing pedal. Sometimes, the music will simply say con pedale, which in Italian means with pedal. It means that the damper pedal should be used, but the pianist should know when to change the pedal.

Another sign, which tells a pianist to press the soft pedal is una corda, (Italian for one string). It is held down until another sign, tre corde (meaning three strings), appears, telling the pianist to let go of the soft pedal. In early pianos, it was possible to press the pedal a little way so that the hammers hit two strings, then press it further so that they hit only one string.

There is no sign for the sostenuto pedal, so it is up to the pianist on whether to use it in a specific piece of music.

Once the piano became popular in the late 18th century many composers wrote music for the piano. Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart started to learn on harpsichords when he was very small, but the piano was becoming popular when he was a young man and he wrote many sonatas and concertos for the piano.  Franz Joseph Haydn also wrote a lot of piano music.  Ludwig van Beethoven was a very famous pianist before he became very famous as a composer. His piano compositions include 5 concertos and 32 sonatas. In the Romantic period many composers wrote for the piano. They include Franz Schubert, Robert Schumann, Johannes Brahms, Franz Liszt and Frederic Chopin.  Later composers include Sergei Rachmaninoff, Claude Debussy, Maurice Ravel, Sergei Prokofiev, Dmitri Shostakovich and Bela Bartok.

Some famous piano players from the early days of the piano include Dussek, Mozart, Muzio Clementi, John Field and Chopin. In the 19th century Franz Liszt was a very great influence on the piano by composing and performing very difficult music. Other great pianists include Clara Schumann and Anton Rubinstein. 20th century pianists include Artur Schnabel, Vladimir Horowitz, Josef Hofmann, Wilhelm Kempff, Dinu Lipati, Claudio Arrau, Artur Rubinstein,  Sviatoslav Richter and Alfred Brendel. Among the greatest pianists today are Vladimir Ashkenazy, Daniel Barenboim, Leif Ove Andsnes, Boris Berezovsky and Evgeny Kissin.

Pianists who play popular music include Liberace, Jerry Lee Lewis, Little Richard, Elton John, Billy Joel, Thelonious Monk, Tori Amos and Ray Charles.  Perhaps the greatest jazz pianist was Fats Waller.

Also a number of modern harpsichordists and pianists have achieved success in fortepiano performance, including Paul Badura-Skoda, Malcolm Bilson, Andras Schiff, Kristian Bezuidenhout, Ronald Brautigam, Alexei Lubimov, duet Katie and Marielle Labeque, Yuan Sheng, Gary Cooper, Jörg Demus, Richard Egarr, Richard Fuller, Robert Hill, Geoffrey Lancaster, Vladimir Feltsman, Robert Levin, Steven Lubin, Bart van Oort, Trevor Pinnock, Viviana Sofronitsky, Andreas Staier, Melvyn Tan, Jos van Immerseel and Olga Pashchenko.

The piano has been a very popular instrument ever since the mid 18th century when it soon replaced the clavichord and the harpsichord. By the early 19th century the sound that the piano made was big enough to fill large concert halls. Smaller pianos were made for use in people’s homes. At first these included square pianos and giraffe pianos, later on the upright pianos became popular for home use. Pianos are not often used in orchestras (if they are, they are part of the percussion section). They may, however, be used for piano concertos (pieces for solo pianist accompanied by orchestra). There is a vast amount of music written for piano solo. The piano can also be used together with other instruments, in jazz groups, and for accompanying singing.

A garden is usually a piece of land that is used for growing flowers, trees, shrubs, and other plants. The act of caring for a garden by watering the flowers and plants and removing the weeds is called gardening.

There are many types of gardens. People have small private gardens in the backyard outside their house. Some gardens are built indoors in malls, public buildings, or greenhouses. Greenhouses are special buildings where plants are grown. A greenhouse has a transparent glass or plastic roof and walls that let sunlight in.

Water gardens are plants that are grown in ornamental (decorative) pools and ponds. People doing water gardening plant water lilies and other aquatic (water) plants.

Gardening can be done outside of the home, and if you want to maintain your privacy, adding a metal garden screen can enhance the beauty of your garden as well. There are in city gardens, botanical gardens (places where plants are grown), zoos which have gardens, and theme parks which have gardens. These types of gardens are cared for by people called gardeners or groundskeepers.

Gardens are related to farms (agriculture); both gardens and farms are used for growing plants. But farms are much larger than gardens. A farm may have hundreds of square kilometers of plants and crops. A garden in a person's backyard is usually only measures a few square meters.

Farms are businesses which sell the crops, fruit, and vegetables that are produced. Some gardens are businesses, which charge a fee to enter the garden. However, private gardens in people's backyards are usually used as a hobby or as a recreation, not as a business.

In addition to plants, many gardens also have landscaping features such as pathways, seats, rock gardens, ponds, fountains, a small stream with or without a waterfall. Some incorporate gazebos and structural designs to accommodate for places to sit or to place a hammock for a siesta. Roman gardens will have its own columns, fountains and statures placed at strategic places depending on its sizes and uses. Japanese gardens have their own unique designs and features.

Some gardens are created in people's backyards, outside their home (note that in Britain the whole area is called a "garden", not a "yard"). People with gardens in their backyards use gardens as a place to do gardening. Gardening is a type of physical activity which can use enough energy and increase your heart rate that it can be rated as a form of exercise for to relax and exercise certain muscles depending on whether on the activity you do that day such as planting, pruning, weeding, or simply just walk around your garden continuously for 15 minutes or more.

Many people find gardens relaxing especially if the garden is full flowers with strong scents. Some flowers like roses, bougainvilleas, orchids and many others are just beautiful to look at. Many people think that gardens are very beautiful and a place to relax and /or entertain. A garden can have a place to barbecue, to sit and to read.

In many countries and cultures, designing pretty gardens is considered to be an art. In Japan, for instance, Zen monks build decorative gardens with stone and waterfall features using natural materials such as bamboo, rock and BONSAI trees like spruce, pine, and other trees with they trained into miniature forms. In Europe in the 1700s, kings and queens had formal gardens built (for example, the gardens at Versailles, France). In China they also feature Chinese forms of gardens. Now some enterprising people start to have herbal gardens to feature useful herbs used in alternative, traditional, and homeopathic medicine

The kitchen is the room in the house where food is cooked. Sometimes, people eat in their kitchens, too. Hotels, schools, and places where people work often have kitchens as well. A person who works in a kitchen in one of these places may be a kitchen worker or a chef (depending on where he/she cooks).

Kitchens have evolved significantly over time. Early kitchens were basic areas with open fires for cooking, often separate from the living areas due to the smoke. In the Middle Ages, larger homes featured separate kitchens with chimneys.

The Industrial Revolution brought advancements like cast iron stoves, which made kitchens more efficient. By the 20th century, kitchens became central to homes, equipped with gas and electric stoves, refrigerators, and sinks with running water.

Modern kitchens combine cooking and social spaces. They often form part of open-plan living areas.

Kitchens can vary in size, layout, and purpose. Common layouts include:

Outdoor kitchens are also common in warm climates and are used for barbecues and social gatherings. They might include grills, sinks, and/or storage. Usually they are located near a water source.

Modern kitchens often include smart appliances, such as refrigerators with touchscreens or ovens controlled via smartphone apps.

Renovating a kitchen can improve functionality, energy efficiency, and aesthetics. Popular renovations include adding islands, upgrading appliances, and improving storage.

A flower is the reproductive part of flowering plants. Flowers are also called the bloom or blossom of a plant. Flowers have petals. Inside the part of the flower that has petals are the parts which produce pollen and seeds.

In all plants, a flower is usually its most colourful part. We say the plant 'flowers', 'is flowering' or 'is in flower' when this colourful part begins to grow bigger and open out. There are many different kinds of flowers in different areas in the world. Even in the coldest places, for example the Arctic, flowers can grow during a few months.

Flowers may grow separately on the plant, or they may grow together in an inflorescence.

To investigate the structure of a flower, it must be dissected, and its structure summarised by a floral diagram or a floral formula. Then its family can be identified with the aid of a flora, which is a book designed to help you identify plants.

Although this arrangement is typical, plant species show a wide variation in floral structure. The modifications produced in the evolution of flowering plants are used by botanists to find relationships among plant species.

Flowers are an important evolutionary advance made by flowering plants. Some flowers are dependent upon the wind to move pollen between flowers of the same species. Their pollen grains are light-weight. Many others rely on insects or birds to move pollen. Their pollen grains are heavier. The role of flowers is to produce seeds. These are inside what botanists call the fruit. Fruits and seeds are a means of dispersal. Plants do not move, but wind, animals and birds spread the plants across the landscape.

Since the ovules are protected by carpels, it takes something special for fertilisation to happen. Angiosperms have pollen grains made of just three cells. One cell drills down through the integuments, to make a passage for the two sperm cells to flow down. The megagametophyte is a tiny haploid female plant which includes the egg. It has just seven cells. Of these, one is the egg cell; it fuses with a sperm cell, forming the zygote. Another cell joins with the other sperm, and forms a nutrient-rich endosperm. The other cells take auxiliary roles. This process of "double fertilisation" is unique, and is common to all angiosperms.

Flowers are modified leaves. They are only present in flowering plants (angiosperms), which are relatively late to appear in the fossil record.

Early fossils of flowers and flowering plants are known from 130 million years ago, in the Lower Cretaceous. However, flowers had a much longer history, the extent of which is not yet fully known. There were flowers from the early Jurassic, 50 million years earlier than was previously thought.

The flowering plants were thought to have evolved from within the gymnosperms. However, the known gymnosperms are a clade which is distinct from the angiosperms. Apparently, the two clades diverged (split) some 300 million years ago. That is about the boundary of the Carboniferous period with the Permian period.

Flowers have long been admired and used by humans. Most people think that flowers are beautiful. Many people also love flowers for their fragrances (scents). People enjoy seeing flowers growing in gardens. People also enjoy growing flowers in their backyards, outside their homes. People often wear flowers on their clothes or give flowers as a gift during special occasions, holidays, or rituals, such as the birth of a new baby (or a Christening), at weddings (marriages), at funerals (when a person dies). People often buy flowers from businesses called florists.

Some parents name their children, most often girls, after a flower. Some common flower names are: Rose, Lily, Daisy, Holly, Hyacinth, Jasmine, Blossom.

People eat some types of flowers. Flower vegetables include broccoli, cauliflower and artichoke. The most expensive spice, saffron, comes from the crocus flower. Other flower spices are cloves and capers. Hops flowers are used to flavor beer. Dandelion can be made into wine.

Honey is flower nectar that has been collected and processed by bees. Honey is often named by the type of flower that the bees are using (for example, clover honey). Some people put flowers from nasturtiums, chrysanthemums, or carnations in their food. Flowers can also be made into tea. Dried flowers, such as chrysanthemum, rose, and jasmine, can be used to make tea.

Flowers were used to signal meanings in the time when social meetings between men and women was difficult. Lilies made people think of life. Red roses made people think of love, beauty, and passion. In Britain, Australia and Canada, poppies are worn on special holidays as a mark of respect for those who served and died in wars. Daisies make people think of children and innocence.

Vegetables are a health food that are eaten by humans as part of a meal. This meaning is often used: it is applied to plants to mean all edible plant matter, including the flowers, fruits, stems, leaves, roots, and seeds.

Carrots and potatoes are parts of the root of the plants, but since they are eaten by humans, they are vegetables. They are not in the same category as a fruit, nut, herb, spice, or grain. Vegetables are an important part of people's diet. Vegetables and fruits are sometimes called produce. Vegetables have vitamins, minerals, and carbohydrates.

The USDA Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends eating five to nine servings of fruit and vegetables everyday. The total amount eaten varies depending on age and gender.

The word vegetable was first recorded in English in the early 15th century. It comes from Old French. It is gotten from Medieval Latin vegetabilis "growing, flourishing" (i.e. of a plant).

The meaning of "vegetable" as a "plant grown for food" was not accepted until the 18th century. The year 1955 saw the first use of the slang term "veggie".

The word "vegetable" can also be used to mean plants in general, such as when people say "Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral."

However, in an Asian context, 'vegetable' may mean any plant produce, apart from grain and nuts, that is eaten cooked, while only the fruits eaten raw are considered as 'fruits'. For example, an artichoke is thought to be a vegetable, while a melon has the features of a fruit.

"Fruit" has a botanical meaning. Peaches, plums, and oranges are known as "fruits". Many plants commonly called "vegetables", such as eggplants, bell peppers, and tomatoes, are fruits in botany. The question of is a tomato a fruit or a vegetable was asked in the United States Supreme Court in 1893. For the tariff of 1883 on imported produce, the court ruled that a tomato is, and thus taxed as, a vegetable, but the court knew that a tomato is a fruit in botany.

Before agriculture, humans were hunter-gatherers. They looked for fruit, nuts, stems, leaves, corms, and tubers, scavenged for dead animals, and hunted living ones for food. Growing crops in a forest clearing is thought to be the first example of agriculture. Useful types of plant were grown while unwanted plants were removed. Plant breeding through the selection of plants with wanted characteristics such as large fruit and fast growth soon started.

It is likely that many people around the world started growing crops in the period 10,000 BC to 7,000 BC. Subsistence agriculture was the earliest form of agriculture. It involves the growing of crops by people to produce enough food for their families. Anything left is used for exchange for other goods.

Throughout history, the rich have been able to afford different kinds of food including meat, vegetables, and fruit. But for poor people, the food they ate was very dull. It is usually made up of mainly some staple product made from rice, rye, barley, wheat, millet, or maize. The addition of vegetables gave some variety to the diet.

Vegetables are very important in human nutrition. Most vegetables are low in calories but are large and filling. They are a source of dietary fiber, essential vitamins, minerals, and trace elements.

When people eat more vegetables, it reduces the incidence of cancer, stroke, cardiovascular disease, and other chronic ailments. The amount of nutrients in each vegetable is different. Some have useful amounts of protein and varying amounts of vitamins such as vitamin A, vitamin K, vitamin B6, provitamins, minerals, and carbohydrates.

Vegetables are commonly eaten raw. They may become contaminated when they are managed by an infected food handler. Hygiene is important when handling foods to be eaten raw. Vegetables need to be properly cleaned, handled, and stored to stop contamination.

Vegetables have been big part of what humans eat. Some vegetables are perennial crops, but most are annual and biennial crops. Cultivation of vegetables follows a particular pattern. The pattern is usually followed like this:

On a small garden, tools like the spade, fork, and hoe are used. On commercial farms, mechanical equipments are used. These include tractors, ploughs, harrows, transplanters, cultivators, irrigation equipment, and harvesters.

When a vegetable has matured, it is ready to be harvested for storage or sale. There should be little damage and bruising to the crop when harvesting. Before storage or sale, damaged goods should be removed and produce should be picked according to its quality, size, ripeness, and color.

All vegetables have to be stored to make them available all year round. A large proportion of vegetables are lost after harvest during the storage period. The main causes of loss include spoilage caused by moisture, moulds, micro-organisms, and pests.

Storage can be short-term or long-term. During storage, leafy vegetables lose moisture, and the vitamin C in them is lost quickly.

Cold storage is useful for vegetables like cauliflower, eggplant, lettuce, radish, spinach, potatoes, and tomatoes. Storage of fruit and vegetables in controlled atmospheres with high levels of carbon dioxide or high oxygen levels can stop microorganisms from growing.

The reason why vegetables are preserved is to make them available all year round. The goal is to harvest the plants when they are mature with a high nutritional value and preserve these qualities for a longer period of time. The main causes of spoilage during storage are the actions of naturally-occurring enzymes and micro-organisms. There are many ways to preserve vegetables, some examples are:

In 2010, China was the largest vegetable producing nation, with over half the world's production. India, the United States, Turkey, Iran, and Egypt were the next largest producers. Here is a table with the needed information.

An engine, or motor, is a machine used to change energy into movement that can be used. The energy can be in any form.  Common forms of energy used in engines are chemical energy (such as petrol or diesel), or heat.  When a chemical is used to produce energy it is known as fuel.

In past centuries motor and "engine" meant very different things. A motor was made to move something such as a vehicle. This meaning is still often used. Sometimes a thing is called an engine if it creates mechanical energy from heat, and a motor if it creates mechanical energy from other kinds of energy, like electricity. Typical engines in this meaning are steam engine and internal combustion engine, while typical motors are electric motor and hydraulic motor. And sometimes the two words mean the same thing.

"Engine" was originally a term for any machine that converts force into motion. Hence, pre-industrial weapons such as catapults, trebuchets and battering rams were called "siege engines". The word "gin," as in "cotton gin", is short for "engine." The word derives from Old French engine, from the Latin ingenium, which is also the root of the word ingenious. Most mechanical devices invented during the industrial revolution were described as engines—the steam engine being a notable example.

Early kinds of engine used heat that was outside of the engine itself to heat up a gas to a high pressure. This was usually steam and the engines are called steam engines. The steam was piped to the engine where it pushed on pistons to bring about motion. These engines were commonly used in old factories, boats and trains.

Most cars use a chemical engine that burns fuel inside it. This is called an internal combustion engine.  There are many different types of internal combustion engine. They can be grouped by fuel, cycle and configuration. Common fuel types for internal combustion engines are petrol, diesel, auto gas and alcohol. There are many other types of fuels.

There are 3 different types of cycle. 2-stroke engines produce power once every turn of the engine. 4-stroke engines cylinders make power once every two turns of the engine. 6-stroke engines cylinders make power twice in every six turns of the engine.

There are lots of different configurations of piston engines. Their cylinders have pistons in them and a crankshaft. Any number of cylinders can be used but 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12 are common. The cylinders can be arranged in many ways, in a straight line, at an angle to each other or in a circle.

A Wankel engine has no cylinders and uses a triangle shaped rotor spinning in an oval housing which mimics the movement of a piston.

Hot gas can also be made to push a turbine around rather like the way the wind turns a windmill. Most electric power stations use big steam turbines. Others use water or wind turbines. Smaller turbines called gas turbines are used for internal combustion engines, such as the jet engines used in aircraft.

A rocket causes movement by shooting jets of gas very fast out of a nozzle. The gas may have been stored under pressure or be a chemical fuel that burns to make a very hot gas. Although they are very simple, rockets are the most powerful engines we know how to make. They will work in space where there is nothing to push against.

Electric motors do not use a fuel. The energy is supplied to them by electricity carried along wires.  The energy may come from a fuel being burnt somewhere else a long way off. The electricity is used to make powerful magnets inside the motor switch on and off at the right time to turn the shaft of the motor.

Electric engine is not a motor, but a railway locomotive which runs on electricity.

A song is a piece of music which contains lyrics and words. Songs may be made by songwriters. Other songs are folk songs, which are songs created by people long ago that have been sung as tradition.

Some people form bands which write and record songs to make money from it. When two or three singers sing the song it is called a duet or trio. Some people also make parodies of songs, which is usually changing the words of the song but keeping the tune. Parodies are usually made to make fun of a song or its writer/singer (parody artist "Weird Al" Yankovic is an example of this).

The word "song" is often used to describe any piece of music, even one without words or lyrics. The proper word for a piece of music without words is "instrumental".

Sugar is the common name for several chemical substances, some of which taste sweet. Mostly, it refers to sucrose, lactose, or fructose. Sugar is in certain kinds of food, or it is added to make it sweeter.

Regular or pure sugar, or sucrose, is extracted from sugarcane or sugar beet. Brazil produces the most sugar per person and India's total consumption of sugar is the highest for a country. Fructose is the sugar that is in fruits.

Sucrose and fructose are both made by two smaller sugars. Glucose is the more common of these smaller sugars. The human body changes regular sugar into the smaller sugars.

Sugars are a kind of carbohydrate since it made from carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. Sugar can be simple carbohydrates or complex carbohydrates. Simple carbohydrates are made of only one or a few of the smallest sugars. Complex carbohydrates are made of many of the smallest sugars.

Sugar can be different colors. For example, brown sugar has molasses in it, and is often used in baking.

Global production of sugarcane in 2020 was 1.9 billion tonnes, with Brazil producing 40% of the world total and India 20% (table).

Sugar cane can be any of many species, or their hybrids, of giant grasses in the genus, or group Saccharum in the family Poaceae. They are grown in tropical climates in the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia over centuries for the sucrose found in their stems.

Sugar cane needs a climate with no frost and enough rain in the growing season to grow. It is harvested by a machine or by hand, and cut into pieces and moved to the processing plant where it is milled. The juice is extracted with water or it is extracted by diffusion. The juice is clarified with lime and heated to destroy enzymes. The thin syrup result is concentrated in evaporators, after then water is removed. The supersaturated solution is added with sugar crystals, making crystals and drying easier. Molasses, fiber from the stems, is burned to give energy for the sugar extraction process. The raw sugar crystals have a sticky brown coating and may be bleached by sulfur dioxide, or may be treated in a carbonation process to make it whiter. About  of water is needed for every  of sugar to be produced.

In 2020, global production of sugar beets was 253 million tonnes, led by Russia with 13% of the world total (table).

Sugar beet is harvested during cool seasons, and then a rotor beater cuts off the head of the beet, which is then left in the field. A beet loader pulls the beets out of the earth and into a truck, where the beet is driven to a processing plant. The processor slices the beets into thin chips called cossettes. The extraction takes place in a diffuser where the beet is kept in contact with hot water for about an hour. The diffuser is a large agitated tank in which the cossettes slowly move from one end to the other as the water is moved in the opposite direction. This is called counter-current flow and as the water goes it becomes a stronger and stronger sugar juice.

In around 8,000 BC, people in New Guinea and Polynesia had sugar cane where it had then came to Asia. With interest of the people who had discovered it, sugar cane and it's practices of planting sugar cane had gone to Southwest Asia, including China and India.

In 510 BC the Persia (Iran), Emperor Darius invaded India where he found cane sugar which was named "the reed which gives honey without bees". The growing was kept unknown and showing the sugar for a rich profit. The Arab invasion of Persia in 642 BC, sugar cane refining techniques had been added by Eastern Mediterranean people.

Records from the Ancient Greeks and Romans would suggest that sugar cane was used in medicine. In around 350 CE, Indian people discovered how to crystallize sugar. Around 650 CE, crystallized sugar became a culinary staple across India, China, and the Middle East.

The tiger (Panthera tigris) is the largest living member of the cat family, the Felidae. It feeds by hunting, and it lives in Asia. Tigers are solitary animals.

There are tigers with distinct colours. Most tigers have orange fur with black stripes, and a white belly. The black stripes usually extend to the white underside. The stripes are vertical on the tiger's body, but the stripes are horizontal on the forehead, and the legs. The tail has rings, and the tail tip is black. The stripes are used to keep them camouflaged while hunting. No two tigers have the same pattern of stripes. Most Bengal tigers have orange fur, but some Bengal tigers have white fur with black stripes, or that even have pure white fur. These white tigers are not albino, but they are leucistic instead. The white coat only appears once in every 100

births. The Bengal tiger is the national animal of Bangladesh and India.

Tigers vary in size depending on their subspecies. Siberian tigers are the largest. Males can grow to at least  long (body length) and weigh about . Females are a bit smaller. Record weight for males is claimed as , but this cannot be confirmed.

Tigers can live in a variety of habitats. Mostly they need to hide, to be near a water jungle source, and have enough prey to eat. Tigers are solitary and they all control large amounts of territory, the size of which depends on the availability of  various food for tigers and prey. According to Tigers-World, a male tiger may live and hunt in an area of 60 to 100 square kilometers (23 to 39 square miles).  A female tiger may have 20 square kilometers (8 square miles).  According to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, a single tiger can live in a territory as small as 21 square kilometers (8 square miles) to as large as 995 square kilometers (385 square miles).

As previously thought, the tiger had five living subspecies. Three tiger subspecies are extinct (†).

However, in 2017, the Cat Classification Task Force of the IUCN Cat Specialist Group revised felid taxonomy and recognized the tiger populations in continental Asia as P. t. tigris, and those in the Sunda Islands as P. t. sondaica.

Tigers are becoming rare, because people hunt them for their coat (skin) and destroy the habitats they live in. The Bengal tiger has the largest population with 3,500 left in the wild. To help keep the tiger population, tigers are often placed in zoos. In order for tigers to survive into the next century, governments throughout the tigers’ range must show greater determination and commitment to conserve tigers and their habitats.

Chinese tigers have been used for centuries in traditional Chinese medicine. Body parts such as their whiskers and bones are used to treat things such as toothaches, malaria, and burns.

Tigers also kill and eat peoples' livestock, which are easier to hunt than their typical prey, because they are often in fenced or closed areas and livestock may not be able to flee. Sometimes tigers hunt people as prey and eat them, because they are either too old, injured, or ill to hunt their typical animal prey which are much faster than people. These too are a reason why tigers are killed by people.

Tigers eat many types of prey, mostly ungulates. Some examples are deer, monkeys, wild rabbits, wild pigs, tapirs, water buffalo and other animals. They also eat birds, reptiles and fish. They also prey on other predators, including dogs, leopards, bears, snakes and crocodiles. All are carnivores (meat eaters). Some tigers may eat up to  of meat a day. Tigers kill their prey by clamping down on the prey's throat and suffocating it.

Painting is using colors to make visual art. It is also the word for a painted work of art. Many kinds of paints are used to create art. They include watercolors, acrylics and oils. Other artists like working with pencil or chalk. Sometimes charcoal can be used.

Famous paintings are often kept in art galleries, like the National Gallery in London and the Louvre (Paris) where one of the most famous paintings in the world hangs, the Mona Lisa, painted by Leonardo da Vinci. People do not have to go to a famous gallery to view art. There are private art galleries in many cities around the world.

Painting is an important type of art that you look at. It uses things like drawing, arranging the picture, brush strokes, telling stories, and simple shapes. There is a basic difference between drawing and painting. In drawing, a single layer is the entire image. In painting, one layer is painted over another to get the final image. As a result, most of the time the image will not be clear until it gets to the final stage.

There are four basic stages in painting: preparation, divide, layer, and touch up.

The standard horse is the species Equus caballus. It was domesticated from wild horses by humans at least 5000 years ago. They are large, strong animals and some breeds are used to pull heavy loads.

A male horse is a stallion, and a female horse is a mare, while the general term for a young horse is a foal. A young female horse is a filly, and a young male horse is a colt. A castrated horse is a gelding. A small adult horse is called a pony. A pack of horses, called a herd, can be led by a top stallion and a top mare.

Horses are related to the rhino and tapir in the order Perissodactyla.  is the old Latin word for horse.

The evolution of horses has been well studied. Fifty million years ago, there were no horses as we know them now. Of the earliest fossil horse, the North American one is called Eohippus, and the Eurasian one is called Hyracotherium. Both were small animals: Eohippus was the larger of the two at twice the size of a terrier dog.

Many changes occurred between those little animals and today's horses. These changes are best explained as adaptations to its changing ecological niche, from a small forest-dweller eating nuts and fruit to a more significant forest browser eating leaves and small branches. Finally, the modern horse is a grazer on open grassland, with different teeth, legs for running, and a much larger size. Significant changes happened in the mid-Miocene when the climate cooled and grassland replaced forests. This change continued, and several groups of mammals changed from browsers to grazers.

Ancient horse species were present in the Americas up to ~8000-12000 years ago. They went extinct around the same time as other large American mammals such as woolly mammoths. The Spanish reintroduced horses to the Americas in the 15th century.

Adult horses stand 14-17 "hands" tall, which equates to ~52-72 inches in height. They have long hair along the neck, called a mane, as well as a long tail of similar hair. Horses are fast, running over 30 mph, and majestic, with four different ways they can move: walking, trotting, cantering, and galloping. Horses have hooves which sometimes have protection called horseshoes from hard or rough ground. They are herbivores, which means they eat grass and other plants, especially alfalfa. Some plants are dangerous for them, like ragwort, lemongrass (oil grass) and sometimes acorns. Domestic horses typically live between 25 and 30 years, although some may live longer.

Humans have used horses in many different ways for travel, work, food, pleasure and show.

Horses were used in war as cavalry until the mid-20th century. They are still used today for riding and transport, but much less since cars were invented. They are also used for carrying things, pulling carts, or helping plough farmers' fields in agriculture. People have used selective breeding to make more giant horses do heavy work.

Some people keep horses as pets. Today, horses are mainly used for entertainment and sports. Horses are used in equestrianism, and equine sports such as cross-country, show jumping, and other events. Show jumping, cross-country, and dressage are Olympic sports.

Horses are often seen as friendly companions. Horses have been used as therapy animals for people with mental health issues and physical problems.

Humans have used the skin of horses as a rugged leather, called horsehide. Humans have used horsehair to create a stiff fabric, to stuff furniture, as strings on musical instruments, and even mixed it with plaster to make it strong.

A stallion is a male horse and a mare is a female horse. Other female equines are also sometimes called mares. Before a horse's fourth birthday, females are called fillies and males are called colts. A mare for breeding is called a broodmare. When a mare wants to mate, the mare is called in heat. This part of the oestrous cycle lasts about three weeks. During this time, mares can be temperamental. Some people call this being "mare-ish".

These are some well-known horse breeds among the hundreds that exist:

The guitar is a string instrument which is played by plucking the strings. The main parts of a guitar are the body, the fretboard, the headstock and the strings. Guitars are usually made from wood or plastic. Their strings are made of steel or nylon.

The guitar strings are plucked with the fingers and fingernails of the right hand (or left hand, for left handed players), or a small pick made of thin plastic. This type of pick is called a "plectrum" or guitar pick. The left hand holds the neck of the guitar while the fingers pluck the strings. Different finger positions on the fretboard make different notes.

Guitar-like plucked string instruments have been used for many years. In many countries and at many different time periods, guitars and other plucked string instruments have been very popular, because they are light to carry from place to place, they are easier to learn to play than many other instruments. Guitars are used for many types of music, from Classical to Rock. Most pieces of popular music that have been written since the 1950s are written with guitars.

There are many different types of guitars, classified on how they are made and the type of music they are used for. All traditional types of guitar have a body which is hollow. This makes the sound of the strings louder, and gives the guitar its quality. This type of guitar is called "acoustic". (An acoustic instrument is one that makes its own dynamics.)

From the 1930s, people started making and playing guitars that used electricity and amplifiers to control the loudness. These guitars, which are often used in popular music, are called electric guitars. They do not need to have a hollow body. This is because they do not use acoustics to amplify the sound.

Most guitars have six strings, but there are also guitars with four, seven, eight, ten, or twelve strings. More strings make the instrument sound fuller. The neck of a guitar has bars or marks called frets. Frets help a guitarist know where to put his or her fingers to get the right pitch when playing. Standard tuning defines the string pitches as E, A, D, G, B, and E, from lowest (low E2) to highest (high E4). Standard tuning is used by most guitarists, and frequently used tunings can be understood as variations on standard tuning.

The word guitar was adopted into English from Spanish word guitarra in the 1600s. In the Middle Ages the word gitter or gittern was used in England. Both guitarra and gitter came from the Latin word cithara. The word cithara came from the earlier Greek word kithara. Kithara could have come from the Persian word sehtār. seh meaning "three" and tār meaning "string".  There is also a similar but two-stringed Persian instrument named dotār. do means "two" in Persian.  The Indian sitar instrument was named after the Persian sehtār. The sihtar itself is related to the Indian instrument, the sitar.

A person who plays a guitar is called a guitarist. A person who makes or fixes guitars is a luthier, which comes from the word "lute". The word "lute", comes from the Arabic "Al-Uud", a stringed instrument from the Middle East. The guitar appears to be derived from earlier instruments known in ancient central Asia as the Sitara. Instruments very similar to the guitar appear in ancient carvings and statues recovered from the old Iranian capitol of Susa. The modern word, guitar, was adopted into English from the Spanish word guitarra, which came from the older Greek word kithara. Possible sources for various names of musical instruments that guitar could be derived from appear to be a combination of two Indo-European roots: guit-, similar to Sanskrit sangeet meaning "music", and -tar a widely found root meaning "cord" or "string". The word guitar is a word that the Iberian Arabic language took from the Persian language. The word qitara is an Arabic name for various members of the lute family that preceded the Western guitar. The word guitarra was introduced into Spanish when such instruments were brought into Iberia by the Moors after the 10th century.

There have been instruments like the guitar for at least 5,000 years. The guitar may have come from older instruments known as the sitara from ancient India and central Asia. The oldest known picture of a guitar-like instrument is a 3300 year old stone carving of a Hittite bard. The oldest guitar-like instrument that is still complete is the "Warwick Gittern" in the British Museum. It belonged to Elizabeth I of England and probably to her father Henry VIII before it was given to her. It is about 500 years old.

The design of the modern guitar began with the Roman cithara. The cithara was brought by the Romans to Hispania (Spain) around 40 AD. In the 8th century the Moors brought the four-stringed oud into Spain. The introduction to the oud caused changes to the design of the cithara. In other parts of Europe, the six-string Scandinavian lut (lute) became popular wherever the Vikings had been. By 1200 AD, there were two types of the four string "guitar": the guitarra morisca (Moorish guitar) from Spain which had a rounded back, wide fingerboard and several soundholes, and the guitarra latina (Latin guitar) which was more like the modern guitar with one sound hole and a narrower neck.

The Spanish vihuela, of the 16th century, was another instrument similar to the guitar. It had lute-style tuning and a body that was like a guitar. The vihuela was only popular for a short amount of time. It is not known whether it was simply a design that combined features of the oud and lute or a transition from the Renaissance instrument to the modern guitar.

The Vinaccia family from Naples, Italy were famous mandolin makers. It is thought that they also made the oldest six-string guitar that still exists. There is a guitar built that was signed and dated 1779 on the label by Gaetano Vinaccia (1759 - after 1831) Although there are many fakes that have dates on them from that time, this guitar is believed by experts to be genuine (real).

The guitar's design was improved (made better) by the famous Spanish luthier, Antonio Torres Jurado (1817-1892) and by Louis Panormo of London.

The electric guitar was made by George Beauchamp in 1936. Beauchamp co-founded a company called Rickenbacher to make guitars. However, Danelectro was the first to produce electric guitars for the public to use.

A guitar was described by Dr. Michael Kasha as an instrument that had "a long, fretted neck, flat wooden soundboard, ribs, and a flat back, most often with incurved sides".

Modern guitars come in four main types. The classical guitar is used for classical music. The term acoustic guitar is generally used for a guitar used for popular music, even though a classical guitar is also an acoustic instrument. There are many other different types of acoustic guitars from different parts of the world.

A electric guitar can be flat, hollow, or semi-hollow (solid with hollow pockets on the sides), and produces sound through its pickups, which are wire-wound magnets that are screwed onto the guitar. Some guitars combine the hollow acoustic body with amplified sound. Bass guitars are designed to make a low bass rhythm.

A special electric folding travel guitar called the Foldaxe (briefly manufactured by Hoyer in 1977) was invented for Chet Atkins (in Atkins' book "Me and My Guitars") by inventor and guitarist Roger Field, featuring a built-in way to keep the string tension and tuning the same even when folded, and ready to play when unfolded. Atkins demonstrated his several times on US television, and also on The Today Show with Les Paul, who was with him as a guest.

Unlike most guitars with six strings, some guitars are made with eight strings. Eight string guitars have two extra octave strings on the D and G. This gives the person playing the guitar a large amount of chorus when playing.

Guitars are used in many different genres of music, such as traditional, regional, and folk to modern punk, rock, metal or pop. Guitars are used as rhythm instruments, lead instruments, and sometimes both.

A capo is a device which can be placed on any of the guitar's frets which don't lie on the body itself. This enables the user to change key without changing the tuning of the guitar strings. There are multiple types of capos, some latch around the whole guitar neck and some just clamp onto the back and fret board.

Animation is a way of making a movie from many images that don’t move. The images are put together one after another, and then played at a fast speed to make it look like movement.

A person who makes animations is called an animator. The first animator was a French man called Emile Cohl who made a short film called Fantasmagorie in 1908.

Because it is expensive to make, most animation comes from professional companies. However, independent animators have existed since the 1950s in America, with many of those people entering the professional industry. In Europe, the independent moments has existed since the 1910s, with animators like Russia's Ladislas Starevich and Germany's Lotte Reiniger.

Lots of people use a computer animation program called Adobe Flash to create animations. Flash uses a combination of drawing and computer graphics to make animations. Many animations on the internet are made in Flash. Most animators on the internet do not work for professional companies.

Many television shows, especially those made for children, use limited animation. Companies such as UPA and Hanna-Barbera Productions do this. Simple, limited movement makes the images easier to draw, which allows faster and cheaper production of animation.

Usually, cartoons are hand drawn and short. Cartoons can be a TV series or a theatrical short. The running time of an animated feature is usually more than one hour. Animated features can be hand drawn, stop motion, or computer animated.

Computer generated image (CGI) animation has also become popular since the 1990s. CGI animation needs animators who know how to use computer software to create models of characters, and then move the models around in a realistic way. The first feature-length CGI animation was Toy Story, released in 1995 by Pixar Animation Studios for Disney. Some CGI animation is put into filmed videos and movies of real life too. This is how some of the dinosaurs in Jurassic Park were made.

Animation has been used by people in different cultures in different ways. A major example of this is anime, which is a Japanese style of animation. Anime has been exported across the world and become a major industry in Japan. In 2025, the anime market was worth $25 billion for Japan. Studio Ghibli is a major anime film studio.

The Chinese movie Ne Zha 2 made more than $2 billion in cinemas and movie theatres, becoming the first animated film to do so. No other animated movie has made more money than Ne Zha 2 so far. Only four films in history have made more money than it has.

In the UK, a major animation studio is Aardman Animations which is known for films and characters like Wallace and Gromit, Chicken Run, and Shaun the Sheep. They are known for using clay animation which involves using stop-motion animation with small clay models of characters.

The popular series Masha & the Bear comes from the Russian movie studio Animaccord Animation Studio.

Animation is becoming more popular in the Indian movie industry called Bollywood as well. Major Bollywood animations often use CGI technology.

The USA has a major animation industry also. Most major cartoons, animated films, and animated movies come from the USA. Notable American brands include Disney, Pixar, Fleischer Studios, Warner Bros., Hanna-Barbera, 20th Century Studios, Nickelodeon and DreamWorks. Characters such as Mickey Mouse, Winnie the Pooh, Popeye, Betty Boop, Felix the Cat, Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, Porky Pig, Woody Woodpecker, Rocky and Bullwinkle, The Flintstones, The Jetsons, Scooby-Doo, The Simpsons and SpongeBob SquarePants all come from the USA.

A Singer is a person who sings; anyone who is singing is a singer. Some people do it as a job (professional singer), others may sing without being paid (amateur singer). Singers may sing anything: songs, opera, etc. They may be accompanied by an instrument or an orchestra. Some singers also play a musical instrument such as piano, guitar or harp while they sing (they accompany themselves). Singing is important in movies and in the theatre.

The lead vocalist (or lead singer) is the member of a band who sings the main solo vocal portions of a song. The lead vocalist may also play one or more instruments, and is usually the "leader" of their group, often the spokesperson in interviews and before the public. The lead vocalist is sometimes referred to as the frontman. For example, Jerry Garcia was the lead singer and frontman for the Grateful Dead.

A good singer will have to think of a lot of different things in a performance. Some attributes of singing skill are good vocal technique, a large vocal range, as well as feeling the song through emotional language and breathing, and also acting to provide a song with meaning. A good singer may be able to learn a song quickly, but it may take some time before they really feel it has become "part of them." A lead singer has to be a strong singer since background vocalists sing accompaniment.

Mongolian throat singing has become popular because due to its geographic location and culture. The open landscape of Tuva allows for the sounds to carry a great distance.

Singers can sing as a solo, or in a group or a choir. Choirs can include gospel music, church music and even pop songs where there are usually two male groups of singers (bass and tenor) and two female groups of singers (soprano and alto). Sopranos have a higher range and altos have a lower range. Combining these two can create various harmonies which add textures to songs and make them more interesting to listen to.

People may feel like singing for various reasons. They may want to share their feelings with other people. They may be feeling happy about something, or sad, or excited, frustrated or angry. Singing is an art in which mood is expressed through the voice.

A cartoon is a type of visual art that is usually drawn based on real things. Cartoons are sometimes animated. The word cartoon has meant a lot of different things but now it means but the either: an image or series of images created to be funny or a film with Illustrations that are animated. Someone who creates the first kind of cartoon is called a cartoonist. Someone who makes the second kind of cartoon is sometimes called a cartoonist but is also called an animator.

The concept characteristically originated in the Middle Ages, and first described a preparatory drawing for a piece of art, such as a painting, fresco, tapestry, or stained glass window. In the 19th century, beginning in Punch magazine in 1843, cartoon came to refer – ironically at first – to humorous artworks in magazines and newspapers. Then it also was used for political cartoons and comic strips. When the medium begins to be developed, in the early 20th century, it began to refer to animated films that resembled print cartoons.

Cartoon originally meant a sketch or design drawing, especially a preparatory drawing by a painter. The word is borrowed from the French carton, which referred to cardboard or a sketch on cardboard. The French term traces back to the Italian cartone, an enlarged form of carta (paper).

Through the Latin charta (paper made from papyrus) and the Greek khártēs (papyrus sheet), its origin can ultimately be traced to the papyrus plant.

From the 19th century, cartoon in English came to mean a humorous or satirical drawing, particularly in newspapers. In the early 20th century, especially in American English, it also acquired the meaning of animated film.

The oldest meaning is a drawing that is a full-sized design for a finished artwork. The cartoon might be a drawing for a painting that was going to be put onto a wall or ceiling in fresco. The cartoon would be pinned against the wall and its design marked onto the plastered of the wall. Cartoons were also made to design tapestry. The most famous cartoons of this kind are a set by Raphael which show the "Life of St Peter". The cartoons are in the Victoria & Albert Museum. The finished tapestries belong to the Vatican and were made for the Sistine Chapel.

In the 1700s, artists such as William Hogarth often made sets of humorous (funny) drawings that were about political subjects, such as poverty, elections, war and riots. The drawings were made into prints and were sold cheaply. These prints were not called cartoons at that time, but they led to the idea of modern political cartoons in newspapers.

Nowadays many newspapers publish a different political cartoon in the paper, every day. The word "cartoon" was first used in this way in 1843 in an English magazine called Punch.

A political cartoon does not always show real people. Sometimes it may use a personification of a country or organization as a person, an animal, or a monster. For example, Britain might be shown as a woman holding a baby Australia in her arms. Russia might be shown as a baby bear or a dolphin. The United States might be shown as a Bald Eagle.

Political cartoons were often drawn to show several different stages of the same story. Many of Hogarth's famous political cartoons do this. From this came the idea of telling funny stories in a series of pictures. Comic strips are a type of "cartoon" that is published in newspapers, but they are usually just called "comic strips". Comic books assemble many strips in a book. The book may tell a long story, longer than a newspaper would want to print, or several stories.

From the beginning of the film industry, some artists began experimenting with making animated drawings that seemed to move. These moving drawings also became known as "cartoons", then Walt Disney releases Snow White And The Seven Dwarfs as the first full-length film. They often depict "anthropomorphic" animals rather than humans. They were often just for fun, but sometimes, particularly during World War II, were used for political reasons, just like the cartoons in newspapers.

At first, film cartoons were quite short. When a person bought a film ticket, they would see a news program, two or three cartoons in black and white and a film. Walt Disney then totally got the idea to tell a long story as a "cartoon" and "animated cartoon". The famous cartoon characters from golden age include Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck, Bugs Bunny, Daffy Duck, and Tex Avery's Wolf. Cartoons now begans to be into to the television since started in the late-1950s, including The Flintstones, Scooby-Doo, The Simpsons, and SpongeBob SquarePants.

A light-bulb produces light from electricity. In addition to lighting a dark space, they can be used to show an electronic device is on, to direct traffic, for heat, and for many other purposes. Billions are in use, some even in outer space.

Early people used candles and oil lamps for light. Humphry Davy invented the electric arclight in the early 1800s. Thomas Alva Edison, Joseph Swann, and several others in the 1880s invented the more efficient incandescent lightbulb.

Improved vacuum pumps and better materials made them shine longer and brighter late in the century. This became the main kind for the 20th century. Electric power stations brought electricity to urban and later rural areas to power them.  Later gas discharge lights, including fluorescent lights, use less electricity to make more light.

Light bulbs convert electricity into light and heat. Except for heat lamps, the heat is considered waste. A light bulb that produces more light and less heat is more efficient.

The incandescent light bulb turns electricity into light by sending the dump through a thin pipe called a filament. Electrical filaments are made up mostly of tungsten metal. The resistance of the filament heats the bulb. Eventually the filament gets so hot that it glows, producing light.

The filament needs to be protected from the air, so it is inside the bulb, and the air in the bulb is either removed (a vacuum) or more often, replaced with a noble gas that doesn't affect anything, like neon or argon. Only about 3% of the energy that goes into an incandescent light bulb actually makes light, the rest makes heat. That's one of the reasons LED's are more efficient.

This type of light bulb worked poorly and was little used until Joseph Swan and Thomas Edison improved it in the 1870s. It was the first light bulb that could be used in houses - it did not cost too much, and it worked well. For the first time, people did not need a fire (candles, oil lamps, kerosene lamps, etc.) to make light. It was bright enough to let people read easily at night or do work. It was used to light stores and streets, and people could travel after dark. This started the common use of electricity in homes and businesses. They had carbon filaments until tungsten ones were developed in the 1900s. They last longer and make a brighter light.

Early vacuum tube devices were incandescent bulbs made to operate at lower temperatures, with added electronic parts.

Fluorescent lamps are efficient, and only give off  the amount of heat of an incandescent. They also last longer than incandescent but until the late 20th century were much bigger and did not fit into sockets for small overhead lights and lamps like an incandescent could.

A fluorescent bulb is a glass tube usually filled with argon gas and a little bit of mercury. When turned on, the cathode heats up and sends out electrons. These hit the argon gas and the mercury. The argon gas makes a plasma which lets the electrons move around better. When the electrons hit a mercury atom it puts the molecule into a state where it has a lot of energy (stores the energy). The energetic state doesn't last very long, and when the energy is released, it lets out a photon.  Photons from mercury are not visible like some other photons; they are ultraviolet. So there's a phosphor coating on the wall of the bulb. When the photon hits a phosphor molecule, it in turn puts that molecule into an excited state. When this phosphor releases energy, it lets out a photon that we can see, and light is made. Changing the type of phosphor can change the color we see, but usually fluorescent light bulbs are whiter than incandescent light bulbs, which are slightly yellow.

An LED (also known as light-emitting diode) is made like electronics. It's a chip of semiconducting material. LED bulbs are more efficient and last much longer than either incandescent or fluorescent bulbs. Unlike fluorescent bulbs, LEDs do not use mercury, which is toxic. For several years LED bulbs were not as bright as the other kinds of lights, and cost more too.

Furniture is the word that means all the things like chairs, tables, cupboards, beds and bookcases, etc.

In other words, furniture are all the things that are in the house and that people can use to sit, to lie on or that are supposed to contain smaller things like cloths or cups. Furniture is made of wood, particle boards, leather, screws etc.

Different rooms have different furniture for different purposes. Offices have office furniture such as desks and office chairs. Dining rooms have a table and dining chairs. Theaters and classrooms have rows of seats facing forward.

Bedroom furniture includes a bed covered by sheets, a bedspread and maybe a blanket and pillow . Next to the bed is the nightstand or night table. A lamp may be on the nightstand. The dresser has drawers for clothes. On top of a dresser may be a mirror.

The concept of furniture was first developed as early as 3100-2500 B.C. The first items created for household use were made of stone, as wood was not readily available during the Neolithic time period. Dressers, cupboards, and beds were among the first forms of furniture. One particular issue of fixtures is their capacity to form and replicate cultural and ancient narratives via design. Furniture serves as a visible illustration of the winning aesthetics, societal values, and technological improvements of a selected technology or culture. Each piece of fixture holds a tale inside its design, materials, and craftsmanship. From the ornate carvings and gilded gildings of Rococo fixtures in 18th-century Europe to the glossy traces and minimalist kinds of mid-century cutting-edge pieces, fixtures offer a tangible connection to the artistic, social, and technological tendencies of its time. Furthermore, fixtures frequently embody the cultural identity of a selected area or community. Traditional fixtures and patterns may be deeply rooted withinside the records and customs of a selected culture, reflecting particular craftsmanship techniques, symbolic motifs, and indigenous materials. For instance, the difficult lattice paintings of Moroccan Mashrabiya monitors or the stylish simplicity of Japanese shoji monitors now no longer handiest serve practical functions but additionally encapsulate the cultural history of their respective societies. Moreover, fixtures can act as a medium for self-expression and private identification. People frequently pick fixtures that align with their character tastes and preferences, reflecting their lifestyle, values, and aesthetics. This personalization of fixtures permits people to create particular residing areas that resonate with their very own identities and aspirations. By analyzing fixtures as greater than simply practical objects, we are able to benefit from insights into the ancient, cultural, and private dimensions of human experience. From the grand palaces and stately houses to humble dwellings and modern-day interiors, fixtures stay an effective device for storytelling, connecting us to our past, present, and future. The dresser was said to be the most important piece of furniture in the beginning, as they faced the entrance of each house in Neolithic society and often displayed carved artwork of symbolic objects. Over the years, especially in modern years, the concept of functional furniture in households exploded while keeping the artwork aspect that was displayed in the Neolithic period. This has made way for pieces in our culture that are both functional to our everyday lives and also a form of artwork that is pleasant to look at. The basic design of most furniture has remained the same for the most part though material and stability have become stronger and longer lasting with more of a focus on comfort and luxury in our modern lives.

Increasingly, renters and homeowners are opting for fast furniture. And they don’t keep it long.

The time period "fixtures" reveals its roots withinside the Latin language. It is derived from the Latin word "furnitūra," which means "equipment" or "apparatus." The word "furnitūra" itself is a by-product of the Latin verb "furnīre," which means "to equip" or "to provide." Over time, the means of "fixtures" advanced to embody a broader variety of gadgets associated with equipping and furnishing dwelling areas. It got here to indicate movable gadgets and add-ons that decorate the capability and luxury of home environments. The time period "fixtures" first seemed withinside the English language withinside the sixteenth century.

Fashion is the form of clothing, accessories, and furniture. It includes the way we wear clothes in a particular time and place. Fashion is also one way we can make ourselves look more attractive.

It is related to culture, but also to weather and to the history of the country we live in. For example, we have warm clothes in the Swedish fashion and we have thin clothes in the African fashion.

Fashion includes clothing, footwear, lifestyle, accessories, makeup, hairstyle, and body posture.

The history of modern fashion design is generally understood to date from 1858 when the English-born Charles Frederick Worth opened the first authentic haute couture house in Paris.

Agriculture is made up of  livestock production, aquaculture, fisheries, forestry, animal husbandry and farming (or crop production). From agriculture one can get food and non-food products.

The word agriculture comes from late Middle English which formed it partly from Middle French from the Latin word agricultura. Agricultura comes from the ager/agr meaning “field” and cultura meaning “growing, cultivation”.

There are views about what is different between farming and agriculture.

In at least one country, education is available to become an Agricultural scientist; People with that job, do "implementation of [... things like] crop production, livestock management, and sustainable farming methods".

Australia, officially the Commonwealth of Australia, is an island country and sovereign state located in the southern hemisphere, in Oceania. Its capital city is Canberra, and its largest city is Sydney. It is mostly a desert country.

Australia is the sixth biggest country in the world by land area, and is part of the Oceanic and Australasian regions. Australia, New Zealand, New Guinea and other islands on the Australian tectonic plate are together called Australasia, which is one of the world's great ecozones. When other Pacific islands are included with Australasia, it is called Oceania.

27 million people live in Australia, and about 85% of them live near the east coast. The country is divided up into six states and two territories, and more than half of Australia's population lives in and around the cities of Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide. The first people to live in the country were the Indigenous Australians: many of them died from smallpox during colonisation.

Australia is known for its mining (coal, iron, gold, diamonds and crystals). It produces wool, and is the world's largest producer of bauxite. Its emblem is a flower called the golden wattle.

Australia is also known for its animals. The national symbols of Australia are the kangaroo and the golden wattle. Scientifically, perhaps even more important are its two monotreme mammals: the platypus and the echidna.

Australia's landmass of  is on the Indo-Australian plate. The continent of Australia, including the island of Tasmania, was separated from the other continents of the world many millions of years ago. Because of this, many animals and plants live in Australia that do not live anywhere else. These include animals like the kangaroo, the koala, the emu, the kookaburra, the wallaby and the wombat. The duck-billed platypus and the echidna are completely unique.

People first arrived in Australia more than 50,000 years ago. These native Australians are called Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders. For the history of Australia, see History of Australia.

Most of the Australian colonies, having been settled from Britain, became mostly independent democratic states in the 1850s and all six combined as a federation on 1 January 1901. The first Prime Minister of Australia was Edmund Barton in 1901. Australia is a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations. It is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy with King Charles III as King of Australia and Head of State and a Governor-General who is chosen by the Prime Minister to carry out all the duties of the King in Australia.

Australia has six states, two major mainland territories, and other offshore minor territories. The states are New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, Western Australia and Tasmania (which is a large island located south of the East Coast). The two major mainland territories are the Northern Territory  and the Australian Capital Territory (ACT).

The population is about 27 million people (2021 census = 25,890,773). Most Australians live in cities along the coast, such as Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide, Newcastle and the Gold Coast. The largest inland city is Canberra, which is also the nation's capital. The largest city is Sydney but by some measures also Melbourne.

Australia is a large country by landmass, but much of the land is very dry climate, and the middle of the continent is mostly a hot desert. Only the areas around the east, west and south coast have enough rain and a suitable climate (not too hot and dry) for farms and cities. The island state of Tasmania has a more balanced climate than much of the mainland.

All the capital cities except Perth and Darwin are in the south-east of the country. There is now increasing rainfall and flooding which affects this region. It is thought this is caused by climate change, and may continue to get worse. The BBC report comments: "In the past three years, record-breaking bushfire and flood events have killed more than 500 people and billions of animals. Drought, cyclones and tides have gripped communities". The BBC report continues: "Nowhere is this a bigger issue than this in Queensland. It is home to almost 40% of the 500,000 homes projected to be effectively uninsurable". This means people can't get insurance because the risk of flooding (in one season) or fire (in another season) is too great.

The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people arrived in Australia about 60,000 years ago or maybe even earlier. Until the arrival of British settlers in 1788, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people lived by hunting and gathering food from the land. They lived in all sorts of climates and managed the land in different ways. An example of Aboriginal land management was the Cumberland Plain where Sydney is now. Every few years, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people would burn the grass and small trees. This meant that a lot of grass grew back, but not many big trees. Kangaroos and wallabies like to live on grassy plains, but not in forests. The kangaroos and wallabies that lived on the plain were a good food supply for the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Sometimes, Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders would name a person after an animal, and they could not eat that animal to help level out the food population.

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people did not usually build structures, except huts of grass, leaves and bark. They did not usually build walls or fences either due to their hunter-gatherer lifestyle. Of the limited Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander buildings that are known the most common are fish-traps. However, the remains of a few stone huts have been located in Victoria and Tasmania. The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people did not use metal, make pottery or use bows and arrows or weave cloth. In some parts of Australia the people used sharp flaked-stone spearheads, but most Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander spears were made of sharply pointed wood, some being extremely long. Australia has a lot of trees such as Eucalyptus, that have very hard wood that was good for spear making. The boomerang was used in some areas for sport and for hunting.

The First Nations and Torres Strait Islanders, as a generalisation, people did not think that the land belonged to them and they were instead caretakers. They believed that they had grown from the land, so it was like their mother, and they belonged to the land however this varies depending on the Dreamtime lore that exists in each area or community.

In the 1600s, Dutch merchants traded with the islands of Batavia (now Indonesia), to the north of Australia and several different Dutch ships touched on the coast of Australia. The Dutch governor, van Diemen, sent Abel Tasman on a voyage of discovery and he found Tasmania, which he named Van Diemen's Land. Its name was later changed to honour the man who discovered it.

The British Government was sure that there must be a very large land in the south, that had not been explored. They sent Captain James Cook to the Pacific Ocean. His ship, HMS Endeavour, carried the famous scientists, Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Solander who were going to Tahiti where they would watch the planet Venus pass in front of the Sun. Captain Cook's secret mission was to find "Terra Australis" (the Land of the South).

The voyage of discovery was very successful, because they found New Zealand and sailed right around it. Then they sailed westward. At last, a boy, William Hicks, who was up the mast spotted land on the horizon. Captain Cook named that bit of land Point Hicks. They sailed up the coast and Captain Cook named the land that he saw "New South Wales". At last they sailed into a large open bay which was full of fish and stingrays which the sailors speared for food. Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander went ashore and were astonished to find that they did not know what any of the plants or birds or animals that they saw were. They collected hundreds of plants to take back to England.

Captain Cook saw the Aboriginal people with their simple way of life. He saw them fishing, hunting along with collecting grass seeds and fruit. But there were no houses and no fences. In most parts of the world, people put up a house and a fence or some marker to show that they own the land. But the Aboriginal people did not own the mainland in that way. They belonged to the land, like a baby belongs to its mother. Captain Cook went home to England and told the government that no-one owned the land. This would later cause a terrible problem for the Aboriginal people.

In the 1700s, in England, laws were tough, many people were poor and gaols (jails) were full. A person could be sentenced to death for stealing a loaf of bread. Many people were hanged for small crimes. But usually they were just thrown in gaol. Often they were sent away to the British colonies in America. But by the 1770s, the colonies in America became the United States. They were free from British rule and would not take England's convicts any more, so England needed to find a new and less populated place.

By the 1780s the gaols of England were so full that convicts were often chained up in rotting old ships. The government decided to make a settlement in New South Wales and send some of the convicts there. In 1788 the First Fleet of eleven ships set sail from Portsmouth carrying convicts, sailors, marines, a few free settlers and enough food to last for two years. Their leader was Captain Arthur Phillip. They were to make a new colony at the place that Captain Cook had discovered, named Botany Bay because of all the unknown plants found there by the two scientists.

Captain Phillip found that Botany Bay was flat and windy. There was not much fresh water. He went with two ships up the coast and sailed into a great harbour called Port Jackson, which he said was "the finest harbour in the world". There were many small bays on the harbour so he decided on one which had a good stream of fresh water and some flat shore to land on. On 26 January 1788, the flag was raised and New South Wales was claimed in the name of King George III of England, and the new settlement was called Sydney.

For the first few years of the settlement, things were very difficult. No-one in the British Government had thought very hard about what sort of convicts should be sent to make a new colony. Nobody had chosen them carefully. There was only one man who was a farmer. There was no-one among the convicts who was a builder, a brick-maker or a blacksmith. No-one knew how to fix the tools when they broke. All of the cattle escaped. There were no cooking pots. All the plants were different so no-one knew which ones could be eaten. It was probable that everyone in the new colony would die of starvation.

The little group of tents had a hut for the Governor, Arthur Phillip, and another hut for the supply of food. Soon it grew into a small town with streets, a bridge over the stream, a windmill for grinding grain and wharves for ships. By the 1820s there was a fine brick house for the Governor. There was also a hospital and a convict barracks and a beautiful church which are still standing today. Settlements had spread out from Sydney, firstly to Norfolk Island and to Van Diemen's Land (Tasmania), and also up the coast to Newcastle, where coal was discovered, and inland where the missing cattle were found to have grown to a large herd. Spanish Merino sheep had been brought to Sydney, and by 1820, farmers were raising fat lambs for meat and also sending fine wool back to the factories of England.

While the settlement was growing in New South Wales, it was also growing in Tasmania. The climate in Tasmania was more like that in England, and farmers found it easy to grow crops there.

Because Australia is such a large land, it was easy in the minds  of early colonists to think that it might be able to hold a large number of people. In the early days of the colony, a great number of explorers went out, searching for fertile and flat land to settle on. When the settlers looked west from Sydney, they saw a range of mountains which they called the Blue Mountains. They were not very high and did not look very rugged but for many years no-one could find their way through them. While not high in elevation the cliffs are imposing and numerous and the area had little in the way of traditionally easy to access resources. In 1813, Gregory Blaxland, William Lawson and a 17-year-old called William Charles Wentworth crossed the Blue Mountains and found land on the other side which was good for farming. A road was built and the governor, Lachlan Macquarie founded the town of Bathurst on the other side, 160 km (100 miles) from Sydney. Bathurst became Australia's first inland settlement.

Some people, like Captain Charles Sturt were sure that there must be a sea in the middle of Australia and set out to find it. Many of the explorers did not prepare very well, or else they went out to explore at the hottest time of year. Some died like Burke and Wills. Ludwig Leichhardt got lost twice. The second time, he was never seen again. Major Thomas Mitchell was one of the most successful explorers. He mapped the country as he went, and his maps remained in use for more than 100 years. He travelled all the way to what is now western Victoria, and to his surprise and annoyance found that he was not the first white person there. The Henty brothers had come from Tasmania, had built themselves a house, had a successful farm and fed the Major and his men on roast lamb and wine.

The gold rushes of New South Wales and Victoria started in 1851 leading to large numbers of people arriving to search for gold. The population grew across south east Australia and made great wealth and industry. By 1853 the gold rushes had made some poor people very rich.

The transportation of convicts to Australia ended in the 1840s and 1850s and more changes came. The people in Australia wanted to run their own country, and not be told what to do from London. The first governments in the colonies were run by governors chosen by London. Soon the settlers wanted local government and more democracy. William Wentworth started the Australian Patriotic Association (Australia's first political party) in 1835 to demand democratic government. In 1840, the city councils started and some people could vote. New South Wales Legislative Council had its first elections in 1843, again with some limits on who could vote. In 1855, limited self-government was given by London to New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania. In 1855, the right to vote was given to all men over 21 in South Australia. The other colonies soon followed. Women were given the vote in the Parliament of South Australia in 1895 and they became the first women in the world allowed to stand in elections.

Australians had started parliamentary democracies all across the continent. But voices were getting louder for all of them to come together as one country with a national parliament.

Until 1901, Australia was not a nation, it was six separate colonies governed by Britain. They voted to join to form one new country, called the Commonwealth of Australia, in 1901. Australia was still part of the British Empire, and at first wanted only British or Europeans to come to Australia. But soon it had its own money, its own Army and its own Navy.

In Australia at this time, the trade unions were very strong, and they started a political party, the Australian Labor Party. Australia passed many laws to help the workers.

In 1914, the World War I started in Europe. Australia joined in on the side of Britain against Germany, Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire. Australian soldiers were sent to Gallipoli, in the Ottoman Empire. They fought bravely, but were beaten by the Turks. Today Australia remembers this battle every year on ANZAC Day. They also fought on the Western Front. More than 60,000 Australians and New Zealanders were killed.

Australia had a really hard time in the Great Depression of the 1930s and joined Britain in a war against Nazi Germany when Hitler invaded Poland in 1939. But in 1941 lots of Australian soldiers were captured in the Fall of Singapore by Japan. Then Japan started attacking Australia and people worried about invasion. But with help from the United States Navy, the Japanese were stopped. After the war, Australia became a close friend of the United States and Japan.

When the war ended, Australia felt that it needed many more people to fill the country up and to work. So the government said it would take in people from Europe who had lost their homes in the war. It did things like building the Snowy Mountains Scheme. Over the next 25 years, millions of people came to Australia. They came especially from Italy and Greece, other countries in Europe. Later they also came from countries like Turkey and Lebanon. An important new party, the Liberal Party of Australia was made by Robert Menzies in 1944 and it won lots of elections from 1949 until in 1972, then Gough Whitlam won for the Labor Party. Whitlam made changes, but he made the Senate unhappy and the Governor-General sacked him and forced an election in 1975. Then Malcolm Fraser won a few elections for the Liberal Party.

In the 1960s many people began coming to Australia from China, Vietnam, Malaysia and other countries in Asia. Australia became more multicultural. In the 1950s and 1960s Australia became one of the richest countries in the world, helped by mining and wool. Australia started trading more with America, than Japan. Australia supported the United States in wars against dictatorships in Korea and Vietnam and later Iraq. Australian soldiers also helped the United Nations in countries like East Timor in 1999.

In 1973, the famous Sydney Opera House opened. In the 1970s, 80s and 90s lots of Australian movies, actors and singers became famous around the world. In the year 2000, Sydney had the Summer Olympics.

In the 1980s and 90s, the Labor Party under Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, then the Liberal Party under John Howard made lots of changes to the economy. Australia had a bad recession in 1991, but when other Western countries had trouble with their economies in 2008, Australia stayed strong.

Today Australia is a rich, peaceful and democratic country. But it still has problems. Around 4-5% of Australians could not get a job in 2010. A lot of land in Australia (like Uluru) has been returned to Aboriginal people, but lots of Aboriginals are still poorer than everybody else. Every year the government chooses a big number of new people from all around the world to come as immigrants to live in Australia. These people may come because they want to do business, or to live in a democracy, to join their family, or because they are refugees. Australia took 6.5 million immigrants in the 60 years after World War II, including around 660,000 refugees.

Julia Gillard became the first woman Prime Minister of Australia in 2010 when she replaced her Labor Party colleague Kevin Rudd (who later replaced her).

Australia is part of the Commonwealth of Nations. Australia is made up of six states, and two mainland . Each state and territory has its own Parliament and makes its own local laws. The Parliament of Australia sits in Canberra and makes laws for the whole country, also known as the Commonwealth or Federation.

The federal government is led by the prime minister of Australia, who is the member of parliament chosen as leader. The current prime minister is Anthony Albanese.

The leader of Australia is the prime minister, although the governor-general represents the king of Australia, who is also the king of the United Kingdom, as head of state. The governor-general, currently his excellency Sam Mostyn, is chosen by the prime minister.

Australia constitutionally is a constitutional monarchy meaning that the monarch has little power and in Australia, they must be neutral in Australian politics always.

Australia was colonised by people from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland who also brought "blackbirded" people from mostly Melanesia, but today people from all over the world live there. English is the main spoken language. Christianity is the main religion, though all religions are accepted and not everybody has a religion. Australia is multicultural: all its people are encouraged to keep their different languages, religions and ways of life, while also learning English and joining in with other Australians. Australia has many immigrants from different countries around the world.

Famous Australian writers include the bush balladeers Banjo Paterson and Henry Lawson who wrote about life in the Australian bush. More modern famous writers include Peter Carey, Thomas Keneally and Colleen McCullough. In 1973, Patrick White won the Nobel Prize in Literature, the only Australian to have achieved this; he is seen as one of the great English-language writers of the twentieth century.

Australian music has had world-wide stars, for example the opera singers Nellie Melba and Joan Sutherland, the rock and roll bands Bee Gees, AC/DC and INXS, the folk-rocker Paul Kelly (musician), the pop singer Kylie Minogue and Australian country music stars Slim Dusty and John Williamson. Australian Aboriginal music is very special and very ancient: it has the famous didgeridoo woodwind instrument.

Australian TV has produced many successful programs for home and overseas. Skippy the Bush Kangaroo, Home and Away and Neighbours are examples. It has had well known TV stars, such as Barry Humphries (Dame Edna Everage), Steve Irwin (The Crocodile Hunter) and The Wiggles. Major Australian subgroups such as the Bogan have been shown on Australian TV in shows such as Bogan Hunters and Kath & Kim.

Australia has two public broadcasters (the ABC and the multicultural SBS), three commercial television networks, three pay-TV services, and numerous public, non-profit television and radio stations. Each major city has its daily newspapers, and there are two national daily newspapers, The Australian and The Australian Financial Review.

Australian movies have a long history. The world's first feature movie was the Australian movie The Story of the Kelly Gang of 1906. In 1933, In the Wake of the Bounty, directed by Charles Chauvel, had Errol Flynn as the main actor. Flynn went on to a celebrated career in Hollywood. The first Australian Oscar was won by the 1942 Kokoda Front Line!, directed by Ken G. Hall. In the 1970s and 1980s Australian movies and movie stars became world famous. There were movies like Picnic at Hanging Rock, Gallipoli (with Mel Gibson), The Man From Snowy River and Crocodile Dundee. Russell Crowe, Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger became global stars during the 1990s and Australia starring Nicole Kidman and Hugh Jackman made a lot of money in 2008.

Australia is a popular destination for business conferences and research, with Sydney one of the top 20 meeting destinations in the world.

Sport is an important part of Australian culture because the climate is good for outdoor activities. 23.5% Australians over the age of 15 regularly take part in organised sporting activities. The most popular sports are Australian rules football, rugby league and cricket. In international sports, Australia has very strong teams in cricket, hockey, netball, rugby league and rugby union, and performs well in cycling, rowing and swimming. Local popular sports include Australian Rules Football, horse racing, soccer and motor racing. Australia has participated in every summer Olympic Games since 1896, and every Commonwealth Games. Australia has hosted the 1956 and 2000 Summer Olympics, and has ranked in the top five medal-winners since 2000. Australia has also hosted the 1938, 1962, 1982 and 2006 Commonwealth Games and are to host the 2018 Commonwealth Games. Other major international events held regularly in Australia include the Australian Open, one of the four Grand Slam tennis tournaments, annual international cricket matches and the Formula One Australian Grand Prix. Corporate and government sponsorship of many sports and elite athletes is common in Australia. Televised sport is popular; some of the highest-rated television programs include the Summer Olympic Games and the grand finals of local and international football competitions.

The main sporting leagues for men are the AFL (Australian rules football), the NRL (rugby league), the A-League (soccer) and the NBL (basketball). For women, they are the AFLW (Australian rules football), ANZ Netball Championships (netball), the W-League (soccer) and WNBL (basketball).

Famous Australian sports players include the cricketer Sir Don Bradman, the swimmer Ian Thorpe, the cricketer Shane Warne and the athlete Cathy Freeman.

Just 60 years ago, Australia had only one big art festival. Now Australia has hundreds of smaller community-based festivals, and national and regional festivals that focus on specific art forms.

Australia is home to many animals and plants that can be found nowhere else on Earth, except perhaps New Guinea.

The platypus and the short-beaked echidna are unique, and are two of the only five surviving monotremes. Monotremes are only found in Australia and New Guinea.

Koalas, kangaroos, wallabies, wombats, numbats and many others are marsupials. Most of the marsupials in the world are found only on the continent or on the neighbouring island of New Guinea. Wildfires from global warming in 2020 have reduced their population.

The gum trees are almost as remarkable as the animals. They are mainly Eucalyptus and other gum trees. These are woody evergreens which make essential oils and are prone to fire. Sticky heavily scented gum squeezes out of their wood. The tribe has about 860 species. They are all native to Southeast Asia and Oceania. Most live in Australia. Until British settlement in Australia, these trees were almost entirely unknown. They had been separated from the Americas, Africa and much of Asia for millions of years.

Afghanistan, officially the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan is a country in Asia. It borders Pakistan in the south and east (border with India is disputed), Iran in the west, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the north, and China in the far northeast. Kabul is the capital city.

Afghanistan is currently governed by the Taliban, after the collapse of the internationally recognized Islamic Republic of Afghanistan on 15 August 2021.

The country is around  in size. There are 40.976 million people in Afghanistan. There are about 3 million Afghan refugees (people who had to leave the country) in Pakistan and Iran. In 2011 Kabul, had about 3,691,400 people living in it.

United Nations Human Rights Council decided in October 2021 to appoint an independent expert, known as a United Nations special rapporteur on Afghanistan, to find out about violations carried out by the Taliban and others who are now part of a big conflict.

The economy does not have growth (as April 2024), of that kind that is called GDP growth, according to Worldbank.org. In regard to the mining industry: In 2024, Chinese engineers broke ground for a mine; "The deposit is estimated to [... have] 11.5 million tons of copper ore".

Afghanistan has many mountains. The mountains are called the Hindu Kush and Himalayas. The tallest mountain in Afghanistan is Mount Nowshak. There are plains (which have soil that is good for growing plants) and foothills. Parts of the country are also dry, especially the Registan Desert. Afghanistan has snow and glaciers in the mountains. Amu Darya is the big water stream, or river.

The country has a lot of a valuable stone called lapis lazuli, which was used to decorate the tomb of the Egyptian pharaoh Tutankhamun.

Afghanistan has a continental climate with hot summers and cold winters. Having no water sometimes causes problems for farmers. Sandstorms happen a lot in the desert.

Southern Afghanistan does not have many plants because it is dry. There are more plants where there is more water. Mountains have forests of pine and fir, cedar, oak, walnut, alder, and ash trees.

Afghanistan's wild animals live in the mountains. There are wolves, foxes, jackals, bears, and wild goats, gazelles, wild dogs, camels, and wild cats such as the snow leopard in the country. The birds are falcons, eagles and vultures. The Rhesus Macaque and the red flying squirrel are also in Afghanistan.

Many years of war, hunting, and years of no water have killed animals in Afghanistan. There used to be tigers in Afghanistan, but now there aren't any. Bears and wolves are almost gone.

Many people have moved through or invaded the land of Afghanistan. Today's people of Afghanistan are known as Afghans.

The largest group of people are the Pashtuns. They make up about half the population. Tajiks (often also known as “Farsiwan”, meaning Persian speaking) are the second-largest ethnic group, making up about one-fifth of the population. Before the 20th century, Tajiks were called Sarts and some come from  Iranian peoples. Most Pashtuns are also related to the Iranian peoples. Some Pashtuns and Tajiks marry each other but at the same time they are rivals. The third-largest group are the Hazaras. They are native to the Hazaristan area in central Afghanistan. The country's other groups include the Uzbek, Aimaq, Turkmen, Nuristani, Baloch, and Pashayi.

Dari-Persian and Pashto are the two official languages of Afghanistan. Many people speak both languages. Both are Indo-European languages from the Iranian languages sub-family. They are usually written with the Arabic alphabet. Uzbek and Turkmen are widely spoken in the north and Nuristani and Pashai are spoken in the east. Around 99% of Afghans follow the religion of Islam.

Afghanistan is a largely rural country. This means there are only a few major cities. About one fifth of the population live in cities. Kabul, the capital, is the largest city. It is south of the Hindu Kush range and alongside the Kabul River. Other cities are Kandahar, Herat, Mazar-e Sharif, and Jalalabad. The rural population is made up of farmers and nomads. The farmers live mainly in small villages along the rivers. The nomads live in tents while moving from place to place with their animals and belongings. Some people live in the high central mountains. Some live in the deserts in the south and southwest. Millions of people left Afghanistan to get away from the wars that happened in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Most of them went to Pakistan and Iran.

Afghanistan is in the path of important trade routes that connect southern and eastern Asia to Europe and the Middle East. Because of this, many empire builders have tried to rule over the area. Signs that these emperors were near Afghanistan still exist in many parts of the country. Afghanistan is near what used to be the Silk Road. The peoples of Afghanistan helped develop major world religions, traded and exchanged many products, and sometimes controlled politics and culture in Asia.

Archaeologists digging a cave in Badakhshan discovered that people lived in the country as early as 100,000 years ago. They found the skull of a Neanderthal, or early human, as well as tools from about 30,000 years ago. In other parts of Afghanistan, archaeologists uncovered pottery and tools that are 4,000 to 11,000 years old—evidence that Afghans were among the first people in the world to grow crops and raise animals.

Farmers and herders settled in the plains surrounding the Hindu Kush as early as 7000 B.C. These people may have grown rich off the lapis lazuli they found along riverbeds, which they traded to early city sites to the west, across the Iranian plateau and Mesopotamia. As farms and villages grew these ancient people started irrigation (digging ditches for water so it flows to crops) that allowed them to grow crops on the northern Afghanistan desert plains. This civilization (advanced state of organization) is today called BMAC (Bactria–Margiana Archaeological Complex), or the "Oxus civilization".

The Oxus civilization expanded as far east as the western edge of the Indus Valley during the period between 2200 and 1800 B.C. These people, who were the ancestors of the Indo-Aryans, used the term "Aryan" to identify their ethnicity, culture, and religion. Scholars know this when they read the ancient texts of these people; the Avesta of Iranic peoples and the Vedas of Indo-Aryans.

Zoroaster, the founder of the Zoroastrian religion, the world's earliest monotheistic religion, (meaning a religion believing in one god) lived in the area (somewhere north of today's Afghanistan), around 1000 B.C.

Before the middle of the sixth century BCE, Afghanistan was held by the Medes. Then the Achaemenids took over control of the land and made it part of the Persian empire. Alexander the Great defeated and conquered the Persian Empire in 330 BCE. He founded some cities in the area. The people used Macedonian culture and language. After Alexander, Seleucids, Mauryas, Greco-Bactrians, Scythians, Kushans, Parthians, Guptas and Sassanians ruled the area.

Kushans spread Buddhism from India in the 1st century BCE, and Buddhism remained an important religion in the area until the Islamic conquest in the 7th century CE.

The Buddhas of Bamiyan were giant statues, a reminder of Buddhism in Afghanistan. They were destroyed by the Taliban in 2001. There were international protests. The Taliban believe that the ancient statues were un-Islamic and that they had a right to destroy them.

Arabs introduced Islam in the 7th century and slowly began spreading the new religion. In the 9th and 10th centuries, many local Islamic dynasties rose to power inside Afghanistan. One of the earliest was the Tahirids, whose kingdom included Balkh and Herat; they established independence from the Abbasids in 820. The Tahirids were succeeded in about 867 by the Saffarids of Zaranj in western Afghanistan. Local princes in the north soon became  of the powerful Samanids, who ruled from Bukhara. From 872 to 999, north of the Hindu Kush in Afghanistan enjoyed a golden age under Samanid rule.

In the 10th century, the local Ghaznavids turned Ghazni into their capital and firmly established Islam throughout all areas of Afghanistan, except the Kafiristan region in the northeast. Mahmud of Ghazni, a great Ghaznavid sultan, conquered the Multan and Punjab region, and carried raids into the heart of India. Mohammed bin Abdul Jabbar Utbi, a historian from the 10th century, wrote that thousands of "Afghans" were in the Ghaznavid army. The Ghaznavid dynasty was replaced by the Ghorids of Ghor in the late 12th century, who reconquered Ghaznavid territory in the name of Islam and ruled it until 1206. The Ghorid army also included ethnic Afghans.

Afghanistan was recognized as Khorasan, meaning "land of the rising sun," which was a prosperous and independent geographic region reaching as far as the Indus River.

All the major cities of modern Afghanistan were centers of science and culture in the past. The New Persian literature arose and flourished in the area. The early Persian poets such as Rudaki were from what is now Afghanistan. Moreover, Ferdowsi, the author of Shahnameh, the national epic of Iran, and Rumi, the famous Sufi poet, were also from here. It has produced scientists such as Avicenna, Al-Farabi, Al-Biruni, Omar Khayyám, Al-Khwarizmi, and many others who are widely known for their important contributions in areas such as mathematics, astronomy, medicine, physics, geography, and geology. It remained the cultural capital of Persia until the devastating Mongol invasion in the 13th century.

Timur, the Turkic conqueror, took over in the end of the 14th century and began to rebuild cities in this region. Timur's successors, the Timurids (1405–1507), were great patrons of learning and the arts who enriched their capital city of Herat with fine buildings. Under their rule Afghanistan enjoyed peace and prosperity.

Between south of the Hindu Kush and the Indus River (today's Pakistan) was the native land of the Afghan tribes. They called this land "Afghanistan" (meaning "land of the Afghans"). The Afghans ruled the rich northern Indian subcontinent with their capital at Delhi. From the 16th to the early 18th century, Afghanistan was disputed between the Safavids of Isfahan and the Mughals of Agra who had replaced the Lodi and Suri Afghan rulers in India. The Safavids and Mughals occasionally oppressed the native Afghans but at the same time the Afghans used each empire to punish the other. In 1709, the Hotaki Afghans rose to power and completely defeated the Persian Empire. Then they marched towards the Mughals of India and defeated them with the help of the Afsharid forces under Nader Shah Afshar.

In 1747, after Nader Shah of Persia was killed, a great leader named Ahmad Shah Durrani united all the different Muslim tribes and established the Afghan Empire (Durrani Empire). He is considered the founding father of the modern state of Afghanistan while Mirwais Hotak is the grandfather of the nation.

During the 1800s, Afghanistan became a buffer zone between two powerful empires, the British Indian Empire and the Russian Empire. As British India advanced into Afghanistan, Russia felt threatened and expanded southward across Central Asia. To stop the Russian advance, Britain tried to make Afghanistan part of its empire but the Afghans fought wars with British-led Indians from 1839 to 1842 and from 1878 to 1880. After the third war in 1919, Afghanistan under King Amanullah gained respect and recognition as a completely independent state.

The Kingdom of Afghanistan was a constitutional monarchy established in 1926. It was the successor state to the Emirate of Afghanistan. On 27 September 1934, during the reign of Zahir Shah, the Kingdom of Afghanistan joined the League of Nations.  During World War II, Afghanistan remained neutral. It pursued a diplomatic policy of non-alignment.

The creation of Pakistan in 1947 as Afghanistan's eastern neighbor created problems. In 1973, political crises led to the overthrow of the king. The country's new leader ended the monarchy and made Afghanistan a republic. In 1978, a Communist political party supported by the Soviet Union seized control of Afghanistan's government. This move sparked rebellions throughout the country. The government asked the Soviet Union for military assistance. The Soviets took advantage of the situation and invaded Afghanistan in December 1979.

Most people in Afghanistan opposed the sudden Soviet presence in their country. For nearly a decade, anti-Communist Islamic forces known as Mujahideen were trained in Pakistan to fight the Soviets and the Afghan government. The United States and other anti-Soviet countries supported the Mujahideen. In the long war, over one million Afghan civilians were killed. The Soviet Army also lost more than 15,000 soldiers in that war. Millions of Afghans left their country to stay safe in neighboring Pakistan and Iran. In 1989 the Soviet Army withdrew the last of its troops.

After the Soviets left in 1989, the Afghan Civil War started; different Afghan warlords began fighting for control of the country. The warlords received support from other countries, including neighboring Pakistan and Iran. A very conservative Islamic group known as the Taliban emerged in an attempt to end the civil war. By the late 1990s the Taliban had gained control over 95% of Afghanistan. A group known as the Northern Alliance, based in northern Afghanistan near the border with Tajikistan, continued to fight against the Taliban.

The Taliban ruled Afghanistan according to their strict version of Islamic law. People whom the Taliban believed violated these laws were given cruel punishments. In addition, the Taliban completely restricted the rights of women. Because of such policies, most countries refused to recognize the Taliban government. Only Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates accepted them as the official government. The Taliban also angered other countries by allowing suspected terrorists to live freely in Afghanistan. Among them were Osama bin Laden and members of the al-Qaeda terrorist network. In September 2001, the United States blamed bin Laden for the terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon outside Washington, D.C. The Taliban refused to hand him over to the United States. In response, the United States and its allies launched a bombing campaign against al-Qaeda in October 2001. Within months the Taliban abandoned Kabul, and a new government led by Hamid Karzai came to power, but fighting between the Taliban and US-led armies continued.  Taliban fighters have gone into Afghanistan from neighboring Pakistan.  Afghans accused Pakistan's military of being behind the Taliban militants but Pakistan rejected this and stated that a stable Afghanistan is in Pakistan's own interest.

In December 2004, Hamid Karzai became the first democratically elected president of Afghanistan. NATO began rebuilding Afghanistan, including its military and government institutions.  Many schools and colleges were built.  Freedom for women improved. Women can study, work, drive, and run for office.  Many Afghan women work as politicians, some are ministers while at least one is a mayor.  Others have opened businesses, or joined the military or police. Afghanistan's economy has also improved dramatically, and NATO agreed in 2012 to help the country for at least another 10 years after 2014. Afghanistan improved diplomatic ties with many countries in the world and continues.

In August 2021, the Cabinet of Afghanistan lost its power. Most of the country fell to the Taliban on 15 August 2021 with President Ashraf Ghani escaping the country. The former government's last holdout, [was] in the Panjshir Valley.

The Afghan conflict as of 2025: In regard to (clashes or) skirmishes at the border with Pakistan; They have happened as late as 2025's first quarter. Afghanistan–Pakistan border conflicts, is the name of that part of the conflict.

Some conflicts in other countries have spread into Afghanistan; Islamist insurgency in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, and Islamist insurgency in Balochistan are two such conflicts.

Another part of the Afghan conflict, is the Republican armed rebellion in Afghanistan. Attacks by the NRF have happened as late as 2025's third quarter; Attacks by the AFF have happened as late as 2025's third quarter.

Since the Taliban captured Kabul on 15 August 2021, the governance of Afghanistan is disputed between the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan and the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

According to Transparency International, Afghanistan remains in the top most corrupt countries list.

As of 2004, there are thirty-four provinces.  Each province is divided into districts. (For cities see List of cities in Afghanistan.)

In early times people passed through it with animals and other goods as it connected China and India with Central Asia and the Middle East. More recently, Afghanistan has been damaged by many years of war.  There are not enough jobs.

Acceleration is a measure of how fast velocity changes. Acceleration is the change of velocity divided by the change of time. Acceleration is a vector, and therefore includes both a size and a direction. Acceleration is also a change in speed and direction. There is:

The measurement of how fast acceleration changes is called jerk.

Acceleration is the rate of change of the velocity of an object. Acceleration  can be found by using:

Sometimes the change in velocity  is written as Δ. Sometimes the change in time  is written as Δt.

In difficult situations, the acceleration can be calculated using mathematics: in calculus, acceleration is the derivative of the velocity (concerning time),.

Acceleration has its  units of measurement. For example, if velocity is measured in meters per second, and if time is measured in seconds, then acceleration is measured in meters per second squared  (m/s2).

Acceleration can be positive or negative. When the acceleration is negative (but the velocity does not change direction), it is sometimes called deceleration. For example, when a car brakes it decelerates. Physicists usually only use the word "acceleration".

Newton's laws of motion are rules for how things move. These rules are called "laws of motion". Isaac Newton is the scientist who first wrote down the main laws of motion.

According to Newton's Second Law of Motion, the force something needs to accelerate an object depends on the object's mass (the amount of "stuff" the object is made from or how "heavy" it is).

This formula is very well-known, and it is very important in physics. Newton's Second Law of Motion, in short "Newton's Second Law", is often one of the first things that physics students learn.

Deceleration is negative or backwards acceleration. This means that something slows down instead of speeding up. For example, when a car brakes, it is decelerating.

China () is a country, cultural region, and ancient civilization located in East Asia. Covering an immense geographic area, China features a diverse landscape ranging from arid deserts in the north to tropical forests in the south, bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the east and the Himalayan mountain range to the west. As one of the world's oldest continuous civilizations, its foundational history spans millennia, marked by successive imperial dynasties that contributed significant advancements in philosophy, arts, science, and governance.

Geographically, the nation is defined by its massive river systems, which have historically served as the cradles of its civilization. The longest river entirely within China is the Yangtze River (Chang Jiang), which flows eastward for approximately 6,300 kilometers (3,915 miles) from the Tibetan Plateau to the East China Sea. Ranking as the longest river in Asia and the world’s third-longest river, the Yangtze basin flows through some of China's most densely populated provinces and largest megacities, including Chongqing, Wuhan, and Shanghai. The river basin acts as a vital economic engine, generating a significant percentage of the nation's agricultural and industrial output, and is home to immense biodiversity, including unique and critically endangered species such as the Chinese alligator and the Yangtze finless porpoise.

The English name "China" is first attested in Richard Eden's 1555 translation of the 1516 journal of the Portuguese explorer Duarte Barbosa. The Portuguese term China is thought to derive from the Middle Persian Čīn (چين), and perhaps ultimately from the Sanskrit word Cīna (चीन). The name was popularized in medieval Europe following the travels of the 13th-century Venetian merchant Marco Polo, who encountered variations of the Persian adjective chīnī (چینی), meaning "Chinese", along the Silk Road trading routes.

The Sanskrit root Cīna was used in early Hindu scriptures, including the Mahābhārata (5th century BCE) and the Laws of Manu (2nd century BCE), to denote peoples living in the eastern borderlands of the Indian subcontinent.

The ultimate derivation of the Sanskrit term remains a subject of ongoing scholarly debate, with three prominent hypotheses:

Ancient China was one of the first civilizations, and was active since the 2nd millennium BC as a feudal society. Chinese civilization was also one of the few to invent writing, with the others being Mesopotamia, the Indus Valley civilization, the Maya civilization, the Minoan civilization of ancient Greece, and Ancient Egypt. Ancient China reached its golden age during the Tang Dynasty (c. A.D. 10th century). It is the home of Confucianism and Daoism.

Before the Qin Dynasty united China, there were many small feudal states, nominally loyal to the Zhou King, which typically fought each other for hundreds of years in battles for control of China. The majority of these states were ruled by relatives and clansmen of the Zhou royal house and carried the surname Ji (姬), and were tied by family bonds to the Zhou king, to whom they were ritually subordinate, as members of collateral or lesser lineages. A minority of these states, such as the Qin and Chu, were ruled by non-Zhou clansmen, and were awarded their fiefs on account of some merit. Over time, these feudal states attained to power and wealth, that exceeded that of their Zhou nominal overlord, whose direct authority became confined to a very small territory near present-day Zhengzhou. These states also began to acquire some distinctive characteristics and identities of their own during the long centuries of loose control by the Zhou. Eventually, the Zhou kings were eclipsed in power by two especially problematic vassals - the Qin and Chu, and the functional independence of the Qin later led to its gradual conquest of all other vassal states and the formal supplantation of the Zhou to form a heavily centralised Empire.

The long decline of the Zhou, incidentally the longest ruling dynastic house of China, is known as the Warring States Period. Despite the bloodiness and strife of the period, this was the time when many great philosophies emerged - including Confucianism and Daoism as a response to disintegrating central authority of the Zhou kings and fluctuating power of the vassal states, and the general uncertainty of that era. Confucianism and Daoism have been the foundation of many social values seen in modern east Asian cultures today.

Other notable dynasties include the Han (from which is derived the ethnonym the Han Chinese, which is synonymous with the older self-referential term - the Huaxia) as well as dynasties such as the Tang, Song, and Ming, which were characterised by periods of affluence, wealth, population growth, and the proliferation of literature.

During the later years, China was often raided or invaded by northern nomadic people such as the Xiongnu, the Xianbei, the Jurchens and the Mongols (the latter led by Genghis Khan and Kublai Khan). One effect of regular nomadic invasion and the collapse of native dynasties was the massive migration of Han Chinese - especially the aristocratic elite and the literati, to sparsely populated frontier regions south of the Yangzi river such as Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Guangdong and Fujian. Several notable waves of Han Chinese immigration to Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Guangdong and Fujian took place during the collapse of the Jin, the Tang, and the Song.

Some nomadic groups succeeded in conquering the whole territory of China, establishing dynasties such as the Yuan (Mongol) and Qing (Manchu). Each time, they also brought new elements into Chinese culture - for instance, military uniform, the qipao and the pigtail, the latter of which was deeply resented by the Han Chinese.

While China achieved many things in the First millennium and early 2nd millennium, it became an isolationist country in the 15th century C.E. This was because Spain found enormous silver in the new continent, which was the main currency (money) in China and Europe at the time, and China did not want to be bought by the foreigners.

By the time of the Renaissance, European powers started to take over other countries in Asia. While China was never actually taken over, many European countries, such as Britain and France built spheres of influence in China. Since China had cut itself off from the world over the previous few centuries, by the Qing Dynasty, it had fallen behind other countries in technology, and was helpless to stop this from happening. This had become clear when it lost the Opium Wars to Britain in the 19th century.

Still influenced by Western sources, China faced internal strife. The Taiping Rebellion or Taiping War occurred in China from 1851 through 1864. The Taiping Rebellion was led by Hong Xiuquan from Guangdong. Hong Xiuquan was influenced by Christian missionaries and declared himself the brother of Jesus. Hong made his mission to bring down the Qing Dynasty. Gaining influence on the southern Chinese population, the Taiping Rebellion attracted tens of thousands of supporters. The Taiping regime successfully created a state within the Qing Empire with the capital at Nanjing. Hong called his new state the Taiping Tianguo or "The Heavenly State of Great Peace". Local armies eventually suppressed the rebellion at the final battle of Nanjing.

In 1911, the Republic of China was founded after the Xinhai revolution led by Sun Yat-sen, but its government was very weak. Warlords controlled many areas. Chiang Kai-shek led wars against them, and he became president and dictator.

In 1931, Japan invaded Manchuria, a place in the northeastern part of China. On July 7, 1937, the Japanese attacked the rest of the country, starting what was called the Second Sino-Japanese War.

On December 13 of that same year, The Japanese Army killed an estimated (guessed) 200,000 to 300,000 Chinese civilians (people) which is called Nanjing Massacre. The war later became part of World War II. The war was fought for eight years and millions of Chinese people were killed.

However, the Chinese Civil War later started between the Kuomintang (Nationalists) of the Republic of China (ROC) and the Communists of the People's Republic of China (PRC). The Communists wanted to make China like the Soviet Union, whereas the other side wanted to keep China in its current state at the time. The Communists were led by Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi, Zhou Enlai and others. The Communists eventually won the war by uniting all the people from different positions. The Nationalists (led by Chiang Kai-shek) fled to the island of Taiwan and set up their new capital city in Taipei. After the Chinese Civil War, the Communist leader Mao Zedong declared a new country, the People's Republic of China (PRC), in Beijing on October 1, 1949.

Under Mao the country stayed poor while Taiwan became richer. His attempt at industrialization and collectivization with the Great Leap Forward led to the deaths of many people from famine. The Cultural Revolution caused great social upheaval. After 1976, China underwent market economy reforms under Deng Xiaoping, and experienced rapid economic growth, which made the former progress made by Taiwan became overshadowed. China is now one of the largest economies in the world, relying mainly on exports and manufacturing. China incorporates English, and (since the 2000s) the percentage of people who can speak English fluently is slowly increasing.

China's landscape is vast and diverse. It ranges from the Gobi and Taklamakan Deserts in the north to subtropical forests in the south. The Himalaya, Karakoram, Pamir and Tian Shan mountain ranges separate China from much of South and Central Asia. The Yangtze and Yellow Rivers run from the Tibetan Plateau to the densely populated eastern coast. The Yangtze River is the third-longest river in the world while the Yellow River is the sixth-longest. China's coastline along the Pacific Ocean is 14,500 kilometers (9,000 mi) long. It is bounded by the Bohai, Yellow, East China and South China seas. China connects through the Kazakh border to the Eurasian Steppe, which has been an artery of communication between East and West since the Neolithic through the Steppe route. The Steppe Route is the ancestor of the terrestrial Silk Road(s).

China was once a world leader in science and technology up until the Ming dynasty. There are many Ancient Chinese discoveries and inventions. For example, papermaking, printing, the compass, and gunpowder are known as the Four Great Inventions. They became widespread across East Asia, the Middle East and later to Europe. Chinese mathematicians were the first to use negative numbers. By the 17th century, Europe and the Western world became better than China in science and technology.

The national census of 2010 recorded the population of the People's Republic of China to be about 1,370,536,875. About 16.60% of the population were 14 years old or younger, 70.14% were between 15 and 59 years old, and 13.26% were over 60 years old. The population growth rate for 2013 is estimated to be 0.46%.

Before 1911, the language was written in "classical Chinese" (different grammar, et cetera). After the Qing dynasty, the revolutionists and scholars didn't like it, so written Chinese was changed quickly. By 1921, the language had been largely written in "modern Chinese" (based on the spoken language of north-eastern China). As for the romanization of Chinese, nowadays, mainland Chinese use pinyin. Taiwanese use the zhuyin (not in roman letters) and traditional Chinese characters instead. The common language is called Mandarin. The Min Nan mainland Chinese and the Taiwanese understand each other. Generally, the degree of mutual intelligibility between speakers of different dialects is low (only understand the other speaker a little bit).  A dialect may or may not have a standard writing system.

This page only states the six most popular dialects. 5. Xiang (湘语) (36,000,000 speakers in 1990s); 6. Gan language; For example, Mao Zedong spoke the Xiang dialect as his mother tongue, whereas Chiang Kai-shek spoke Chinese with a strong Wu accent.

China is the origin of Eastern martial arts, called Kung Fu or its first name Wushu. China is also the home of the well-respected Spa Monastery and Wudang Mountains. Martial art started more for the purpose of survival, defense, and warfare than art. Over time some art forms have branched off, while others have retained their distinct Chinese flavor.

China has had renowned artists including Wong Fei Hung (Huang Fei Hung or Hwang Fei Hung) and many others. Art has also co-existed with a variety of paints including the more standard 18 colors. Legendary and controversial moves like Big Mak are also praised and talked about within the culture.

China has many traditional festivals, such as Spring Festival, Dragon Boat Festival, Mid-autumn Festival and so on. The most important is Chinese New Year. People in China will have holidays to celebrate these festivals.

Spring Festival, also known as the Chinese New Year, is celebrated to honor the first day of the lunar year. During the festival, people reunite with family and eat a big dinner, often consisting of fish and rice cakes. People often lay decorations in households such as red lanterns to honor fortunes, joy, and prosperity, leaving behind troubles from last year. They also wish their loved ones good luck by sending red envelopes containing money to their families.

Dragon Boat Festival is celebrated to honor the death of Qu Yuan, a patriotic poet of the State of Chu during the Warring States period. He persuaded his emperor not to accept Qin's diplomats' offers several times but his emperor did not listen to him. He was very sad and ended up jumping into the river to end his life. The people loved him so much that they did not want the fish to eat his corpse. They made and threw rice dumplings into the river. They hope the fish eat these dumplings instead of the poet's corpse. They also rowed dragon boats in the river to get rid of the fish. Such practices, eating rice dumplings and holding dragon boat races, become what Chinese do in this festival nowadays.

Held on the fifteenth day of the eighth lunar month, Mid-Autumn Festival is a festival for families. Now when the festival sets in, people would sit together to eat moon cakes, appreciate the bright full moon cakes, appreciate the bright full moon, celebrate the bumper harvest and enjoy the family love and happiness. To the Chinese people, the full moon symbolizes family reunion, as does the "moon cakes." Hence the Mid-Autumn Festival is also called the Family Reunion Festival.

China's constitution states that The People's Republic of China "is a socialist state under the people's democratic dictatorship led by the working class and based on the alliance of workers and peasants". It also states the state organs "apply the principle of democratic centralism." The PRC is one of the world's only socialist states openly being communist.

The CCP is the founding and ruling political party of the People's Republic of China (PRC). Established in 1921, it rose to power in 1949 under the leadership of Mao Zedong after defeating the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) in the Chinese Civil War. The CCP operates under a one-party system, maintaining strict control over the government, military, economy, and media. It follows a socialist ideology with Chinese characteristics, blending Marxist-Leninist principles with economic reforms introduced by Deng Xiaoping in the late 20th century. Under its leadership, China has grown into the world's second-largest economy while maintaining tight political control through censorship, surveillance, and a strong security apparatus. Today, the CCP continues to shape China's domestic and foreign policies, emphasizing national unity, economic development, and global influence.

To chat is to talk about ordinary things that are not usually very important. However, important issues can also classify as “chat”, for instance when organising gatherings, meetings or events, such as air show attendance.  A person can chat with another person, or to many people. People also use this word now for parts of the Internet where we can talk with many different people at the same time. Usually, people chat on the Internet in a chat room or messaging service like AOL Instant Messenger (AIM), Yahoo Messenger Windows Live Messenger or Tencent QQ. There are also programs which let people use different messaging services from one program, such as Pidgin.

Online Chat is real time, text-based, digital communication between two or more parties.

Europe is the western part of the continent of Eurasia, often thought of as its own continent. It is separated from Asia by the Ural Mountains in Russia and the Bosporus strait in Turkey.

Europe is bordered by water on three sides. On the west is the Atlantic Ocean. To the north is the Arctic Ocean. The Mediterranean Sea separates Southeastern Europe from the continent of Africa. On the eastern border of Europe are the Ural River and Ural Mountains.

There are at least 44 or 51 countries in Europe (the European identities of 7 countries: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Russia and Turkey are disputed). Most of these countries are members of the European Union.

Europe covers about 10,180,000 square kilometre (3,930,000 square miles). This is 2% of the Earth's surface (6.8% of its land area).

Europe contains the world's second most-active volcano, which is Mount Etna that is currently the most-active volcano in the continent.

Europe is a major tourist attraction. People come from all over the world to see its many World Heritage Sites and other attractions. The continent has the largest Roma population in the world.

Europe is named after a princess in Greek mythology called "Europa." The myth says that Zeus kidnapped Europa and took her to Crete, where she became the mother of King Minos (from whom Europe’s first civilization gets its name, the Minoans).

The name "Europa" was later used to describe Greece. Then, as the rest of modern-day Europe started to have cities and empires, the entire area West of the Ural Mountains came to be called "Europa".

The history of Europe is long and has many turns. Many great countries originated from Europe. Greek mythology and the beginning of western civilization came from European nations.

Andreas M. Kaplan describes modern Europe as a continent where many different cultures live closely together, "embracing maximum cultural diversity at minimal geographical distances".

Within these regions, there are up to 51 independent European countries (with the identities of 7 transcontinental countries being disputed). The largest is the Russian Federation, which covers 39% of Europe.

The largest cities in Europe are Istanbul, Moscow, London, St. Petersburg and Berlin. The country with the largest population is the Russian Federation. About 15% of Europeans live in Russia.

Two European countries, the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland, are on islands called the British Isles.

However, there are many different climates throughout Europe. For example, during the winter, it may be snowing and -30 degrees Celsius for 4–5 months in the north of Europe. Yet it may be much warmer, with no snow at all except on high mountains, in Spain.

The European Union is a confederation of 27 European countries. These countries agree to follow common laws so that their citizens can move and trade in EU countries almost the same as they do in their own. Twenty of these countries also share the same type of money: the euro.

Earth is the third planet from the Sun and the only place known where life exists. One big reason life can exist here is that Earth has a lot of water on its surface, being the only planet in our Solar System with liquid water. Most of Earth’s water is in the oceans, which cover about 71% of the planet’s surface. The rest, about 29%, is land. Most of this land is grouped into large continents, like North America, Africa, and Asia, which are mostly humid and covered with plants, while the icy parts at the North and South Poles hold more water in their ice sheets than all of the lakes, rivers, and underground water combined. Earth’s outer layer, called the crust, is made of big pieces called tectonic plates that slowly move around and sometimes bump into each other, creating mountains, volcanoes, and earthquakes. Deep inside Earth, there is a liquid outer core that creates a magnetic field around the planet, called the magnetosphere. It shields the Earth's surface from most of the harmful solar winds and cosmic radiation.

Earth has an atmosphere, which is a layer of gases that surrounds the planet. Most of the atmosphere is made of nitrogen and oxygen. There is also water vapor in the air, which forms clouds that cover much of the planet. The water vapor and other gases, like carbon dioxide, help trap energy from the Sun. It also blocks most meteoroids and harmful ultraviolet (UV) light from hitting the Earth. The atmosphere keeps temperatures normal through the greenhouse effect. You can think of it like a blanket around Earth: it keeps the planet warm enough for liquid water to exist on the surface. Because of this, the average temperature on Earth is about 15 °C (59 °F), which keeps water a liquid instead of freezing or evaporating. Different parts of Earth get different amounts of sunlight. For example, the equator gets more sunlight than the poles. This difference causes winds in the atmosphere and currents in the oceans, moving heat and water around the planet. These movements create different climate zones like deserts, rainforests, and polar regions. They also cause weather events like rain and snow and help elements like carbon and nitrogen move through the environment.

Earth is shaped like a slightly squashed ball, called an ellipsoid. If you could travel all the way around it at the equator, you would cover about 40,000 kilometers (about 25,000 miles). Earth has the most mass for its size of all the planets in our Solar System. Among the four rocky planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, Earth is the largest and heaviest. Earth is about 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from the Sun. Light from the Sun takes about eight minutes to reach the Earth. Earth travels around the Sun in an orbit, taking one year, about 365.25 days, to complete a full circle. Earth also spins around its axis once every day, which takes about 23 hours and 56 minutes. Earth's axis is tilted a little bit away from the Sun, which is why it has seasons: the Sun shines on one side of Earth more, creating summer, and one side less, creating winter. Earth has one natural satellite, the Moon. The Moon orbits Earth at about 384,400 kilometers (238,855 miles). The Moon is about one-quarter the size of Earth. Its gravity helps keep the Earth’s tilt stable, creates tides in the oceans, and makes Earth spin a little slower over time. Earth’s gravity locks the Moon so that the same side always faces Earth.

Earth formed about 4.5 billion years ago from clouds of gas and dust in the early Solar System. During the first billion years, oceans formed on Earth, and soon after, life began in these waters. Over time, life spread all over the planet and started changing the air and the surface of Earth, leading to the Great Oxidation Event about 2 billion years ago, the point when oxygen first became common in the atmosphere. Humans appeared around 300,000 years ago, starting in Africa and eventually spreading to every continent. People use Earth’s plants, animals, water, and other natural resources to survive. As human populations have grown and technology has advanced, humans have started to change the environment in big ways. Today, human activities are affecting Earth’s climate and ecosystems in ways that are not sustainable, causing problems like climate change, loss of habitats, and extinction of species that threaten humans and many other species.

The English word Earth comes from the Old English word . Similar words exist in many Germanic languages, and scientists think they all come from an even older word called Proto-Germanic erþō. The word  was used to mean many things. It could mean the ground, the soil, dry land, the human world, the surface of the planet (including the seas), or even the planet as a whole.

In the past, the word “earth” was usually written with a lowercase “e.” Today, people sometimes write “Earth” with a capital letter, like the names of other planets. However, the lowercase form “earth” is still common. Different books and style guides have different rules.

The planet Earth has had other names throughout history. Terra, a Latin name, is one of these names. English words like terrestrial (meaning "related to Earth") come from this name. Some Romance languages use Terra or similar words as the name for Earth. For example, Italian and Portuguese still call it Terra. In Spanish, it became Tierra, and in French, it became Terre. The Greek name for Earth was Gaia, or sometimes spelled Gaea in English. This name is used less often.

The oldest solid stuff in the Solar System is made of tiny pieces called CAIs, which stands for calcium–aluminium-rich inclusions. These pieces are found in some very old meteorites. Scientists have measured them and found that they are about 4.568 billion years old. These were the very first solid materials that formed from a big cloud of gas and dust in space, called the solar nebula, which later made the Sun and planets. Earth formed a little later, around 4.54 billion years ago.

A long time ago, there was a huge cloud of gas and dust in space called a molecular cloud. Gravity pulled part of this cloud together, which made it shrink, spin, and flatten into a disk around the forming Sun. This disk is called the solar nebula. It had gas, ice, dust, and even radioactive materials like uranium and thorium, which gave off heat as they broke down. Tiny dust particles in the disk bumped into each other and stuck together. Over time, these clumps grew into larger rocks called planetesimals, which were the building blocks of planets. Earth grew by slowly collecting these pieces, a process called accretion, which took about 70 to 100 million years. As smaller bodies crashed into the growing Earth, they created a lot of heat, melting parts of the planet. When Earth first formed, it was very hot and mostly molten, like a giant ball of lava. Over time, it cooled and separated into layers. The heaviest metals sank to make the core, lighter rocks formed the mantle, and the outer layer became a basic crust.

Scientists are still studying how the Moon formed. They think it is about 4.5 billion years old, but it might be a little younger depending on how it is measured. The most accepted idea is called the Giant Impact Hypothesis. According to this idea, a planet-sized object called Theia, about one-tenth the size of Earth, collided with early Earth. The collision was not straight-on but more like a glancing blow. Pieces of Theia and Earth’s outer layer broke off, forming a ring of debris around Earth. This debris later came together to make the Moon. The collision also changed Earth’s spin and tilted its axis.

After the Moon formed, the inner Solar System went through a time called the Late Heavy Bombardment, about 4.0 to 3.8 billion years ago. During this time, many asteroids and comets crashed into the Moon and Earth, making large craters on the Moon, like Imbrium, Serenitatis, and Crisium. Some impacts may have melted parts of the Moon’s crust and caused volcanic activity. On Earth, these impacts affected the surface and atmosphere and might have helped life start by bringing water and organic molecules, or by creating hot underwater areas called hydrothermal vents, which can support life. Scientists think the movements of giant planets, like Jupiter and Saturn, may have disturbed the orbits of asteroids and comets, sending them toward the inner planets and causing this heavy bombardment.

Most of Earth’s air and water came from volcanoes. When volcanoes erupted, they released gases trapped inside the planet. This process is called outgassing. These gases included water vapor, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and small amounts of other gases. The water vapor cooled down and formed the first oceans. Some water also came from space, brought by asteroids, icy protoplanets, and comets. These space objects added more water from different parts of the Solar System. Scientists think there might have been enough water to fill today’s oceans very soon after Earth formed, so our planet was basically “wet” from the start.

Back then, the young Sun was only about 70% as bright as it is now. Normally, this would have made Earth very cold. But greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane trapped heat, keeping the oceans from freezing. This made Earth warm enough for liquid water, which is important for life. Around 3.5 billion years ago, Earth also developed a magnetic field, created by the movement of molten iron in the core. This magnetic field acted like a shield, protecting the atmosphere from being blown away by the solar wind, which helped Earth keep its water and stay stable for life.

As Earth cooled, the molten outer layer hardened to form the first crust, mostly made of mafic rocks that are rich in iron and magnesium but low in silica. Later, the first pieces of continental crust appeared. These rocks were more felsic, meaning they had more silica, aluminum, potassium, and sodium. Scientists think these formed when parts of the mafic crust melted at very high temperatures, helped by early tectonic activity or mantle plumes.

The oldest continental crust is known from tiny minerals called zircons, some of which date back to 4.4 billion years ago, only about 140 million years after Earth formed. Scientists are still figuring out how these small pieces of crust grew into the large continents we have today. Some think growth was slow and steady over billions of years. Others think most continents formed quickly during the Archean eon. Both ideas could be true because the crust was constantly recycled, subducted, eroded, and melted, changing early continents over time.

New continental crust still forms today thanks to plate tectonics, which is the movement of large pieces of Earth’s crust. Heat from inside Earth causes mantle convection, where hot rock slowly rises and sinks. This drives processes like subduction (one plate sliding under another) and volcanoes. Over millions of years, these movements cause continents to come together into supercontinents and then break apart. For example:

The movement and collision of continents affect Earth’s surface, climate, oceans, and life. When continents collide, they form mountains. When they pull apart, they create valleys and basins where sediments collect. These changes have influenced the evolution of plants, animals, and humans over millions of years.

Earth’s climate has gone through many ice ages, when large parts of the planet were covered in ice. These started around 40 million years ago and became very strong during the Pleistocene epoch (~3 million years ago). Areas far from the equator went through repeated cycles of glaciation (ice sheets growing) and thawing (ice melting). These cycles happen because of small changes in Earth’s orbit and tilt, called Milankovitch cycles, which change how sunlight hits Earth roughly every 21,000, 41,000, and 100,000 years. The most recent ice age, called the Last Glacial Period, covered large parts of continents with thick ice sheets. It ended about 11,700 years ago, marking the start of the Holocene epoch. Since then, Earth’s climate has been relatively stable, which allowed humans to build civilizations and thrive.

Scientists think life on Earth began about 4 billion years ago. It likely started with simple chemical reactions that made the first molecules able to copy themselves. These molecules were probably short pieces of RNA, which is similar to DNA. RNA is important because it can both store instructions (like a recipe book) and speed up chemical reactions. The fact that these molecules could copy and change over time was the very beginning of evolution. Around 3.5 billion years ago, something very important appeared: the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA). LUCA was not the very first life, but it was the ancestor of all living things we know today, from bacteria and archaea to plants and animals. LUCA already had the basic tools of life that every organism still uses. It could copy DNA, read it into RNA, and build proteins from those instructions. It also had ways to get energy, either from chemical reactions or from sunlight. In other words, LUCA was like the great-grandparent of all life on Earth, passing down the same core tools that living things still use billions of years later.

A huge change in Earth’s history happened when some bacteria learned how to do photosynthesis, the process of using sunlight to make energy. Plants do this today, but the first organisms to do it were tiny bacteria called cyanobacteria. When they made energy from sunlight, they released oxygen as waste. At first, Earth’s air had almost no oxygen. But over hundreds of millions of years, oxygen built up in the atmosphere. About 2.4 billion years ago, during the Great Oxidation Event, oxygen became much more common. Some of this oxygen turned into the ozone layer, a shield high above Earth that blocks dangerous UV rays from the Sun. Thanks to this protection, life could eventually move from the oceans onto land. Oxygen also changed the way life got energy. Before oxygen, organisms used less efficient methods that did not give them much power. But with oxygen, they could do aerobic respiration, which makes much more energy from food like glucose. This extra energy allowed larger and more complex life to evolve.

Another big step was when life went from simple cells to complex cells. This happened through a process called endosymbiosis, which means “living together inside.” Long ago, some small cells started living inside bigger ones. Instead of being eaten, the smaller cells became permanent helpers. Over time, they turned into organelles, special parts of complex cells. For example, mitochondria make energy, and chloroplasts (in plants) do photosynthesis. These new complex cells are called eukaryotic cells, and they have a nucleus (a control center). Eventually, they started living in groups. At first, they formed loose colonies, but later they became multicellular organisms, where cells had different jobs, like protecting, gathering food, or reproducing. This teamwork made life much more advanced. Meanwhile, the ozone layer kept protecting Earth, allowing living things to slowly spread from oceans to land.

Scientists have found fossils that prove life is very old. For example, tiny structures made by microorganisms have been found in rocks 3.45–3.7 billion years old. Even some rocks from 4.1 billion years ago show signs of life. These fossils include microbial mats (thin layers of bacteria), tiny cell-like shapes, and special carbon (graphite) that likely came from living things. Much later, between 1,000 and 539 million years ago, Earth may have gone through a frozen period called Snowball Earth, when ice covered nearly the whole planet, even near the equator. After this icy time came the Cambrian explosion about 535 million years ago. Life suddenly became much more diverse. Many major groups of animals we know today first appeared then, including animals with shells, backbones, and specialized body parts.

Over Earth’s history, there have been at least five major mass extinctions. A mass extinction is when a huge number of species die in a short time. Each one reshaped ecosystems and forced life to evolve in new ways. The most famous mass extinction happened about 66 million years ago when a giant asteroid hit near today’s Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico. This caused massive climate changes and wiped out the dinosaurs that could not fly (non-avian dinosaurs) along with many other reptiles. But smaller animals, like mammals, birds, lizards, and insects, survived. Because of this, mammals had the chance to grow and spread, eventually becoming the dominant animals on Earth.

After the dinosaurs died out, mammals quickly evolved to fill many different roles. Some stayed small and fast, while others grew large. A few million years ago, one type of ape in Africa changed in an important way. It started walking on two legs. This freed up its hands to carry things and make tools. Tool use encouraged more complex communication and the growth of larger brains. This path eventually led to the first humans. Humans changed the world in powerful ways. They learned farming, tamed animals like dogs and cows, and built civilizations. These advances let humans shape the land, grow in numbers, and change entire ecosystems. Today, human activity is causing many plants and animals to go extinct much faster than normal. Cutting down forests, polluting air and water, hunting too much, and causing climate change are all big factors. Many scientists believe we may now be living through a new mass extinction, called the Holocene extinction, caused mostly by humans.

Earth is shaped like a round ball, but it is not a perfect sphere. Its shape is kept by a balance between two main forces. Gravity pulls everything toward Earth’s center, while pressure inside the planet and Earth’s spinning motion push outward. Together, these forces make Earth mostly round. Earth’s average diameter is about 12,742 kilometers (7,918 miles), making it the fifth largest planet in the Solar System. Only the giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, are bigger. Earth is the largest rocky planet, bigger than Mercury, Venus, and Mars. Being this big gives Earth enough gravity to hold onto a thick atmosphere, which helps life survive. Smaller planets, like Mars, lost much of their air over time because they don’t have enough gravity to keep it.

Because Earth spins once every 24 hours, it is not perfectly round. It bulges slightly at the equator and is a bit flattened at the poles. Scientists call this shape an oblate spheroid. The equator is about 43 kilometers (27 miles) wider than the distance from pole to pole. This happens because of centrifugal force, a pushing-out effect caused by spinning. Earth spins fastest at the equator, about 1,670 km/h (1,040 mph), while the poles do not spin at all. The equatorial radius (distance from the center to the equator) is about 6,378 km (3,963 miles). The polar radius is slightly smaller at 6,357 km (3,950 miles).

Earth’s surface is not smooth. Tectonic activity, erosion, volcanoes, and the movement of rocks create mountains, valleys, and trenches. The deepest place is the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean, about 10,925 meters (35,843 feet) below sea level. The tallest mountain on land is Mount Everest, rising 8,848 meters (29,029 feet) above sea level. But the place farthest from Earth’s center is not Everest, it is Chimborazo, a volcano in Ecuador. It is only 6,263 meters (20,548 feet) tall, but because it sits near the equator, where Earth bulges, its peak is 2 kilometers farther from the center than Everest.

Just like land has mountains and valleys, the oceans have their own shapes, but they are not solid. Ocean surfaces are always moving because of winds, tides, currents, gravity, and Earth’s spin. Some parts of the ocean are slightly higher because strong gravity pulls water toward denser rocks under the seafloor. Ocean currents are affected by the Coriolis effect, caused by Earth’s spin, creating big circular patterns called gyres. For example, in the Pacific Ocean, the surface in the western Pacific is about 60 centimeters (2 feet) higher than in the eastern Pacific because of trade winds and ocean circulation.

Scientists study Earth’s real shape in a field called geodesy. Instead of looking at uneven land and moving oceans, they use a model called the geoid. The geoid shows what Earth would look like if it were covered with perfectly still water, no waves, tides, or winds. The geoid is not a perfect sphere or simple oval. It is slightly bumpy, because some parts of Earth’s crust and mantle are denser, creating stronger gravity in those spots. The geoid is very useful because it acts as a baseline for measuring heights and depths, like how tall mountains are or how deep the oceans go. Today, satellites like GRACE and GOCE have mapped the geoid in incredible detail. They help scientists track important changes on Earth, like rising sea levels, melting ice sheets, and shrinking groundwater, with accuracy down to just a few centimeters.

The surface of Earth is where land, oceans, and the atmosphere all meet. It is the part of the planet where life happens, plants grow, animals live, humans build cities, and water moves in rivers, lakes, and the ocean. Earth’s surface is very large, covering about 510 million square kilometers (197 million square miles), giving plenty of space for ecosystems, farms, and people. We can divide Earth’s surface in two main ways. First is by latitude, which are lines that go east to west. This splits Earth into the Northern Hemisphere (above the equator) and the Southern Hemisphere (below the equator). Second is by longitude, which are lines that go north to south. This divides Earth into the Eastern Hemisphere and the Western Hemisphere, using the Prime Meridian and the 180th meridian as rough dividing lines. These divisions help scientists and people understand climate, ocean currents, where plants and animals live, and also help with navigation and maps.

Most of Earth’s surface, about 70.8% or 361 million square kilometers (139 million square miles), is covered by oceans. This huge, connected body of water is called the world ocean, making Earth a true ocean world. The oceans are always moving, with currents, tides, and waves that help control climate and move nutrients that living things need. Long ago, oceans may have covered almost the entire planet, hiding the first land. Today, the world ocean is divided into five major oceans, from largest to smallest: Pacific, Atlantic, Indian, Southern, and Arctic Oceans. Under the oceans is oceanic crust, which forms deep basins and has many interesting features, like abyssal plains (flat areas), seamounts (underwater mountains), submarine volcanoes, ocean trenches, oceanic plateaus, mid-ocean ridges, where new crust forms from volcanic activity. In the polar regions, the ocean is covered by sea ice during part of the year. The ice, along with polar land and ice sheets, forms the polar ice caps, which affect how much sunlight Earth reflects back into space and also influence ocean currents.

The remaining 29.2% of Earth’s surface, about 149 million square kilometers (58 million square miles), is land. This includes continents and islands. The four biggest landmasses are Afro-Eurasia, America, Antarctica, and Australia. Land is divided into continents to make it easier to study geography and human cultures. Earth’s land is very diverse, with mountains, deserts, plains, plateaus, and other landforms. The lowest exposed point is the Dead Sea, 418 meters (1,371 feet) below sea level. The highest point is Mount Everest, which rises 8,848 meters (29,029 feet) above sea level. On average, land sits about 797 meters (2,615 feet) above sea level, showing that most land is much lower than the tallest mountains but far above the ocean floors.

Earth’s land is made up of a mix of plants, water, snow, ice, and human buildings, which creates very different environments. Most land has vegetation, like forests and grasslands, which help hold soil in place and provide homes for animals. Some areas are much harsher: about 10% of land is covered by ice sheets, and about 33% is desert, where it is hard for most plants and animals to survive. The top layer of land is called the pedosphere, or soil. Soil forms from weathered rocks, decomposed plants and animals, and the cycling of minerals. Soil is very important because it supports ecosystems and growing food. Only about 10.7% of land can be used for farming crops (arable land), and about 1.3% is permanent cropland that grows food for people. Worldwide, there are around 16.7 million square kilometers (6.4 million square miles) of cropland and 33.5 million square kilometers (12.9 million square miles) of pastureland, which is used for grazing animals. These lands are essential for life on Earth.

Beneath the land and oceans is the Earth’s crust, the planet’s outer layer. Together with part of the upper mantle, it forms the lithosphere, which is the solid, rigid shell of Earth. The crust comes in two main types. The oceanic crust is thinner, heavier, and made mostly of basalt, a dark dense rock. It forms the ocean floors. The continental crust is thicker, lighter, and made of granite, as well as sedimentary and metamorphic rocks. It supports mountains and continents. Most of the continents are covered by sedimentary rocks, formed from material worn down from other rocks and deposited over time. These rocks cover about 75% of continental surfaces, but they only make up 5% of the crust’s total mass, showing that the surface does not fully represent what the crust is made of.

Earth is one of the eight planets in the Solar System. There are also thousands of small bodies which move around the Sun. The Solar System is moving through the Orion Arm of the Milky Way galaxy, and will be for about the next 10,000 years.

Earth is about  away from the Sun (this distance is called an "astronomical unit" or au. It moves on its orbit at an average speed of about . Earth turns around about 365 times in the time it takes for Earth to go all the way around the Sun. To make up this extra bit of a day every year, an additional day is added to the calendar every four years (29 February). A year that has this extra day is called a "leap year".

The Moon goes around Earth at an average distance of . It is locked to Earth, so that it always has the same half facing Earth; the other half is called the "dark side of the moon". It takes about 27 days for the Moon to go all the way around Earth, but because Earth is moving around the Sun at the same time, it takes about 29 days for the Moon to go from dark to bright to dark again. This is where the word "month" came from, even though most months now have 30 or 31 days.

Earth is rocky. It is the largest of the rocky planets moving around the Sun by mass and by size. It is much smaller than the gas giants such as Jupiter.

Overall, Earth is made of iron (32.1%), oxygen (30.1%), silicon (15.1%), magnesium (13.9%), sulfur (2.9%), nickel (1.8%), calcium (1.5%), and aluminium (1.4%). The 1.2% left over is made of many different kinds of other chemicals. Some rare metals (not just gold and platinum) are very valuable. Rare earth metals are often used in electronic phones and computers.

The structure of Earth changes from the inside to the outside. The center of Earth (Earth's core) is mostly iron (88.8%), nickel (5.8%), sulfur (4.5%), and less than 1% other elements. The Earth's crust is largely oxygen (47%). Oxygen is normally a gas but it can join with other chemicals to make compounds like water and rocks. 99.22% of rocks have oxygen in them. The most common rocks with oxygen are silica (made with silicon), alumina (made with aluminium), rust (made with iron), lime (made with calcium), magnesia (made with magnesium), potash (made with potassium), and sodium oxide.

Being rich in metals such as iron, the Earth is the densest of all the planets. Mercury and Venus are slightly less dense.

Earth's shape is a spheroid: not quite a sphere because it is slightly squashed on the top and bottom. The shape is called an oblate spheroid. As Earth spins around itself, centrifugal force forces the equator out a little and pulls the poles in a little. The equator, around the middle of Earth's surface, is about  long. The reason the Earth is roughly a sphere (and so are all planets and stars) is gravity. Meteorites, on the other hand may be any shape because, in their case, the force of gravity is too weak to change their shape.

The highest mountain above sea level the well-known Mount Everest (which is  above sea level) is not actually the one that is the farthest away from the center of the Earth. Instead, the sleeping volcano Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador is; it is only  above sea level but it is almost at the equator. Because of this, Mount Chimborazo is  from the center of the Earth, while Mount Everest is closer to it (). Similarly, the lowest point below sea level that we are conscious of is the Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench in the Pacific Ocean. It is about  below sea level, but, again, there are probably places at the bottom of the Arctic Ocean that are nearer to the center of the Earth.

The deepest hole ever dug is only about . We know something about the inside of the Earth, because we learn things from earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. We can detect how quickly shock waves move through the Earth.

The inside of Earth is very different from the outside. Almost all of Earth's liquid water is in the seas or close to the surface. The surface also has a lot of oxygen, which comes from plants. Small and simple kinds of life can live far under the surface, but animals and plants only live on the surface or in the seas. The rocks on the surface of Earth (Earth's crust) are well known. They are thicker where there is land, between  thick. Under the seas they are sometimes only  thick.

There are three groups of rocks that make up most of the Earth's crust. Some rock is made when the hot liquid rock comes from inside the earth (igneous rocks); another type of rock is made when sediment is laid down, usually under the sea (sedimentary rocks); and a third kind of rock is made when the other two are changed by very high temperature or pressure (metamorphic rocks).

Below the crust is hot and almost-liquid rock which is always moving around (the Earth's mantle). Then, there is a thin liquid layer of heated rock (the outer core). This is very hot: . The middle of the inside of the Earth would be liquid as well but all the pressure of the rock above it makes it a solid. This solid middle part (the inner core) is almost all iron. It is what makes the Earth magnetic.

The Earth's crust is solid but made of parts which move very slowly. The thin skin of hard rock on the outside of the Earth rests on hot liquid material below it in the deeper mantle. This liquid material moves because it gets heat from the hot center of the Earth. The slow movement of the plates is a factor in earthquakes, volcanoes and large groups of mountains on the Earth.

There are three ways plates can come together. Two plates can move towards each other ("convergent" plate edges). This can form islands, volcanoes, and high mountain ranges (such as the Andes and Himalayas). Two plates can move away from each other ("divergent" plate edges). This gives the warm liquid rock inside the earth a place to come out. This makes special mountain ranges below the sea or large low lands like Africa's Great Rift Valley. Plates are able to move beside each other as well ("transform" plate edges, such as the San Andreas Fault). This makes their edges crush against each other and makes many shocks as they move.

The outside of the Earth is not even. There are high places called mountains, and high flat places called plateaus or plateaux. There are low places called valleys and canyons. For the most part, moving air and water from the sky and seas eats away at rocks in high places and breaks them into small pieces. The air and water then move these pieces to lower places. The fundamental cause of the differences in the Earth's surface is plate tectonics. The shape of the entire planet itself is not an exactly a ball. Because of its spin, Earth has a slight bulge at the Equator.

All places on Earth are made of, or are on top of, rocks. The outside of the Earth is usually not uncovered rock. Over 70% of the Earth is covered by seas full of salty water. This salty water makes up about 97% of all Earth's water. The drinkable fresh water is mostly in the form of ice. There is only a small amount (less than 3%) of fresh water in rivers and under the ground for people to drink. Gravity stops the water from going away into outer space. Also, much of the land on Earth is covered with plants, or with what is left from earlier living things. Places with very little rain are dry wastes called deserts. Deserts usually have few living things, but life is able to grow very quickly when these wastes have rainfall. Places with large amounts of rain may be rain forests. Lately, people have changed the environment of the Earth a great deal. As population has increased, so has farming. Farming is done on what were once natural forests and grassland.

All around the Earth is the of air (the atmosphere). The mass of the Earth holds the gases in the air down and does not let them go into outer space. The air is mostly made of nitrogen (about 78%) and oxygen (about 21%) and there are a few other gases as well. Living things need both the air and water.

The air, which animals and plants use to live, is only the first level of the air around the Earth (the troposphere). The day to day changes in this level of air are called weather; the larger differences between distant places, and from year to year, are called the climate. Rain and storms come about because this part of the air gets colder as it goes up. Cold air becomes thicker and falls, and warm air becomes thinner and goes up. The turning Earth also moves the air as well and air moves north and south because the middle of the Earth generally gets more power from the Sun and is warmer than the north and south points. Air over warm water evaporates but, because cold air is not able to take in as much water, it starts to make clouds and rain as it gets colder. The way water moves around in a circle like this is called the water cycle.

Above this first level, there are four other levels. The air gets colder as it goes up in the first level; in the second level (the stratosphere), the air gets warmer as it goes up. This level has a special kind of oxygen called ozone. The ozone in this air keeps living things safe from damaging rays from the Sun. The power from these rays is what makes this level warmer and warmer. The middle level (the mesosphere) gets colder and colder with height; the fourth level (the thermosphere) gets warmer and warmer; and the last level (the exosphere) is almost outer space and has very little air at all. It reaches about half the way to the Moon. The three outer levels have a lot of electric power moving through them; this is called the ionosphere and is important for radio and other electric waves in the air.

Even though air seems very light, the weight of all of the air above the outside of the Earth (air pressure) is important. Generally, from sea level to the top of the outer level of the air, a space of air one cm2 across has a mass of about 1.03 kg and a space of air one sq in across has a weight of about 14.7 lb. Because of friction in the air, small meteorites generally burn up long before they get to the Earth.

The air also keeps the Earth warm, specially the half turned away from the Sun. Some gases   especially methane and carbon dioxide   work like a blanket to keep things warm. This is called the Greenhouse Effect. In the past, the Earth has been much warmer and much colder than it is now. Since people have adapted to the heat we have now, we do not want the Earth to be too much warmer or colder. Most of the ways people create electric power use burning kinds of carbon   especially coal, oil, and natural gas. Burning these fuels creates more carbon dioxide which causes more warming. A discussion is going on now about what people should do about the Earth's latest warming, which has gone on for about 150 years. So far, this warming has been acceptable: plants have grown better. The weather has generally been better than when it was colder.

About eight billion people live on Earth. They live in about 200 different lands called countries. Some, for example, Russia, are large with many large cities. Others, for example, Vatican City, are small. The seven countries with the most people are India, China, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan, Brazil and Nigeria. About 90% of people live in the northern hemisphere of the world, which has most of the land. Human beings originally came from Africa. Now, 70% of all people do not live in Africa but in Europe and Asia.

People change the Earth in many ways. They have been able to grow plants for food and clothes for about ten thousand years. When there was enough food, they were able to build towns and cities. Near these places, men and women were able to change rivers, bring water to farms, and stop floods (rising water) from coming over their land. People found useful animals and bred them so they were easier to keep.

There is wide agreement that the long-term future of Earth is tied to the future of the Sun. This is because the Sun’s energy controls our climate, atmosphere, and even our orbit. As the Sun changes over time, Earth will change too. In the next 1.1 billion years, the Sun will shine about 10% brighter than today. That might not sound like much, but it will make Earth much hotter. In about 3.5 billion years, the Sun could be 40% brighter, making Earth almost impossible for life to survive. This happens because inside the Sun, hydrogen is fused into helium. As the core changes, the Sun slowly shines more strongly. Even small changes in sunlight can upset Earth’s climate system and make the planet hotter.

One of the first big problems will be the loss of carbon dioxide from the air. Plants need CO₂ for photosynthesis, which makes food and releases oxygen. But as Earth gets hotter, rock weathering (rain and heat breaking down rocks) will speed up. This process traps carbon in rocks instead of leaving it in the air. Today, CO₂ levels are over 400 ppm. In 100 to 900 million years, CO₂ levels may drop so low, below 10 parts per million (ppm), that even the toughest plants would not survive. Without plants, there will be no photosynthesis, so oxygen will slowly disappear. Without oxygen, animals, including humans cannot survive. This means Earth will eventually become uninhabitable for all oxygen-breathing life.

As the Sun keeps brightening, Earth will get even hotter. In about 1.5 billion years, the average temperature could reach 100 °C (212 °F), the boiling point of water. The oceans would start to boil away. As water evaporates, huge amounts of water vapor (a strong greenhouse gas) would fill the air. This would trigger a runaway greenhouse effect, where Earth heats up uncontrollably, just like Venus, which is now over 460 °C (860 °F). Scientists think this would happen in about 1.6 to 3 billion years. By then, all oceans would be gone, and Earth’s water would escape into space. Even if the Sun stayed stable, Earth would still slowly lose water. Some ocean water sinks into the mantle at tectonic plate edges. Normally, volcanoes return some water, but as Earth’s interior cools and volcanic activity slows, less water comes back. Over billions of years, Earth would still dry out.

In about 5 billion years, the Sun will run out of hydrogen in its core. Fusion will shift to outer layers, and the Sun will swell into a red giant, about 250 times wider than today. Its size could reach 1 astronomical unit (AU), which is Earth’s current distance from the Sun. Mercury and Venus will be swallowed. Earth’s fate is uncertain. The Sun will lose about 30% of its mass as strong stellar winds blow gas into space. With less mass, the Sun’s gravity will weaken, and Earth could drift outward to about 1.7 AU, possibly safe. But other forces, like tidal pulls and drag from the Sun’s outer gases, might slow Earth down. If that happens, Earth could spiral inward and be swallowed, burning up inside the Sun. After its red giant phase, the Sun will shed its outer layers, creating a glowing planetary nebula. Its core will shrink into a white dwarf, a small, dense star made mostly of carbon and oxygen. Whether Earth survives in a distant orbit or is destroyed inside the Sun is still a mystery.

Glass is a  material that can be made in many shapes. It is usually transparent, but it can also be made in colours. Glass is mainly made of silica; glass made of silica only is called silica glass.

Glass used to make windows and bottles is a specific type called soda-lime glass, composed of about 75% silicon dioxide (SiO2), sodium oxide (Na2O) from sodium carbonate (Na2CO3), calcium oxide, also called lime (CaO), and several minor additives.

By changing the proportions, and adding different ingredients, many kinds of glass can be made. Coloured glass is made by adding small amounts of metal oxides. For example, a blue colour is given by tiny amounts of cobalt oxide.

Crystal glass is made by adding lead and zinc oxides. It is not actually a crystal because all glass is a non-crystalline solid. Crystal glass is called cut glass if it has been cut by hand:

Because glass is used to make lenses, the word "glasses" often means eyeglasses.

The myth that glass is actually a liquid comes from the fact that old windows in houses and churches (200–300 years old) are sometimes a little out of shape: thicker at the bottom than the top. This is actually due to the process of glass making in the past which led to the glass pane being thicker at one edge than the other. It was sensible to install the windows with the thick edge at the bottom. Sometimes a window can be found with the thick edge at the top of the window.

Glass can be recycled over and over. Glass bottles and jars can easily be recycled to make new glass bottles and jars or used in industry as aggregate (building material) or sand.

India ( ), officially the Republic of India, also known as Hindustān, is a country in South Asia. It is the world's seventh-largest country by area. It is also the most populated country in the world. It has been the world's largest democracy by number of people since 1947.

India is a peninsular country. It has the Indian Ocean to the west, the Arabian Sea in the southwest, the Bay of Bengal in the southeast, and the Himalayas up north. It has six neighbours: Pakistan in the northwest; China, Nepal and Bhutan in the north; Bangladesh and Myanmar in the east; and Sri Lanka and the Maldives are nearby to the south. Its Andaman and Nicobar Islands share water borders with Indonesia, Myanmar and Thailand.

Humans came to the Indian subcontinent from Africa more than 55,000 years ago. They have lived there for a long time. At first, they lived in the subcontinent as hunter-gatherers. The Indian subcontinent is the second most  region after Africa. Humans began to create settlements in the subcontinent 9,000 years ago, on the western banks of the Indus River. The settlements became parts of the Indus Valley Civilisation in the third millennium BCE. By 1200 BCE, Sanskrit, an Indo-European language,  to India from the northwest. The first presence of Sanskrit is found in the hymns (songs of worship) of the Rigveda. The hymns were spread from one person to another , not by any book. They show the early forms of Hinduism. The Indo-Aryan languages replaced the Dravidian languages in the northern and western regions of India. By 400 BCE, the caste system was developed within Hinduism. Buddhism and Jainism were also developed in India at the same time.

India has been a federal republic since 1950. Its government is a democratic parliamentary system. It is a multilingual (multiple languages) and multicultural (multiple cultures) society. The capital city of India is New Delhi. India has the second largest military force in the world and is also a nuclear weapon state. India's economy became the world's fastest growing in the G20 developing nations during 2014, replacing the People's Republic of China. India's literacy and wealth are also rising.

India has the fourth largest economy by nominal GDP, the third largest by GDP (PPP) and is one of the fastest growing major economy. According to New World Wealth, India is the fifth richest country in the world with a total individual wealth of $12.6 trillion. However, it still has many social and economic issues, for example poverty, pollution, social equality, religious extremism, terrorism and corruption. India has reduced its rate of poverty but its economic inequality has increased.

India is a founding member of the World Trade Organisation (WTO), and has signed the Kyoto Protocol. It is also a member of the G20 developing nations. India has its own space agency (ISRO). It has done much research throughout the Solar System. It has sent spacecraft to the Moon and Mars. Indian movies, music and spiritual teachings are becoming more important in global culture. Sources describe it as a potential superpower, because of its rising economy and increase in global influence. India is a country with nuclear weapons. It also has a high  in military expenditure. It has disputes over Kashmir with its neighbours, Pakistan and China, since the middle of the 20th century.

India has the fourth largest number of spoken languages per country in the world, only behind Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, and Nigeria. Most of Indians follow Hinduism at 80%, but people of different religions such as Buddhism, Sikhism and Islam also live there.

The Oxford English Dictionary (third edition - 2009) says that the name "India" comes from the Classical Latin name India. It was originally used for the Indian subcontinent and the areas to its east. Latin took the name from Hellenistic Greek India (Ἰνδία), from ancient Greek Indos (Ἰνδός) and then from Old Persian Hinduš. The Old Persian name was used for the eastern province of the Achaemenid Empire. The name has a relation with the Sanskrit word sindhu. It means "river",  the Indus River. The ancient Greeks called Indians as Indoi (), which means "the people of the Indus".

The name Bhārat (; ) is found in both Indian epic poetry and the Constitution of India. It is used in different Indian languages in different forms. Bhārat is a modern form of the older name Bharātavarṣa (). It original meaning was the northern part of India. It has become a very popular name for India since the middle of the 19th century.

Hindustān () is a Middle Persian name for India. It became popular by the 13th century. It is used widely since the Mughal Empire.

In 300 BCE, a king named Chandragupta Maurya established the Maurya Empire and under Ashoka, united most of the Indian subcontinent under a centralized state.

One of the oldest languages in the world, Tamil, developed in South India more than 3000 years ago.

The Gupta Empire managed to unify large parts of the Indian subcontinent.The Gupta period is traditionally considered India's Golden Age as there were great developments in culture, religion and mathematics.

There were also many other Indian dynasties (empires) such as the Chalukyas, Cholas, Pallavas, and Pandyas. Southern India at that time was famous for its science, art, and writing.

The Cholas of Thanjavur were pioneers at war in the seas and influenced Malaya, Borneo, Cambodia. The influence of Cholas are still noticeable in Southeast Asia.

The Vijayanagara Empire was another significant Indian empire.

In the 16th century India came under Mughal rule. The Taj Mahal was built during the Mughal period.

As Mughal rule weakened other empires like the Maratha Empire and Sikh Empire replaced it.

In the 1600s, India came under European colonization, and by 1856 the British controlled most of India.

British colonial exploitation resulted in the deaths of millions of Indians due to starvation and famine. The British also introduced railways and banned widow burning.

In the early 1900s, millions of people peacefully started to  against British rule. One of the people who led the freedom movement was Mahatma Gandhi, who only used peaceful tactics, including a way called "ahimsa", which means "non-violence".

On 15 August 1947, India peacefully became free and independent from the British Empire. India's constitution came into effect on 26 January 1950. Every year, on this day, Indians celebrate Republic Day. The first official leader (Prime Minister) of India was Jawaharlal Nehru.

After 1947, India had a socialist planned economy. It is one of the founding members of the Non-Aligned Movement and the United Nations. It has fought many wars since independence from Britain, including wars in 1947-48, 1965, 1971, and 1999 with Pakistan and in 1962 with China. India also fought a war to capture Goa, a Portuguese-built port and a city that was not a part of India until 1961. The Portuguese refused to give it to India, so India used force and defeated the Portuguese.

India’s early general elections saw the Congress Party, led by Jawaharlal Nehru, dominate until his death in 1964. Lal Bahadur Shastri briefly took over, followed by Indira Gandhi, who won elections in 1967 and 1971. After declaring a state of emergency in 1975, public dissatisfaction led to the Congress losing power in 1977, with the Janata Party taking over. However, this government lasted only about two years, with Morarji Desai and Charan Singh serving as prime ministers.

Congress returned to power in 1980, and after Indira Gandhi’s assassination in 1984, her son Rajiv Gandhi won a landslide election. The party lost again in 1989, with a short-lived National Front coalition government under V.P. Singh and Chandra Shekhar. By 1991, no party secured a majority, but Congress formed a minority government led by P.V. Narasimha Rao.

India performed nuclear tests in 1974 and 1998. It is one of the few countries that have nuclear bombs.

Since 1991, India has been one of the fastest-growing economies in the world.

India is the seventh biggest country in the world by land. It is the main part of the Indian subcontinent. The countries next to India are Pakistan, Bangladesh, Myanmar, China, Bhutan and Nepal. It is also near Sri Lanka and the Maldives, two island countries. The Andaman and Nicobar Islands, a union territory of India, is near Thailand, Indonesia and Myanmar.

There are many mountains in the northern part of India. There is the Himalayas, which have some of the tallest mountains in the world.

There are many rivers in India. The main rivers are the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, the Yamuna, the Godavari, the Kaveri, the Narmada, and the Krishna.

India is a peninsula, which means that it is surrounded on three sides by water. In the west is the Arabian Sea, in the south is the Indian Ocean, and in the east is the Bay of Bengal.

India's total coastline is  long. The mainland's coastline is  long. The Andaman, Nicobar and Lakshadweep islands have  long coastlines in total.

Based on Indian naval hydrographic charts, 43% of the mainland coast are sandy beaches, 11% are rocky shores and cliffs, and 46% are mudflats or marshy shores.

India has different climates. In South India, the climate is mainly tropical, which means it can get very hot in summer and cool in winter. The northern part, though, has a cooler climate, called subtropical. The mountainous regions can be alpine. The Himalayas, in the alpine climate region, can get extremely cold.

The Himalayas block cold Central Asian winds from blowing into the Indian subcontinent. It keeps the most of the subcontinent warmer than most places at same latitudes.

There is very heavy rainfall along the west coast and in the Eastern Himalayan foothills. The west, though, is drier.

Because of some of India's deserts, the entire country gets rain for four months of the year. That time (usually around June to September) is called the monsoon. It happens because the deserts attract water-filled winds from the Indian Ocean, which give rain when they come into India.

When the monsoon rains come late or not so heavily, droughts (when the land dries out because there is less rain) are possible.

India is a parliamentary republic with a multi-party system. It is the largest democracy in the world by the number of people. It has sixnational parties, for example the Indian National Congress (INC) and the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP). It also has more than 50regional parties. The Congress is known as centre in Indian political culture, while the BJP is known as right-wing. The Congress was the  in the Parliament from 1950 to the end of the 1980s. From the end of the 1980s, the BJP and the powerful regional parties are getting more seats in the Parliament over time. This forced the national parties to create coalition governments.

India is ruled under the Constitution of India. It is the country's highest  of law. It came into effect on 26 January 1950. Its original form said that India would be a "sovereign, democratic republic". In 1971, the statement was changed to "sovereign, socialist, secular, democratic republic".

India has been said to be a "quasi-federal" form of government. That means a strong federal government with weak state governments. The federal government is often called the "union government" or the "central government" but after political, economic and social changes at the end of the 1990s, the government became federal.

The union government is divided into three parts: the legislature (the one that make laws), the executive (the one that applies laws), and the judiciary (the one that makes sure that the laws are obeyed). All three parts are in New Delhi, the capital city of India.

The legislature of India is called the Parliament ( ). It is divided into two houses: the upper house Rajya Sabha (Council of States); and the lower house Lok Sabha (House of the People). The Rajya Sabha has 245 members. They remain members for six years. Most members are elected indirectly by the legislatures of state and union territories. The Lok Sabha has 545 members. They remain members for five years. They are elected directly by the people's vote.

The executive is made up of the President, the Vice President, the Prime Minister and the Union Council of Ministers. The President is the head of state of India. The presidents are elected by an electoral college for a period of five years. The electoral college is made up of members of central and state legislatures. The Prime Minister is the head of government of India. The President can choose the Prime Minister, who has most of the power. The President has less power than the Prime Minister. The Union Council of Ministers helps the Prime Minister. It is similar to a cabinet in many countries.

The judicial branch is made up of three types of courts of law: the Supreme Court, the 24 High Courts and a number of trial courts. The Chief Justice of India is the head of the Supreme Court. The members of the court have the power to stop a law being passed by Parliament if they think that the law contradicts (opposes) the Constitution. They can make any government action  if it contradicts the Constitution.

For administration purposes, India has been divided into smaller pieces. Most of these pieces are called states; others are called union territories. In total, there are twenty-eight states and eight union territories.

States and union territories differ in the way they are represented. Most union territories are ruled by administrators (called Lieutenant Governors) sent by the central government. All the states (and the territories of Delhi and Puducherry) elect their local government themselves.

The Indian Armed Forces is the country's military. It is made up of an Army, Navy and Air Force. There are other parts like Paramilitary and Strategic Nuclear Command. Its Commander-in-Chief is the President of India, but the Ministry of Defence manages the military.

In 2010, the Indian Armed Forces had 1.32 million active personnel, making it one of the largest militaries in the world.

The Indian Army is becoming more modern by buying and making new weapons. It is also building defenses against missiles of other countries. In the years 2018-2022, India imported more arms than any other nation in the world. Since its independence in 1947, India fought four wars with Pakistan and a war with China.

The national emblem of India shows four lions standing back-to-back. The lions symbolize power, pride, confidence, and courage. Only the government can use this emblem, according to the State Emblem of India (Prohibition of Improper Use) Act, 2005.

The name India comes from the Greek word Indus. This came from the word sindhu, which, over time, turned into Hind, Hindi, or Hindu.

The preferred endonym (the name given to the country by its own people) is "Bhārat" in Hindi and other Indian languages. This differs with names that outsiders use for the country.

Different countries disagree about where India's borders lie. For example, India claims Jammu and Kashmir as an Indian state. However, Pakistan and China do not recognise this area as part of India. Similarly, the Republic of India does not recognise the Pakistani and Chinese parts of Kashmir.

In 1914, British India and Tibet agreed on the McMahon Line, as part of the Simla Accord. Indians and Tibetans see this line as the official border. However, in July 1914, China withdrew from the agreement. Neither mainland China nor Taiwan recognize that Arunachal Pradesh belongs to India. According to them, it is a part of South Tibet, which belongs to China.

India's economy is among the world's fastest growing. It is the 6th largest in the world with a nominal GDP of $4.15 trillion (USD). In terms of PPP, the economy is 3rd largest (worth US$18.720 trillion). The growth rate is 8.25% for fiscal year 2010. However, that is still $3678 (considering PPP) per person per year.

India's economy is diverse. Major industries include automobiles, cement, chemicals, consumer electronics, food processing, machinery, mining, petroleum, pharmaceuticals, steel, transportation equipment, and textiles.

Despite its economic growth, India continues to suffer from poverty. Over one quarter of the population (27.5%) was living in poverty in 2004–2005. In 2007-2008, 80.4% of the population lived on less than US $2 a day. By 2009, this number had decreased to 68%.

There are 1.4 billion people living in India. In 2023, India passed China to become the world's most populous country. About 65% of Indians live in rural areas, or land set aside for farming. The largest cities in India are Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad, and Ahmedabad. Hindi and English are official languages of India. India has 23 officially recognised languages. Altogether, 1,625 languages are spoken in India.

There are many different languages and cultures in India. There are two main language families in India, the Indo-Aryan and the Dravidian languages. About 69% of Indians speak an Indo-Arayan language, and about 26% speak a Dravidian language. Other languages spoken in India come from the Austro-Asiatic group. Around 5% of the people speak a Tibeto-Burman language.

Hindi is the official language in India with the largest number of speakers. It is the official language of the union. Native speakers of Hindi represented about 41% of the Indian population in the 2001 Indian census.

English is also used, mostly for business and in administration. It has the status of a 'subsidiary official language'.

The constitution also recognises 21 other languages - either because many people speak them, or because they are very important for Indian culture. There may be as many as 1,652 different dialects in India.

In the south of India, many people speak Kannada, Telugu, Tamil and Malayalam. In the north, many people speak Punjabi, Bengali, Gujarati, and Marathi, Odia, and Maithili.

India has 23 official languages. Its constitution lists the name of the country in each of the languages. Hindi and English (listed in boldface) are the "official languages of the union" (Union meaning the Federal Government in Delhi); Tamil, Sanskrit, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam, and Odia are officially the "classical languages of India."

Cave paintings from the Stone Age are found across India. They show dances and rituals and suggest there was a prehistoric religion. During the Epic and Puranic periods, the earliest versions of the epic poems Ramayana and Mahabharata were written from about 500–100 BCE, although these were   for centuries before this period. Other Indian Stone Age sites apart from Pakistan are in modern India, such as the Bhimbetka rock shelters in central Madhya Pradesh and the Kupgal petroglyphs of eastern Karnataka, contain rock art showing religious rites and evidence of possible ritualised music.

Several modern religions are linked to India, namely modern Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. All of these religions have different schools (ways of thinking) and traditions that are related. As a group they are called the Eastern religions. The Indian religions are similar to one another in many ways: The basic beliefs, the way worship is done and several religious practices are very similar. These similarities mainly come from the fact that these religions have a common history and common origins. They also influenced each other.

The religion of Hinduism is the main faith followed by 79.80% of people in the Republic of India; Islam – 14.23%; Christianity – 2.30%; Sikhism – 1.72%; Buddhism – 0.70% and Jainism – 0.37%.

India sent a spacecraft to Mars for the first time in 2014. That made it the fourth country and first Asian country to do so, successfully. It was called the Mars Orbiter Mission.

ISRO launched 104 satellites in a single mission to create a world record. India became the first nation in the world to have launched over a hundred satellites in one mission. That was more than the 2014 Russian record of 37 satellites in a single launch.

This historic event of Chandrayaan-III successfully landed on the South Pole of the moon, being the first one to do so.

India has the largest movie industry in the world. The Hindi film industry is known as Bollywood, and is mainly based in Bombay, now known as Mumbai. Other industries include Tollywood, Kollywood, Sandalwood, Mollywood, Jollywood, Dhollywood, etc. It makes 1,000 movies a year, about twice as many as Hollywood.

Cricket is the most popular sport in India. The Indian cricket team won the 1983 and 2011 Cricket World Cup and the 2007 ICC World Twenty20. They  the 2002 ICC Champions Trophy with Sri Lanka and won the 2013 ICC Champions Trophy and 2025 ICC Champions Trophy.

Cricket in India is controlled by the Board of Control for Cricket in India or BCCI. Domestic tournaments are the Ranji Trophy, the Duleep Trophy, the Deodhar Trophy, the Irani Trophy, and the Challenger Series. There is also the Indian cricket league and Indian premier league Twenty20 competitions.

Indians have excelled in hockey. They have also won eight gold, one silver, and two bronze medals at the Olympic Games.

Tennis has become popular due to the victories of the India Davis Cup team.

Association football is also a popular sport in northeast India, West Bengal, Goa and Kerala. The Indian national football team has won the South Asian Football Federation Cup many times.

Chess, which originated in India, is also becoming popular. The number of Indian Grandmasters has increased recently.

Traditional sports include kabaddi, kho kho, and gilli-danda, which are played throughout India.

Japan (; Romanized as Nihon or Nippon) is a country in East Asia. It is a group of islands close to the east coast of Korea, China and Russia. The Pacific Ocean is to the east of Japan and the Sea of Japan is to the west. Most people in Japan live on one of the four islands. The biggest of these islands, Honshu, has the most people. Honshu is the 7th largest island in the world. Tokyo is the capital of Japan and its biggest city.

The Japanese people call their country "Nihon" or "Nippon", which means "the origin of the Sun" in Japanese. Japan is a monarchy whose head of state is called the Emperor. Japan is the oldest monarchy in the world, lasting more than 2,000 years.

The first people in Japan were the Ainu people and other Jōmon people. They were closely related to Europeans or Mongols. They were later conquered and replaced by the Yayoi people (early Japanese and Ryukyuans). The Yayoi were an ancient ethnic group that migrated to the Japanese archipelago mainly from southeastern China during the Yayoi period (300 CE–300 AD). Modern Japanese people have primarily Yayoi ancestry at an average of 97%. The indigenous Ryukyuan and Ainu peoples have more Jōmon ancestry on the other hand.

The earliest records on Japan are from Chinese documents. One of those records said there were many small countries (in Japan) which had wars between them and later a country, ruled by a queen, became the strongest, unified others, and brought peace.

The Japanese began to write their own history after the 5th and 6th century, when people from Korea and China taught Japan about the Chinese writing system. Japan's neighbors also taught them Buddhism. The Japanese changed Buddhism in many ways. For example, Japanese Buddhists used ideas such as Zen more than other Buddhists.

Japan had some contact with the Europeans in the 16th century. The Portuguese were the first Europeans to visit Japan. Later, the Spanish and Dutch came to Japan to trade. Also, they brought Christianity. Japan's leaders welcomed them at first, but because Europeans had conquered many places in the world, the Japanese were scared that they would conquer Japan too. That made the Japanese not let the Europeans come into Japan anymore, except in a small area in Nagasaki. Many Christians were killed. Only the Chinese, Korean, and Dutch people were allowed to visit Japan, in the end, and they were under careful control of the Japanese government. Japan was opened for visitors again in 1854 by Commodore Matthew Perry, when the Americans wanted to use Japanese ports for American whale boats. Perry brought steamships with guns, which scared the Japanese into making an agreement with him.

This new contact with Europeans and Americans changed the Japanese culture. The Meiji Restoration of 1868 stopped some old ways and added many new ones. The Empire of Japan was created, and it became a very powerful nation and tried to invade the countries next to it.

It invaded and annexed Ryukyu Kingdom, Taiwan, and Korea. It had wars with China and Russia: the First Sino-Japanese War, the Boxer Rebellion, the Russo-Japanese War, World War I and the Siberian intervention.

In 1918, World War I allowed Japan, which joined the side of the victorious Allies, to capture German possessions in the Pacific and in China.

The Second Sino-Japanese War (1937-1945) grew to become a part of World War II when Japan became allies with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy.

In 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor, in Hawaii and destroyed or damaged many ships and airplanes of the United States. That started the Americans' involvement in World War II. American and Japanese forces fought each other in the Pacific. The Americans captured most of the islands in the Pacific, started dropping bombs on Japanese cities, and prepared to invade Japan.

To make Japan surrender, the United States dropped two atomic bombs on the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, killing 150,000 Japanese citizens. Soon, the Soviet Union began to fight against Japan, and the Japanese army in Manchuria lost. Japan surrendered all places that it had taken from other countries. It also accepted the Potsdam Proclamation. The United States occupied Japan from September 1945 to April 1952 and forced it to write a new constitution in which it promised to never go to war again.

Japan was granted membership in the United Nations in 1956. A period of record growth propelled Japan to become the second-largest economy in the world. On 11 March 2011, Japan suffered one of the largest earthquakes in its recorded history, triggering the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster. On 1 May 2019, after the historic abdication of Emperor Akihito, his son Naruhito became emperor and started the Reiwa era. On 8 July 2022, former Prime Minister Shinzo Abe was assassinated while he was giving a campaign speech in Nara.

On 21 October 2025, Sanae Takaichi was confirmed as the country's first female prime minister.

Japan is a group of islands in the Western Pacific, off the coast of China. The four biggest islands are Honshu, Hokkaido, Shikoku, and Kyushu, and there are about 6,000 smaller islands there. Japan is separated from the Asian continent by the Sea of Japan and the East China Sea. Honshu, which means 'Mainland' in the Japanese language, is the biggest island. Hokkaido is the island north of Honshu. Kyushu is the island west of Honshu. Shikoku is the island to the south-west of Honshu.

In the middle of Japan there are mountains. They cover the middle of the islands and leave a very narrow strip of flat land on most coasts. Many of the mountains are extinct volcanoes, but some are still active. The highest of these mountains is the beautiful, volcano-shaped Mt Fuji (3,776 metres or 12,389 feet high). Japan has many earthquakes, in fact there are about 1500 of these every year. The biggest earthquake recorded in Japan was in 2011 - called '2011 Tohoku Earthquake'. It caused great damage to several power plants forcing Japan to shut down all its nuclear plants. There was nuclear core meltdown which caused a serious health risk to nearby villages and cities.

90% of the people living in Japan live in just 10% of the land, near the coast. The other 10% of the people in Japan live away from the coast.

Over 10 cities have more than a million people in them. The biggest city in Japan is Tokyo, which is the capital.

The QR code, the camera phone, the CD player, and the VHS were invented in Japan.

Japan is a leader in the robotics industry: It is the world's largest maker of industrial robots. It has the 2nd most industrial robots behind the Chinese.

Japan has one of the strongest economies of any country. Its nominal gross domestic product (GDP) is the 4th highest in the world. It has a very low unemployment rate and was the 4th-largest exporter and 4th-largest importer in 2021.

Japan is known for its automotive industry: It is home to Toyota, the world's largest car company. Honda, Nissan, Suzuki and Mazda are other popular car makers from Japan.

Tokyo is the most populous city in the world. It also has one of the largest economies of any city. It is an important financial center: It has the Tokyo Stock Exchange, one of the largest stock exchanges in Asia.

Many things in Japanese culture originated in China, like Go and bonsai.

Cherry blossom also known as Japanese cherry and Sakura is thought to be the national flower of Japan.

Japan's traditional food is seafood, rice, miso soup, and vegetables. Noodles and tofu are also common. Sushi, a Japanese food made of cooked rice with vinegar with other ingredients such as raw fish, and sometimes fried shrimp, is popular around the world.

The religion in Japan is mostly Shinto and Buddhist. Due to the tolerant nature of the two main Japanese religions, and the resulting intermixing of the two, many Japanese identify as both Shinto and Buddhist at the same time. There are small numbers of Christians and Hindus, and a few Jews.

When it comes to popular culture, Japan is famous for making video games. Many of the biggest companies that make games, like Nintendo, Namco, and Sega, are Japanese. Other well-known parts of Japanese arts are its comics, called manga, and its digital animation, known as anime. Many people get to know Japanese or how life in Japan is like by reading manga or watching anime on television.

The Ryukyuans and the Ainu both have their own separate cultures, languages and religion.

Since Japan is an island nation, Japan has several problems over territory because maritime boundaries can be hard to protect. These days, Japan is competing for at least 4 different territories. It cannot agree with some neighboring countries on whether the land belongs to Japan or the other country.

There are several important international airports in Japan. Narita is the major international airport in the Tokyo area. Kansai International Airport serves as the main airport for Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. Chūbu Centrair International Airport near Nagoya is the newest of the three. Haneda Airport is close to central Tokyo and is the largest domestic airport in the country.

The Shinkansen is one of the fastest trains in the world and connects cities in Honshu and Kyushu. Networks of public and private railways are over almost all the country. People mostly travel between cities in buses.

Modern Japan is divided into 47 prefectures. Before the Meiji period (1868-1912), the nation was divided into provinces which were consolidated in the prefectural system.

Japan has many traditional sports such as sumo, judo, karate, kyudo, aikido, iaido and kendo. Also, there are sports which were imported from the West such as baseball, soccer, rugby, golf and skiing. Baseball is the most popular sport.

Japan has taken part in the Olympic Games since 1912. It hosted the Olympic Games in 1964, 1972, 1998 and 2020. From 1912 until now, Japanese sportspeople have won 398 medals in total.

Professional sports are also popular and many sports such as baseball (see Pacific League and Central League), soccer (see List of Japanese football teams), sumo, American football, basketball and volleyball, are played professionally.

Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun and the second-smallest planet in the Solar System, nicknamed  The Red Planet.

Mars is a terrestrial planet with caps of water and carbon dioxide. It has the largest volcano in the Solar System, and some very large impact craters.

Mars is named after the mythological Roman god of war because it appears of red color. Anything that has to do with Mars is called "Martian".

Space probes, such as the Viking program landers, are the main tools for the exploration of Mars.

Mars is a terrestrial planet and made of rocks. The ground there is red because of iron oxide (rust) in the rocks and dust. The planet's atmosphere is very thin. It is mostly carbon dioxide with some argon and nitrogen and tiny amounts of other gases including oxygen. The temperatures on Mars are colder than on Earth, because it is farther away from the Sun and has less air to keep heat in. There is water ice and frozen carbon dioxide at the north and south poles. Mars does not have any liquid water on the surface now, but signs of run-off on the surface were probably caused by water.

The average  of the planet's crust is about 50 km (31 mi), with a maximum thickness of 125 km (78 mi).

The origin of Mars' moons is unknown and controversial. One theory is that the moons are captured asteroids. However, the moons' near circular orbits and low inclination relative to the Martian equator are not in agreement with the capture hypothesis.

Estimates of the mass ejected by a large Borealis-size impact vary. Simulations suggest that a body about 0.02 of Mars mass (~0.002 Earth mass) in size can produce a sizable debris disk in Martian orbit. Much of the material would stay close to Mars. There are several other large impact basins on Mars that could also have ejected enough debris to form the moons.

Mars does not have a global magnetic field. Despite this, observations show that parts of the planet's crust have been magnetized. This suggests that polarity reversals have occurred in the past. This paleomagnetism  is similar to the magnetic striping found on Earth's ocean floors. One theory is that these bands suggest plate tectonic activity on Mars four billion years ago, before the planetary dynamo stopped working and the planet's magnetic field faded.

A Martian day is called a sol, and is a little longer than an Earth day. Mars rotates in 24 hours and 37 minutes. It rotates on a tilted axis, just like the Earth does, so it has four different seasons. Of all the planets in the Solar System, the seasons of Mars are the most Earth-like, due to their similar axial tilt. The lengths of the Martian seasons are almost twice those of Earth's: Mars's greater distance from the Sun causes the Martian year to be almost two Earth years long.

Martian surface temperatures vary from lows of about  (at the winter polar caps) to highs of up to  (in equatorial summer). The wide range in temperatures is due mostly to the thin atmosphere which cannot store much solar heat. The planet is also 1.52 times as far from the Sun as Earth, resulting in just 43% of the amount of sunlight.

Its orbit is more eccentric than the Earth's (meaning less like a circle). Probably that is one reason why the Earth's climate varies so much. In other words, its orbit affects the climate of the Earth. That is just a theory at present.

A 2015 report says Martian dark streaks on the surface were affected by water.

Liquid water cannot exist on the surface of Mars due to its low atmospheric pressure (there is not enough air to hold it in), except at the lowest elevations for short periods. The two polar ice caps appear to be made largely of frozen water. The amount of ice in the south polar ice cap, if melted, would be enough to cover the entire planet's surface 11 meters deep. A permafrost mantle stretches from the pole to latitudes of about 60°.

Geological evidence gathered by unmanned missions suggest that Mars once had much liquid water on its surface. In 2005, radar data revealed the presence of large quantities of water ice at the poles, and at mid-latitudes. The Mars rover Spirit sampled chemical compounds containing water molecules in March 2007. The Phoenix lander found water ice in shallow Martian soil in July  2008.

Landforms seen on Mars strongly suggest that liquid water at some time existed on the planet's surface. Huge areas of ground have been scraped and eroded.

In August 2024, a reservoir of liquid water was discovered on Mars - deep in the rocky outer crust of the planet. The findings came from a new analysis of data from Nasa’s Mars Insight Lander, which recorded four years' of vibrations - Mars quakes - from deep inside the Red Planet.

Mars has two permanent polar ice caps. During a pole's winter, it lies in continuous darkness, chilling the surface and causing the deposition of 25–30% of the atmosphere into slabs of CO2 ice (dry ice). When the poles are again exposed to sunlight, the frozen CO2 sublimes (turns to vapor), creating enormous winds that sweep off the poles as fast as 400 km/h. Each season this moves large amounts of dust and water vapor, giving rise to Earth-like frost and large cirrus clouds and dust storms. Clouds of water-ice were photographed by the Opportunity rover in 2004.

Mars has a very thin atmosphere with barely any oxygen (it is mostly carbon dioxide). Because there is an atmosphere, however thin it is, the sky changes colour when the sun rises and sets. The dust in the Martian atmosphere makes Martian sunsets somewhat blue. Mars's atmosphere is too thin to protect Mars from meteors, which is part of the reason why Mars has so many craters.

After the formation of the planets, they all experienced the "Late Heavy Bombardment". About 60% of the surface of Mars shows a record 67.

of impacts from that era. Much of the remaining surface is probably lying over the immense impact basins caused by those events. There is evidence of an enormous impact basin in the northern hemisphere of Mars, spanning , or roughly four times larger than the largest impact basin previously known. This suggests that Mars was struck by a Pluto-sized body about four billion years ago. The event is thought to be the cause of the difference between the Martian hemispheres. It made the smooth Borealis Basin that covers 40% of the planet.

Some meteorites hit Mars with so much force a few pieces of Mars went flying into space  even to Earth. Rocks on Earth are sometimes found which have chemicals that are exactly like the ones in Martian rocks. These rocks also look like they fell really quickly through the atmosphere, so it is  to think they came from Mars.

Spacecraft Insight detected seismic waves made by the biggest meteorite impacts ever seen on Mars.

Mars is home to the highest known mountain in the Solar System, Olympus Mons. Olympus Mons is about 17 miles (or 27 kilometers) high. This is more than three times the height of Earth's tallest mountain, Mount Everest. It is also home to Valles Marineris, the third largest rift system (canyon) in the Solar System, 4,000 km long.

Our records of watching and recording Mars start with ancient Egyptian astronomers in the 2nd millennium BC.

Detailed observations of the location of Mars were made by Babylonian astronomers who developed methods using math to predict the future position of the planet. The ancient Greek philosophers and astronomers developed a model of the solar system with the Earth at the center ('geocentric'), instead of the sun. They used this model to explain the planet's motions. Vedic and Islamic astronomers estimated the size of Mars and its distance from Earth. Similar work was done by Chinese astronomers.

In the 16th century, Nicholas Copernicus proposed a model for the Solar System in which the planets follow circular orbits about the Sun. This 'heliocentric' model was the beginning of modern astronomy. It was revised by Johannes Kepler, who gave an elliptical orbit for Mars which better fit the data from our observations.

The first observations of Mars by telescope was by Galileo Galilei in 1610. Within a century, astronomers discovered distinct albedo features (changes in brightness) on the planet, including the dark patch and polar ice caps. They were able to find the planet's day (rotation period) and axial tilt.

Better telescopes developed early in the 19th century allowed permanent Martian albedo features to be mapped in detail. The first crude map of Mars was published in 1840, followed by better maps from 1877 onward. Astronomers mistakenly thought they had detected the spectroscopic mark of water in the Martian atmosphere, and the idea of life on Mars became  among the public.

Yellow clouds on Mars have been observed since the 1870s, which were windblown sand or dust. During the 1920s, the range of Martian surface temperature was measured; it ranged from 85 to 7 oC. The planetary atmosphere was found to be arid with only traces of oxygen and water. In 1947, Gerard Kuiper showed that the thin Martian atmosphere contained extensive carbon dioxide; roughly double the quantity found in Earth's atmosphere. The first standard naming of Mars surface features was set in 1960 by the International Astronomical Union.

Since the 1960s, multiple robotic spacecraft and rovers have been sent to explore Mars from orbit and the surface. The planet has remained under observation by ground and space-based instruments across a broad range of the electromagnetic spectrum (visible light, infrared and others). The discovery of meteorites on Earth that came from Mars has allowed laboratory examination of the chemical conditions on the planet.

During the 1877 opposition, Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli in Milan used a  telescope to help produce the first detailed map of Mars. What caught people's attention was that the maps had features he called canali. These were later shown to be an optical illusion (not real). These canali were supposedly long straight lines on the surface of Mars to which he gave names of famous rivers on Earth. His term canali was popularly mistranslated in English as canals, and thought to be made by intelligent beings.

Other astronomers thought they could see the canals too, especially the American astronomer Percival Lowell who drew maps of an artificial network of canals on Mars.

Although these results were widely accepted, they were contested. Greek astronomer Eugène M. Antoniadi and English naturalist Alfred Russel Wallace were against the idea; Wallace was extremely outspoken. As bigger and better telescopes were used, fewer long, straight canali were observed. During an observation in 1909 by Flammarion with a  telescope, irregular patterns were observed, but no canali were seen.

Because Mars is the one of the closest planets to Earth in the Solar System, many have wondered if there is any kind of life on Mars. Scientists have not found life on Mars (as of 2024). No sign of former life, has been found.

Today we know that this life, if any, would be simple organisms, like bacteria.

NASA maintains a catalog of 34 Mars meteorites, that is, meteorites which originally came from Mars. These assets are highly valuable since they are the only physical samples available of Mars.

Studies at NASA's Johnson Space Center show that at least three of the meteorites contain possible evidence of past life on Mars, in the form of microscopic structures resembling fossilized bacteria (so-called biomorphs). Although the scientific evidence collected is reliable, and the rocks are correctly described, what made the rocks look like they do is not clear. To date, scientists are still trying to agree if it really is evidence of simple life on Mars.

Over the past few decades, scientists have agreed that when using meteorites from other planets found on Earth (or rocks brought back to Earth), various things are needed to be sure of life. Those things include:

For people to agree on past life in a geologic sample, most or all of these things must be met. This has not happened yet, but investigations are still in progress. Reexaminations of the biomorphs found in the three Martian meteorites are underway.

Liquid water is necessary for life and metabolism, so if water was present on Mars, the chances of life evolving is improved. The Viking orbiters found evidence of possible river valleys in many areas, erosion and, in the southern hemisphere, branched streams. Since then, rovers and orbiters have also looked closely and eventually proved water was on the surface at one time, and is still found as ice in the polar ice caps and underground.

Several space probes have gone to Mars to study it. Some have orbited (gone around) the planet, and some have landed on it. There are pictures of the surface of Mars that were sent back to Earth by the probes.

The Chevaya Falls rock was discovered on Mars in June 2024. The rock was core sampled by the Perseverance rover, so that the rock could get sent to Earth and further examination. Research has not shown (as of 2025's third quarter) if the rock has a  biological origin or abiotic origin; The rock has spots that look [similar to spots on a leopard, or] "poppyseed and leopard-esque spots.

NASA has said that the rock is maybe a biosignature. The rock is part of the samples from "Sapphire Canyon".

Earlier (August 2012), the Mars Science Laboratory landed on Aeolis Palus in Gale Crater on Mars. It brought with it a mobile explorer called 'Curiosity'. Curiosity has dug up Martian soil and studied it in its laboratory. It has found sulfur, chlorine, and water molecules.

Some people are interested in sending astronauts to visit Mars. They could do a better search, but getting astronauts there would be difficult and expensive. The astronauts would be in space for many years, and it could be very dangerous because of radiation from the Sun.

Some famous stories were written about the idea of life on Mars. The writers used the name "Martians" for intelligent beings from Mars. In 1898, H.G. Wells wrote The War of the Worlds, a famous novel about Martians attacking the Earth.  In 1938, Orson Welles broadcast a radio version of this story in the United States, and many people thought it was really happening and were very scared. Beginning in 1912, Edgar Rice Burroughs wrote several novels about adventures on Mars.

An operating system (OS) is a kind of computer program that helps a computer to interact with other machines or with people. An OS is not actually one single program but a group of small programs, like file managers, device drivers, and kernels. An OS can be small (like Damn Small Linux), or large (like Microsoft Windows). Some are meant for general use, like in a personal computer or a smartphone. Others are used for specific purposes. For example, an ATM would use a specialized kind of operating system.

An operating system has many jobs. It ensures that all the programs share access to the computer's processor, memory, screen, input devices, and other hardware. Today, most operating systems also include a visible interface so the user can easily interact with it. An operating system is also responsible for sending data to other computers or devices on a network.

Some examples of commonly used operating systems are:  Android; macOS; Linux; Microsoft Windows.

One of the first computers was ENIAC (Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer), built by the United States during World War II. Making ENIAC do useful work was difficult. To program ENIAC, scientists had to move switches and cables around on the side of the computer. While this was an operating system of a kind, it is not really like modern operating systems.

The first operating system that looked and felt like today's operating systems was UNIX, made in 1969 by Bell Labs.  With UNIX, people could program computers by typing on a keyboard. Many of its features were taken from Multics, an older operating system made in 1964.

Operating systems come in many types. An OS might fit one or several of the types listed below, and the difference between the types isn't always clear.

A single-tasking system can only run one program at a time. A multitasking operating system can run more than one program at the same time. To multitask, the computer lets each program take a turn using the processor.

Single-user operating systems don't let people create their own "accounts" on the computer—there is only one user. A multi-user operating system lets multiple users interact with the system at the same time.

A distributed operating system takes a group of distinct computers, which might be all over the place, and makes them work together like one single computer.

Embedded operating systems are very small OSes used in embedded systems. They are designed to operate on small machines, like the electronic part of a microwave, and they only do a few particular things.

Hobbyist OS are made by individuals or small groups. There are many online communities like OS dev wiki to learn how to make an OS.

A search engine is a website that allows users to look up information on the World Wide Web (WWW), part of the Internet. The search engine will achieve this by looking at many web pages to find matches to the user's search inputs. It will return results ranked by relevancy and popularity by the search engine. The most popular search-engines are Google Search and Bing. There are other popular search engines too, such as Baidu, Brave Search and Yandex. Older services include Webcrawler are,  Yahoo! Search, Ask.com, Lycos, and Alta Vista. Examples of specialized engines are Ecosia (supports ecological goals) or Tenor (picture engine).

To use a search engine you must enter at least one keyword into the search box. Usually, an on-screen button must be clicked on to submit the search. The search engine looks for matches between the keyword(s) entered and its database of websites and words.

After the user inputs their search or query into the search bar, a list of results will appear on the screen known as the search engine results page (SERP). This list of webpages contains matches related to the user's query in a particular order determined by a ranking system. Most search engines will remove "spam" pages from the list of results to provide a better list of results. The user can then click on any of the links to go to that webpage.

Search engines are some of the most advanced websites on the web. They use special computer code to sort the web pages on SERPs. The most popular or highest-quality web pages will be near the top of the list.

When a user types words into the search engine, it looks for web pages with those words. There could be thousands, or even millions, of web pages with those words. So, the search engine helps users by putting the web pages it thinks the user wants first.

Search engines are very useful to find information about anything quickly and easily. Using more keywords or different keywords improves the results of searches.

A search service may also include a portal with news, games, and more information besides a search engine.  Yahoo! has a popular portal, while Google has a simple design on its front page.  Search services usually work without charging money for finding sites, and are often supported with text or banner advertisements.

Search engines use robots to ‘crawl’ online content. The process of crawling is the first measure that search engines take before indexing content in virtually any form–videos, text, images, webpages, etc. The content may constitute newly uploaded content to the internet or content that features updates or changes to its material. These robots, also known as crawlers or bots, record the information along with its links. Once the material has been crawled, it can be stored in a massive URL database. It’s this database that generates internet search results.

After the bots crawl content, it can be indexed in the database and arranged in terms of its relevance. If internet content has not been crawled or indexed, it is unlikely to appear in the search results when someone makes a query no matter how relevant that content may be. After the content has been crawled, each of its words is indexed. The search engines also pinpoint where words are located on the crawled pages. During the indexing process, the search engine compares the content to other content with similar ‘words’ and decides how to organize it within its index.

Ranking is a complex process that is dependent on search engine algorithms. When a searcher makes a query on Google looking for anything from 19th-century British landscape painters to New York City plumbers, the search engine will generate a list of good matches to that query. How these matches appear in the list relates to their rank. The search engine lists what it ‘thinks’ are the best answers to the query early in its search results.

Google and other search engines rely on algorithms to interpret the searcher’s query, identify the websites and pages in its index that are related to the request, and it then ranks them in terms of relevance in its presented search results list. What’s important to search engines is to provide searchers with the most relevant matches to their queries possible. Website operators, in turn, use search engine optimization to give their pages a higher rank.

The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, often shortened to the United Kingdom (UK), or just Britain, is a sovereign country in Northwestern Europe. It is a constitutional monarchy of four countries: England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. Although these are called "countries", none of them are in the UN and they all have to listen to the British King and the British Parliament. The UK borders the Republic of Ireland on the island of Ireland.

It is part of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, NATO, the G7, and the Five Eyes. Despite not being connected by land, it is said to be in Europe. It had the sixth largest economy in the world by nominal GDP in 2019.

About 95 percent of the UK's population can only speak English. About 5 percent of the population can speak a non-British language.

The UK's capital city and largest city is London in England. England is also by far the largest country in the UK. The capitals of the other countries in the UK are Edinburgh, Scotland, Cardiff, Wales, and Belfast, Northern Ireland.

Between the English Civil War and World War II, the UK was a major world power. It invaded and controlled controlled large areas of Africa, Asia, North America and Oceania. During this time, from about 1650 - 1950, historians call the UK the British Empire. At its height in 1922, more than 458 million people lived in the British Empire, one-fifth of the Earth's population. It controlled more than 33 million square kilometers of land: almost a quarter of the Earth's land area.

It was said in the early 1900s that "The sun never sets on the British Empire" because no matter what time of day it was in London, it was daytime for at least one British subject under the King. Britain lost most of its colonies in the 1900s (with a major exception being the 13 North American British Colonies), although Britain keeps links with most countries of its former empire and also still controls fourteen overseas territories.

It is not known when the first group of people visited the island of Great Britain. They most likely did not live there year-round, probably because the climate was too cold in the winter. However, there is evidence of people at least visiting Great Britain almost a million years ago.

Archaeological remains show that the first group of modern people to live in the British Isles were hunter-gatherers after the last ice age ended. The date is not known: perhaps as early as 8000BC but certainly by 5000BC. They built mesolithic wood and stone monuments. Stonehenge was built between 3000 and 1600BC. Celtic tribes arrived from mainland Europe. Britain was a changing collection of tribal areas, with no overall leader. Julius Caesar tried to invade (take over) the island in 55BC but was not able to do so. The Romans successfully invaded in 43AD.

Latin-written history began in Britain when this alphabet was brought to Britain by the Romans. Rome ruled in Britain from 44AD to 410AD. They ruled modern day England and parts of Wales. The Romans never ruled Ireland or fully controlled Scotland. The border varied from time to time and was marked sometimes at Hadrian's Wall (in modern England), sometimes at the Antonine Wall (in modern Scotland).

After the Romans invaded, waves of immigrants came to Britain. Some were German: the Angles, Saxons and Jutes. Others were Celts, like the Scots, who came to Great Britain from Ireland. At this time, most people spoke Old English. This language came from the Anglo-Saxons in an area from the River Forth to the River Tamar.

A later wave of immigration was that of the Vikings, during the Early Middle Ages or Viking Age. During the Viking invasion of Britain, they set up their own kingdom in north-western England, which the Anglo-Saxons named the "Danelaw", after the Danes who lived there and controlled the land. Vikings from Scandinavia also controlled most of the islands which are now part of Scotland, including the Outer Hebrides, the Inner Hebrides, and the Northern Isles (the Shetland Islands and the Orkney Islands).

After a long period when Anglo-Saxon England was split into various kingdoms, it was made into one kingdom by Æthelstan (Athelstan) in 945 AD. In the 13th century, the lands of Wales were unified by force with England by the wars of Edward I of England ("Edward Longshanks").

There were hundreds of years of fighting between both kingdoms of Great Britain. In 1603, when Queen Elizabeth I of England died, her closest relative was King James VI of Scotland. He became king of England and Ireland as well as the king of Scotland. The kingdoms of England, Ireland, and Scotland had the same monarch ever since. James VI and I was the first to be named "King of Great Britain", and he ordered the design of the Union Jack. The Union Jack has been the British national flag ever since.

In 1707, the Parliaments of England and Scotland agreed on the Treaty of Union, which joined the two countries into one country called the United Kingdom of Great Britain under Queen Anne with the Acts of Union 1707. This union merged Scotland and England into one kingdom. England and Scotland kept their own laws, with English law in England and Wales and Scots law in Scotland. The division between the Church of Scotland and the Church of England continued. Ireland and Great Britain continued to have the same king, but Ireland did not become part of the new kingdom in 1707.

Many Scottish and English Lords had already ruled over Ireland since the Tudor Conquest. In 1800, laws were passed in the parliaments of Great Britain and Ireland (where Irish people (in Ireland) had little or no representation) to merge the two kingdoms and their two parliaments under King George. The country was then called the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. The flag was changed so that the flag of Saint Patrick (a red saltire) shows Ireland to be a part of the country.

In the 1840s the hard times hit Ireland, causing millions of Irish people to starve or flee the country under Queen Victoria.

In the 1857 the UK tightened its control over India under Queen Victoria.

In 1943 the Famine of Bengal killed millions of Indians under King George the 6th.

In 1922 much of Ireland became independent from the United Kingdom as the Irish Free State (now called Ireland). However, six northern counties (called Northern Ireland) are part of the United Kingdom. The country was renamed the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland in 1927.

The new Parliament of Northern Ireland set up in the 1920s stopped working in the 1970s, because of The Troubles. However, devolution started again with the Northern Ireland Assembly after the Belfast Agreement (the "Good Friday Agreement") in 1998. Devolution in Scotland and Wales started the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh Parliament the same year.

The United Kingdom was a member state of the European Union (EU) and an older organization, the European Economic Community (EEC), from 1973 until Brexit in 2020.

In September 2024, the United Kingdom became the first G7 country to phase out coal power for electric generation, after 142 years of using the energy source.

The UK is northwest off the coast of mainland Europe. Around the UK are the North Sea, the English Channel and the Atlantic Ocean. The UK also rules, usually indirectly, a number of smaller places (mostly islands) around the world, which are known as British Overseas Territories. They were once part of the British Empire. Examples are Gibraltar (on the Iberian Peninsula next to the Strait of Gibraltar) and the Falkland Islands (in the south Atlantic Ocean).

In the British Isles, the UK is made up of four different countries: Wales, England and Scotland and Northern Ireland. The capital city of Wales is Cardiff. The capital city of England is London. The capital city of Scotland is Edinburgh and the capital city of Northern Ireland is Belfast. Other large cities in the UK are Birmingham, Glasgow, Leeds, Norwich, Manchester, Liverpool, Sheffield, Bristol, Leicester, Coventry, Nottingham, Bradford, Newcastle Upon Tyne and Southampton.

The physical geography of the UK varies greatly. England consists of mostly lowland terrain, with upland or mountainous terrain only found north-west of the River Tees-River Exe line. The upland areas include the Lake District, the Pennines, the North York Moors, Exmoor, and Dartmoor. The lowland areas are typically traversed by ranges of low hills, frequently composed of chalk, and flat plains. Scotland is the most mountainous country in the UK and its physical geography is distinguished by the Highland Boundary Fault which goes across the Scottish mainland from Helensburgh to Stonehaven. The Royal Observatory, Greenwich is the defining point of the Prime Meridian.The weather of the United Kingdom is changeable and unpredictable. Summers are moderately warm, winters are cool to cold. Rain falls throughout the year, and more on the west than the east because of its northerly latitude and the warm water from the Atlantic Ocean's Gulf Stream. The usually moderate prevailing winds from the Atlantic may be interrupted by Arctic air from the northeast or hot air from the Sahara.

The United Kingdom is reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It has met the Kyoto Protocol targets. It has signed the Paris Agreement. The British government want the UK to be carbon neutral by the year 2050.

The highest temperature ever recorded in the United Kingdom was , on 19 July 2022 in Coningsby. The lowest temperature ever recorded was , on February 11, 1895 & January 10, 1982 in Braemar, and December 30, 1995 in Altnaharra.

The United Kingdom is a parliamentary democracy based on a constitutional monarchy. The people of the United Kingdom vote for a members of Parliament to speak for them and to make laws for them. King Charles III is the King of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and is the head of state. The government, led by the Prime Minister, governs the country and appoints cabinet ministers. Today, the Prime Minister is Andy Burnham, who is the leader of the center-left Labour Party.

Parliament is where laws are made. It has three parts: the House of Commons, the House of Lords, and the King. The House of Commons is the most powerful part. It is where Members of Parliament sit.

Scotland has its own devolved Parliament with the power to make laws on things like education, health and Scottish law. Northern Ireland and Wales have their own devolved legislatures which have some powers but less than the Scottish parliament. The Parliament of the United Kingdom is sovereign and it could end the devolved administrations at any time. The UK is a unitary state and not a federation of states.

The Parliament of the United Kingdom is the legislature, the political assembly that makes laws and decides tax. The British people are represented by members of parliament (MPs) in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom. MPs are chosen in elections. The MPs in the House of Commons decide who will be the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. The prime minister decides who will be in the British Government (His Majesty's Government). The government is not controlled by the king or queen, but by Parliament. In Britain, Parliament is made up of the House of Commons and the House of Lords.

Unlike the House of Commons, the people in the House of Lords are not elected. The people who sit in the House of Lords are called peers. Most peers are appointed by the government. There are some who are hereditary peers (who inherit their peerages from ancestors or other family members). Certain bishops in the established Church of England also attend the House of Lords. (The Church of England is the national church in England. The Church of Scotland does not have bishops, and neither Wales nor Northern Ireland has an established national church.) Together, the two houses make a bicameral legislature, in which the House of Commons has more power. In the past, the House of Lords had more power. Before the 20th century, the prime minister was often a member of the House of Lords. As the House of Lords lost its powers, as political reforms tried to improve democracy, the House of Commons became more powerful and the prime minister is now always a member of the House of Commons.

After the English Civil War during the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Oliver Cromwell became Lord Protector, and the monarchy ended for a time. The British Isles were a republic, which Cromwell named the "Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland". Although the monarchy was restored after his death, the Crown slowly became the secondary power, and Parliament the first. Until the early twentieth century, only men who owned property could vote to choose MPs. In the nineteenth century, more people were given suffrage. In 1928, all men and women got the vote: this is called universal suffrage.

Almost all members of Parliament belong to political parties. The biggest parties are the Conservative Party, Labour Party, the Scottish National Party and the Liberal Democrats. Members of the same party agree to work together. A party (often with more than half the seats: a majority) forms the government. The leader of the party becomes the prime minister, who then chooses the other ministers. Because the government has a majority in Parliament, it can normally control what laws are passed.

The British Parliament is in Westminster, in London. It has power over the whole of the United Kingdom. Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland each have their own parliaments as well, and these have more limited powers. England does not have a separate parliament.

Scotland has the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood in Edinburgh. Wales has the Welsh Parliament in Cardiff. Northern Ireland has the Northern Ireland Assembly at Stormont in Belfast. There are also parliaments in the Isle of Man and in Jersey and Guernsey (the Channel Islands), which are all island states for which the UK has responsibility in international law. Man, Jersey, and Guernsey are "crown dependencies". Some British Overseas Territories have their own legislatures.

About 68 million people live in the UK (Mostly in England). This population is divided into four nationalities based on the where each citizen (or their parents) were born. Each country has a name for its people (for example; Mexico's people are Mexican), but no matter which country someone is from, they have a British (UK) nationality.

The crown dependencies are three nations which are not part of any of the four countries in the UK. They are: the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey. Unlike the four countries, the governments of the crown dependencies have almost full power over the dependencies, with the exception of military and international relations. Everybody from a crown dependency has a British nationality.

The British Overseas Territories are former colonies of the British Empire which have not become independent from the UK. There are fourteen. Some have civilizations on them while others are military bases. Most of them have their own governments. The UK is responsible for their defense and international relationships. Everybody from an overseas territory has a British nationality.

One overseas territory was the Chagos Archipelago. Following resumed negotiations a treaty was signed on 22 May 2025 that will formally transfer the sovereignty of the territory to Mauritius once it comes into effect, while the Diego Garcia military base remains under British control during a 99-year lease.

The United Kingdom has one of the most advanced militaries in the world, alongside countries such as the USA and France, and operates a large navy (Royal Navy), a sizable army, (British Army) and an air force (Royal Air Force).

From the 18th century to the early 20th century, the United Kingdom was one of the most powerful nations in the world, with a large and powerful navy (due to the fact it was surrounded by sea, so a large navy was the most practical option). This status has faded in recent times, but it remains a member of various military groups such as the UN Security Council and NATO. It is also still seen as a great military power.

The United Kingdom is a developed country with the sixth-largest economy in the world. It was a superpower during the 18th, 19th and early 20th century and was considered since the early 1800s to be the most powerful and influential nation in the world, in politics, economics and in military strength.

Britain continued to be the biggest manufacturing economy in the world until 1908 and the largest economy until the 1920s. The economic cost of two world wars and the decline of the British Empire in the 1950s and 1960s reduced its leading role in global affairs. The United Kingdom still has strong economic, cultural, military and political influence and is a nuclear power. The United Kingdom holds a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council, and is a member of the G8, NATO, World Trade Organization and the Commonwealth of Nations. The City of London, in the capital, is famous for being the largest center of finance in the world.

Beowulf is one of the earliest major texts. Geoffrey Chaucer is an important early poet.

William Shakespeare was an English playwright who wrote plays in the late 16th century. His work includes titles such asRomeo and Juliet and Macbeth. In the 19th century, Jane Austen and Charles Dickens were novelists. Twentieth-century writers include the science-fiction novelist H. G. Wells and J. R. R. Tolkien. The children's fantasy Harry Potter series was written by J. K. Rowling. Aldous Huxley was also from the United Kingdom.

English language literature is written by authors from many countries. Eight people from the United Kingdom have won the Nobel Prize in Literature. Seamus Heaney is a writer who was born in Northern Ireland.

Arthur Conan Doyle from Scotland wrote the Sherlock Holmes detective novels. He was from Edinburgh. The poet Dylan Thomas brought Welsh culture to international attention.

The nature of education is a devolved matter in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. They have separate, but similar, systems of education with laws that a broad education is required from ages five to eighteen, except for in Scotland where school departure is allowed from the age of sixteen. Pupils attend state funded schools (academy schools, faith schools, grammar schools, sixth form colleges, further education, city technology colleges, studio schools) and other children attend independent fee-paying schools (known as public schools).

There have been universities in Britain since the Middle Ages. The "ancient universities" started at this time and in the Renaissance. They are: the University of Oxford, the University of Cambridge, the University of St Andrews, the University of Glasgow, the University of Aberdeen, and the University of Edinburgh. These are the oldest universities in the English-speaking world.

The University of Cambridge, the University of Oxford, and London universities (University College London, the London School of Economics, King's College London and Imperial College London) collectively form the Golden Triangle of universities in the south-east of England. A broader group of twenty universities form the Russell Group of research universities.

The BBC is an organisation in the United Kingdom. It broadcasts in the United Kingdom and other countries on television, radio and the Internet. The BBC also sells its programs to other broadcasting companies around the world. The organisation is run by a group of twelve governors who have been given the job by the King on the advice of government ministers.

Road traffic in the United Kingdom drives on the left-hand side of the road (unlike the Americas and most of Europe), and the driver steers from the right-hand side of the vehicle. The road network on the island of Great Britain is extensive, with most local and rural roads having evolved from Roman and Medieval times. Major routes developed in the mid 20th Century were made to the needs of the motor car. The multi-lane high speed motorway (freeway) network was mostly built in the 1960s and 1970s. It links major towns and cities.

The system of rail transport was invented in England and Wales, so the United Kingdom has the oldest railway network in the world. It was built mostly during the Victorian era. At the heart of the network are five long-distance main lines which radiate from London to the major cities and secondary population centres with dense commuter networks and highs-speed lines in the regions. The newest part of the network connects London to the Channel Tunnel from St Pancras station. The system of underground railways in London, known as the Tube, has been copied by many other cities.

Most domestic air travel in the United Kingdom is between London and the major cities in Scotland and the North of England and Belfast. London-Heathrow is the nation’s largest airport and is one of the most important international hubs in the world. Other major airports with principal international service include London-Gatwick, Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow. An extensive system of ferry networks operates. The Isle of Man and the Channel Islands also have domestic passenger and freight routs.

Major languages spoken in the United Kingdom other than English include Polish (500,000 approximate number of speakers in the United Kingdom), Eastern Panjabi or Punjabi (471,000), Bengali (400,000), Urdu (400,000), Cantonese (300,000), Greek (200,000), Southwestern Caribbean Creole English (170,000).

A web browser is a computer program or mobile application for visiting websites on the World Wide Web. Since the late 1990s, most personal computers, mobile phones and other mobile devices have supported web browsers.

Web browsers are used to browse websites on the Internet. The first web browser was created in 1990. Many web browsers are available for free. All web browsers are used for visiting websites, but some web browsers exist with certain purposes in mind. For example, some browsers focus on data security, privacy, and keeping computers safe from viruses. Other browsers focus on providing the fastest and most simple experience.

A webpage is one area of a website.  Every web page has a unique web address, which is typically entered in a text input located at the top of the browser interface. When visiting a webpage, the browser downloads the website content, usually HTML documents, style information, JavaScript for website function, and any images or video required to display the webpage. Its browser engine then reads and translates the HTML file, and renders it on-screen in a visible format.

Africa is the second largest continent on Earth. It makes up about one-fifth of the world's total land area. It is surrounded by large areas of water. There are 54 fully recognised and independent countries in Africa, and 14.7% (1.216 billion) of the world's population lives there. It is thought to be the continent where the first humans evolved.

The history of Africa begins with the first modern human beings and continues to its present difficult state as a politically developing continent.

Africa's ancient historic period includes the rise of Egyptian civilization. It also includes the development of other societies outside the Nile River Valley, and the interaction between these societies and civilizations outside of Africa. In the late 7th century, North and East Africa were heavily influenced by the spread of Islam. That led to the appearance of new cultures, like the Swahili people and the Mali Empire, whose king, Musa Keita I, became one of the richest and most influential people of the early 14th century. This also led to an increase in the slave trade, which had a very bad influence on Africa’s development until the 19th century.

Slavery has long been practiced in Africa, just like the rest of the world. But two new slave trades would create a much bigger and more violent version of slavery.

Between the 7th and 20th centuries, the Arab slave trade took 18 million slaves from Africa via trans-Saharan routes and the Indian Ocean. Between the 15th and 20th centuries (a period of 500 years), the Atlantic slave trade took an estimated 7–12 million slaves to the Americas. While some sub-Saharan Africans collaborated with European, Arab, and Berber slave traders, many were strongly opposed to slavery and avoided, protested, or fought it violently.

Sub-Saharan Africans who had been captured and sent to the French colony of Saint Domingue on slave ships played an important role in ending the Atlantic slave trade. They began the Haitian Revolution, which created Haiti, the first country to permanently ban slavery. After this revolution, European empires began to reduce slave trading and abolitionism became more popular. Between 1808 and 1860, the British Navy captured approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who were aboard.

In the late 19th century, the European powers occupied much of the continent, creating many colonial and dependent territories. They left only two fully independent states: Liberia and Ethiopia (which the Europeans called “Abyssinia").

Egypt and Sudan were never formally made a part of any European colonial empire. However, after the British occupation of 1882, Egypt was effectively under British administration until 1922.

African independence movements had their first success in 1951, when Libya became the first former colony to become independent. Modern African history is full of revolutions and wars, as well as the growth of modern African economies and democratization across the continent.

A civil war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) began in 1998. Neighbouring African countries have become involved. Since the conflict began, it has killed an estimated 5.5 million people.

Political associations such as the African Union offer hope for greater co-operation and peace between the continent's many countries.

From north to south, Africa has most types of climate. In sequence from the north:

Running north-east to the south is the East African Great Rift Valley. This has mountains, volcanoes, deep rifts and valleys, rivers and lakes.

In fact, Africa has examples of most of the Earth's climate types.

Much of North Africa is dry and hot: it is dominated by the Sahara Desert and does not receive much rain. In sub-Saharan Africa, there are few rivers or other water sources. Underground water sources are very important in the desert. These often form oases. An oasis is an area of vegetation (plant life) surrounded by desert.

In that part of the world, the wind comes mostly from the east. That does bring rain, but the Himalayas and the Tibetan Plateau block the monsoon rain and prevent it from getting to North Africa. Also, the Atlas Mountains near the north coast

of Africa prevent rain from coming in from the north. That is another rain shadow.

These two rain shadows are mainly responsible for the Sahara desert.

Conditions and winds are different further south, where huge amounts of rainfall near the equator. The equator runs across the middle of Africa (see red line drawn on map). That means much of Africa is between the two tropics:

Africa has a lot of wildlife. There are many types of animals there. In particular, it is now the only continent that has many native species of large mammals. Some of them occur in very large numbers. There are antelope, buffalo, zebra, cheetah, elephant, lion, giraffe, rhinoceros, apes, hyaena, and a lot more. Over 2,000 types of fish live in African lakes and rivers.

The African Union (AU) is an international organisation. It aims to transform the African Economic Community, a federated commonwealth, into a state under established international conventions. The African Union has a parliamentary government, known as the African Union Government, consisting of legislative, judicial, and executive organs. It is led by the African Union President and Head of State, who is also the President of the Pan African Parliament. A person becomes President of the AU by being elected to the PAP and then gaining majority support in the PAP.

Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa, often under the oversight of the state. Most of such violations occur for political reasons, often as a side effect of civil war. Countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include Uganda, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Sudan, Zimbabwe, and Côte d'Ivoire. There are 54 UN member states in Africa.

People who come from Africa are called Africans. People in the north are called Northern Africans and people in the south are called Southern Africans. Languages in eastern Africa include Swahili, Oromo and Amharic. Languages in western Africa include Lingala, Igbo, Hausa and Fulani. The most popular language in Northern Africa is Arabic, Berber languages, and Coptic.

Countries with significant African descendents outside Africa:

Asia is the largest continent on Earth by area and number of people. It is mainly in the northern hemisphere. Asia is connected to Europe in the west and Africa on the south, and separated from North America at the east. Sometimes Asia and Europe are combined to form a larger continent called Eurasia. Some of the oldest human civilizations began in Asia, for example Sumer, China, and Pakistan. Asia was the birthplace of many religions, for example Hinduism, Zoroastrianism, Judaism, Jainism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Christianity, Islam, and Sikhism. It was also home to some large empires, for example the Persian Empire, the Mughal Empire, the Byzantine Empire, the Mongol Empire, and the Ming Empire. Asia has 48 countries. Georgia, Russia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Turkey, and Greece have territory in both Europe and Asia.

Asia includes a large amount of land. Covering about 30% of the world's land area, it has more people than any other continent, with about 60% of the world's total population. Stretching from the icy Arctic in the north to the hot and steamy equatorial lands in the south, Asia contains huge, empty deserts, as well as some of the world's highest mountains and longest rivers.

Asia is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea, the Black Sea, the Arctic Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, and the Indian Ocean. It is separated from Europe by the Pontic Mountains and the Turkish Straits. A long, mainly land border in the west separates Europe and Asia. This line runs north–south down the Ural Mountains in Russia, along the Ural River to the Caspian Sea, and through the Caucasus Mountains to the Black Sea.

These are all the countries usually considered in Asia. Some of them are transcontinental, meaning they span more than one continent.

Some countries are in both Europe and Asia, for example Russia (region of Siberia), Georgia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, and Turkey. Egypt is located in Africa and Asia with the Sinai Peninsula, but is not usually considered Asian.

Paper is a thin material of (mostly) wood fibres pressed together. People write on paper with a pencil or pen, and books are made of paper. Paper can absorb liquids such as water, so people can clean things with paper. There are many types of paper, such as craft paper and copy paper.

The pulp and paper industry comprises companies that use wood as raw material and produce pulp, paper, board and other cellulose-based products.

Modern paper is normally made from wood . Wood is ground up and mixed with water and other chemicals to make a thin liquid called "paper pulp". Paper pulp can be bleached to make paper more white, and dyes can be added to make colored paper. This pulp is pressed into  of paper. Printing is often done on paper before the paper is cut into sheets. Newsprint paper (newspaper) comes in a huge roll, and goes through the printing process as one continuous sheet. It is cut by a machine-driven guillotine blade later. Folding comes last, then packing for distribution.

Sometimes paper is made heavier and more glossy (shiny) by adding clay, and by 'milling' it. Milling is done by  the paper through a series of rollers. Sometimes paper is made from used or waste paper: this is recycling.

Not all paper is made from wood. Other kinds of fiber can be used. People still make paper from cotton, linen and hemp for special purposes.

Writing started long before the invention of paper. People wrote on many kinds of material. They wrote on cloth, on stone walls and on wood. In Mesopotamia the Sumerians wrote on clay tablets, many of which have survived today. In Europe, people wrote on vellum.

Many centuries ago – as early as the 3rd millennium BC (that's over 2000 BC) – people in Egypt made a kind of paper from the papyrus plant. This is where the word 'paper' comes from. The people of Greece and Rome learned to do this too. The Romans wrote on parchment (made from animal skin), on waxed tablets and on wood (see Vindolanda).

In China 105 AD, the eunuch Cai Lun told his Emperor he had made paper. They had previously used bamboo and silk. The material used in this ancient paper included cotton , hemp, various plant fibres and old fish nets. The oldest existing paper with writing on it was found in the ruins of a watchtower in the Great Wall of China. It dates to about 150 AD.p5 Even earlier paper (but with no writing on it) has been claimed: "The oldest surviving piece of paper in the world is made of hemp fibers, discovered in 1957 in a tomb near Xian, China, and dates from between the years 140 and 87 BC". Paper-making was regarded by the Chinese as so valuable that they kept it secret as long as they could.

People in Japan learned how to make paper with fibres of the mulberry tree, around 610 AD. This is called Japanese paper or Washi. The Chinese invention spread to India, and then to the Middle East, and then to Italy.

An opportunity occurred after The Battle of Talas in 751. Then an Arab army captured soldiers of the Chinese. There were some paper makers among the captured soldiers. From them, paper-making spread throughout the Middle East.  In 757, a paper mill was built at Samarkand. People learned to use linen as paper raw material and to use starch made from flour as an additive.

The Italians used hemp and linen rags. In 1276 the first Italian paper mill was built at Fabriano and, until the 14 century, Italy was a paper supplier in Europe. In 1282 the first watermark was introduced in Bologna.

Paper was hard to make. It was cheaper than the old writing materials, but still expensive. A mechanical paper maker was conceived in France 1798, but invented in England. At least one paper mill was using them by 1812. Now the process was cheaper but the raw material was still expensive.

In 1840 Friedrich Gottlob Keller Invented a machine that could make pulp for paper out of wood fibres (instead of the expensive rag paper). Paper became cheap enough for everyone to buy. Around the same time, other inventions were made, like the pencil, the fountain pen, and a printing press that used steam power. With this new information technology, people wrote more letters, made more books and newspapers, and kept more records of what they did.

Today, some of the largest paper-producing countries are China, USA, Canada, Finland, Sweden and Russia. Paper is produced in large factories called paper mills. They produce hundreds of thousands of tons of paper each year.

Paper is used for writing and . Books, magazines and newspapers are printed on paper.

Paper is often used for money. Paper used for money is made in special ways. It does not use wood fiber. It is mostly cotton with additives to make it hard for people to print their own money. A piece of paper money is called a banknote, a bill or a note.

Paper can be used for cleaning. Special forms of paper are used, such as paper towels, facial tissues or toilet paper.

Pretty paper can be used as decoration. It can be pasted onto the walls of a room; this is called wallpaper. Paper can be used to wrap gifts. This is called wrapping paper or gift wrap.

Some kinds of paper are strong and can be used in boxes and other packaging material. Sometimes several layers of paper are held together with glue, to make cardboard.

An acid is a type of chemical compound. The definition of an acid has changed as people discovered more about chemistry. Acids were originally grouped together by their properties: they taste sour, change the color of litmus paper to red, and make salts when reacted with certain other chemicals.

There are two main definitions of acid used by chemists today. A Brønsted–Lowry acid is a chemical that can donate a hydrogen ion () (generally speaking, this will be a proton) to another substance. A Lewis acid is a chemical that can receive a pair of electrons from another substance. In both cases, the other substance the acid reacts with is called a base.

pH is used to measure the strength of acids that are dissolved in water.

A chemical can donate a proton if the hydrogen atom is attached to an electronegative atom like oxygen, nitrogen, or chlorine. Some acids are strong and others are weak. The weak acids hold on to some of their protons, while the strong acids let go of all of them. All acids will release hydrogen ions into solutions. The amount of ions that get released per molecule will determine if the acid is weak or strong. Weak acids are acids that partially release the hydrogen atoms that are attached. These acids, then, may lower pH by dissociation of hydrogen ions, but not completely. Weak acids generally have a pH value of 4-6 while strong acids have a pH value of 1 to 3.

A base is an acid's "chemical opposite." A base is a substance that will accept the acid's hydrogen atom. Bases are molecules that can  split apart in water and release hydroxide ions.

Acids and bases typically exist together in equilibrium. This means that within a sample of an acid, some molecules will give up their protons and others will accept them. Even water is a mixture of an acidic ion, H3O+ (called a hydronium ion) and a basic ion, OH- (called a hydroxide ion). When acids are diluted (mixed in water) they release H+ ions. These H ions cannot exist independently, so they combine with water to form Hydronium ion.  A hydronium ion will give up its proton to a hydroxide ion, forming two molecules of H2O, which is neutral. This reaction happens continuously in a sample of water, but overall the sample is neutral because there are equal amounts of hydronium and hydroxide in the sample. For most reactions, however, the acids and bases are not present in equal amounts, and this imbalance is what allows a chemical reaction to occur.

Every acid has a conjugate base formed by removing the acid's proton. Hydrochloric acid (HCl), for example, is an acid and its conjugate base is a chlorine anion, or Cl-. An acid and its conjugate base are opposite in strength. Since HCl is a strong acid, Cl- is a weak base.

Acids can have different strengths, some are more reactive than others. More reactive acids are often more dangerous.

Acids can have a lot of different properties depending on their molecular structure. Most acids have the following properties:

Acids can burn the skin, the severity of the burn depending on the type and concentration of the acid. These chemical burns require immediate medical attention.

Because acids donate hydrogen ions, all acids must have hydrogen in them.

Acids are important. Nucleic acids, such as DNA and RNA contain the genetic code. These molecules determine many characteristics of an organism, they are passed from the parents to offspring. DNA contains the plans how to build proteins which are made of amino acids.

Fatty acids and fatty acid derivatives are another group of carboxylic acids that play a significant role in biology. These contain long chains of hydrocarbons and a carboxylic acid group on one end. The cell membrane of nearly all organisms is primarily made up of a phospholipid bilayer, a micelle of hydrophobic fatty acid chains with polar, hydrophilic phosphate "head" groups.

In humans and many other animals, hydrochloric acid is a part of the gastric acid secreted within the stomach. It can help hydrolyze proteins and polysaccharides. It can also convert the inactive pro-enzyme, pepsinogen into the enzyme, pepsin. Some organisms produce acids for defense; for example, ants produce formic acid, and octopi produce a black acid called magneta.

Most acids can be found in nature. Some of these include the following:

Adolf Hitler (20 April 1889 – 30 April 1945), was an Austrian-born German politician who was the dictator of Germany during the Nazi era from 1933 until his suicide in 1945. He rose to power as the leader of the Nazi Party, becoming the chancellor of Germany in 1933 and then taking the title of Führer und Reichskanzler in 1934. Germany's invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 under his leadership marked the outbreak of the Second World War. Throughout the ensuing conflict, Hitler was closely involved in the direction of German military operations and was central to the perpetration of the Holocaust, the genocide of about six million Jews and millions of other victims.

Hitler was born in Braunau am Inn in Austria-Hungary and was raised near Linz. He lived in Vienna in the first decade of the 1900s before moving to Germany in 1913. He was decorated during his service in the German Army in World War I, receiving the Iron Cross. In 1919, he joined the German Workers' Party (DAP), the precursor of the Nazi Party. Hitler became the leader of the Nazi Party in 1921. In 1923, he attempted to seize governmental power in a failed coup in Munich and was imprisoned with a sentence of five years. In jail, he dictated the first volume of his autobiography and political manifesto Mein Kampf ("My Struggle"). He led them to become the most powerful political party in Germany after the 1932 elections. He began running the government when he became the Chancellor of Germany in 1934. The Nazis banned all other political parties and turned Germany into a dictatorship (meaning that the government was ruled by one person). Hitler's dictatorship is known as Nazi Germany, also known as the "Third Reich" (meaning "Third Empire" or "Third Realm"). Hitler called himself the Führer (meaning "leader") after the year 1934.

Hitler ordered the takeover of Poland in 1939, and this started World War II in Europe. Hitler made all the important decisions during the war. At first, Nazi Germany did well in the war, but by 1945 they were losing. On 29 April 1945, Hitler married his longtime lover, Eva Braun, in the Führerbunker in Berlin. Less than two days later, Hitler and Braun killed themselves as the Soviet Army got to Berlin, because they did not want to be captured alive by the Soviet Union.

Because of the Nazi government, at least 50 million people died. About 28.7 million soldiers and people died in the fighting. The war also killed 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war. Nazi forces committed many war crimes and atrocities during the war. They killed their enemies sometimes with mobile death squads or put them in concentration camps and death camps. Hitler and his men persecuted and killed Jews and other ethnic, religious, and political minorities. In what is called the Holocaust, the Nazis killed six million Jews, Roma people, homosexuals, Slavs, and many other groups of people.

Hitler's family was born in Waldviertel, in Lower Austria. At the time, the name Hitler changed in this region several times between Hüttler, Hiedler, Hittler and Hitler. The name was commonly in the German-speaking area of Europe in the 19th century. The literature says that this name is descended from the Czech name Hidlar or Hidlarcek.

Adolf Hitler was born on 20 April 1889, as the fourth child of six in Braunau am Inn. This is a small town near Linz in the province of Upper Austria, close to the border with Germany. At the time, the town was in Austria-Hungary. His parents were Klara Pölzl and Alois Hitler. Because of his father's job, Hitler moved from Braunau to Passau, later to Lambach and finally to Leonding. He attended several Volksschule's.

Hitler's mother, Klara Pölzl, was his father's third wife and also his cousin. Hitler's father died in 1903. Hitler was born with only one testicle.

Hitler failed high school exams in Linz twice. In 1905, he left school. He became interested in the anti-Semitic (anti-Jewish), Pan-German teachings of Professor Leopold Poetsch. In September 1907, he went to Vienna and took an entrance examination. On 1 and 2 October, he failed the second examination. Hitler went back to Linz at the end of October. In December 1907, Hitler's mother died and, because of that, he was depressed. Hitler's mother was Catholic, but Hitler is not known to have been personally interested in Christianity.

In 1909, Hitler again went to Vienna to study art. He tried to become a student at the Academy of Arts, but failed the first entrance examination. He made many paintings and sold them at low prices. Hitler said he first became an anti-Semite in Vienna. This city had a large Jewish community.

In 1913, Hitler was 24 years old. At that time, all young Austrian men had to join the army. Hitler did not like the Austrian army and the Austro-Hungarian Empire because of its many ethnic groups, so he left Austria for Germany. He lived in the German city of Munich.

On 16 August 1914, Hitler joined the Bavarian army. He fought for the German Empire in World War I. Hitler served in Belgium and France in the 16th Bavarian Reserve Regiment. He spent nearly the whole time on the Western Front. He was a runner, one of the most dangerous jobs on the Front. That means he ran from one position to another, carrying messages. On 1 November 1914, Hitler became a Gefreiter (which was like being a private first class in the United States Army, or a lance corporal in the British Army). The government awarded him the Iron Cross Second Class on 2 December 1914.

On 5 October 1916, Hitler was hurt by a bullet shell. Between 9 October and 1 December, he was in the military hospital Belitz. In March 1917, he went back to the front. There, he fought in a battle and was awarded with the Militärverdienstkreuz Third Class with swords.

In March 1918, Hitler participated in the Spring Offensive. On 4 August 1918, Hitler was awarded the Iron Cross First Class by the Jewish Hugo Gutmann. After Germany surrendered, Hitler was shocked, because the German army still held enemy territory in November 1918.

After World War I, Hitler stayed in the army and returned to Munich. There he attended the funeral march of the Bavarian prime minister Kurt Eisner, who had been killed. In 1919, he participated in a training programme for propaganda speakers from 5 to 12 June and 26 June to 5 July.

Later that year, Hitler joined a small political party called the German Workers Party. He became member number 555. He soon won the support of the party's members. Two years later, he became the party's leader. He renamed the party the National Socialist German Workers Party. It became known as the Nazi Party.

In 1923, Hitler got together several hundred other members of the Nazi Party and tried to take over the Weimar Republic government (1918–34) in the Beer Hall Putsch. The coup failed. The government killed 13 of his men (the 13 dead men were later declared saints in Nazi ideology). They also put Hitler in the Landsberg Prison. They said that he would stay in prison for five years, but they let him leave after nine months.

While Hitler was in prison, he wrote a book with the help of his close friend Rudolf Hess and Maxwell Schmidtlein. At first, Hitler wanted to call the book Four and a Half Years of Struggle against Lies, Stupidity and Cowardice. In the end, he called the book "Mein Kampf" ("My Struggle").

Mein Kampf brought together some of Hitler's different ideas and explained where they came from:

Hitler may have also been influenced by Martin Luther's On the Jews and their Lies. In Mein Kampf, Hitler says Martin Luther was "a great warrior, a true statesman and a great reformer."

In January 1933, Hitler was elected into the German government and established a dictatorship in the following months. He ended freedom of speech, freedom of the press and punished his enemies by imprisoning or killing them. He banned every political party except for the Nazi Party by the summer of 1933 and Germany became a one-party state. Hitler and his propaganda minister, Joseph Goebbels, spread extreme nationalism within Germany. All media came under the control of the Nazi Party and they had to praise Hitler and the Nazis. Also, more people were born because Hitler wanted more people of the "master race" (those he called "Aryans"). After the death of Paul von Hindenburg in 1934, Hitler declared the office of President vacant and made himself Führer (both Head of State and Head of Government) and became a full dictator with no checks and balances. He made Germany a totalitarian fascist dictatorship.

Hitler was also responsible for the Beer Hall Putsch of 1923. In the Night of the Long Knives of 1934 he had Ernst Röhm the head of the SA killed by Heinrich Himmler, Reinhard Heydrich and the SS. They were also involved in the Kristallnacht (1938).

Hitler is credited with starting World War II on September 1, 1939 by ordering the German Army to invade Poland.  His army took over western Poland, and later most of Europe, including France and a large part of the Soviet Union.

During the war, Hitler ordered the Nazis to kill many people, including women and children. The Nazis killed around six million Jews in the Holocaust. Other people that the Nazis killed were Roma (Gypsies), homosexuals, Slavs such as Russians and Poles, and his political opponents. The Nazi’s justified the exploitation and slaughter of Jews via the stab-in-the-back myth - which many Germans believed to be true after their defeat and call for a ceasefire near the end of World War I - thought to be caused by overwhelming support from the United States of America and other allied countries such as France, along with a blockade on food and raw materials causing economic crises, a lack of military progress despite substantial causalities - and according to the stab-in-the-back myth - the influence of the Social Democratic Party of Germany during the war. Following this, the socialists split into extremes such as Communism, leading to competition between the SDP and KPD, causing multi-party instability during the Weimar Republic and influencing the popularity of the National Socialist German Workers’ Party until their eventual victory in 1933. The Nazi party continued to propagate propaganda which demonized Jews as back-stabbers, eventually leading to the holocaust where millions of Jews were exploited for slave labour, medical research, and as disposable military assets for the war economy.

Hitler referred to his Jewish family physician Dr. Eduard Bloch as an Edeljude (noble Jew) due to the compassionate care Dr. Bloch provided when he was treating Hitler’s mother for terminal breast cancer, compelling Hitler to grant Gestapo level protection to Dr. Bloch and his family. Dr. Bloch later immigrated to the United States of America and passed away in 1945 from stomach cancer - about a month after Hitler committed suicide - being one of few Jews Hitler exempted, though he still maintained his view of Jews as a collective threat to Germans.

Finally, some of the other countries in the world worked together to defeat Germany. Hitler lost all of the lands that he had taken. Millions of Germans were killed in the war. At the end of World War II, Hitler gave all people in the Führerbunker permission to leave it. Many people did and moved to the region of Berchtesgaden. They used planes and truck convoys.

Hitler, the Göbbels family, Martin Bormann, Eva Braun and some other  remained in the bunker. Hitler married Eva Braun on 29 April 1945.

Forty hours after Hitler and Eva Braun got married in Berlin, Germany, both of them committed suicide: Eva Braun, by poisoning with cyanide; Hitler also gave some to his German Shepherd. Then, Hitler committed suicide by shooting himself in the head with his gun. Before this, Hitler ordered that their bodies be burned after they were dead. This prevented him from being captured alive by soldiers of the Red Army, who were closing in on him. Despite this, there are theories that Hitler did not die in 1945, but that he instead escaped to Argentina. These theories are very unpopular, with most historians dismissing them.

Ian Kershaw, a historian who wrote a biography (life story) of Hitler, describes him as a modern symbol of evil. "Never in history has such ruination ... been [linked] with the name of one man." However, Kershaw and some other historians believe that it is more important to look at the wider problems in Germany at the time, rather than at Hitler himself, to explain why the war and the Holocaust happened.

The word aircraft originally meant airships and balloons. It comes from the words air and craft,  a term from boating as were many early aviation words.

Some aircraft keep in the sky by moving air over their wings. Examples are aeroplanes, helicopters, and gliders. Some aircraft keep in the sky by floating.  Examples are balloons and airships.

Most aircraft use engine power. Examples are aeroplanes, helicopter, and airships. Gliders and balloons use no power.  A few aircraft use muscle power. A parachute, whilst flying, is also considered an aircraft.

Big aeroplanes for transporting people are called airliners. Airliners are the quickest way to travel.  Airliners can fly over mountains and bad weather.  Airliners have complex technology to make them fly quickly, safely and for less money.

The person who drives an aircraft is called the aviator or pilot.

A hacker is someone who tries to get into another person's computer using computer software. The computer software could be Trojan horse programs, computer viruses, and worms. It used to mean someone who likes to do new things with computers.  The correct name for a person doing these illegal things was cracker, but many news stories used the word hacker even though it was in error. Another meaning of hacker is someone who can change or program something, like how people can change or program a Furby to say something insulting or humorous.

A person doing something illegal with a computer belonging to someone else without asking for permission from the owner is also called a hacker.

In the recent years computers were becoming increasingly more complex. This also means that people with bad intentions have more opportunities to use them for criminal purposes. Computer engineers are not always able to find vulnerable places in the computer code. Hackers find such places, and use them.

There are also hackers who use the same skills for good purposes. Such hackers are called white hat hackers. They help computer engineers to find vulnerable places and correct problems.

A lot of skills are often required to be a hacker. A hacker should be able to find problems or solutions that most other people cannot find.

Adam Smith (baptise date 16 June 1723 – 17 July 1790) was a Scottish economist, who is called the Father of Modern Economics. He wrote two classic books, The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) and An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776).

His book, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, published in 1776, was very important. People call the book just The Wealth of Nations. It stated some of the ideas off of which modern economics is based, especially market economics.

In the Wealth of Nations Adam Smith asks 'what can a person do that is best for his country?' He decides that if every person does what is best for them and their little circle of family and friends, then the country will do better. This is because every person knows a lot about their own situation (what they need and what they want, what works and what does not work), much more than the government knows. This sort of thinking is called "liberal theory", a main part of liberalism.

He was also a philosopher who wanted to know why people thought (felt) that some things are good and others bad.

He wrote an earlier book, in 1759, called The Theory of Moral Sentiments. He thought that empathy was very important in ethics. Empathy is when you see how someone else is feeling, imagine what it feels like, and then end up feeling the same way: for Smith, empathy is like "putting yourself in someone else's shoes". For example, empathy makes us feel happy to see someone else who is happy, or feel sorry for someone who is sad. Empathy may even make us feel pain when we see someone in pain (as if we had been hurt or affected). Both Smith and his friend David Hume, who was another Scottish philosopher, wrote about the importance of sympathy in ethics.

Abraham Lincoln ( ; February 12, 1809 – April 15, 1865) was an American politician who served as the 16th president of the United States from 1861 until his assassination in 1865. He led the United States through the American Civil War, defeating the Confederate States of America and abolished slavery in the United States. Lincoln has been remembered as the Great Emancipator because he worked to end slavery in the United States. He was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth. Lincoln is ranked by presidential historians as the greatest president in U.S. history.

Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12, 1809, in Hodgenville, Kentucky, United States. His parents were Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks. His family was very poor. Abraham had one brother and one sister. His brother died in childhood. They grew up in a small log cabin, with just one room inside. Although slavery was legal in Kentucky at that time, Lincoln's father, who was a religious Baptist, refused to own any slaves.

When Lincoln was seven years old, his family moved to Indiana. Later, they moved to Illinois. In his childhood he helped his father on the farm, but when he was 22 years old he left home and moved to New Salem, Illinois, where he worked in a general store.

Later, he said that he had gone to school for just one year, but that was enough to learn how to read, write, and do simple math. When he was 21, he worked on a flatboat that carried freight. In 1842, he married Mary Todd. They had four children, but three of them died when they were very young.

Abraham Lincoln was sometimes called Abe Lincoln or "Honest Abe" because of a legend stating that he ran miles to give a customer the right amount of change. The nickname "Honest Abe" came from a time when he started a business that failed. Instead of running away like many people would have, he stayed and worked to pay the money he owed.

Lincoln started his political career in 1832 when he ran for the Illinois General Assembly, but he lost the election. He served as a captain in the Illinois militia during the Black Hawk War, a war with Native American tribes. When he moved to Springfield in 1837, he began to work as a lawyer. Soon, he became one of the most highly respected lawyers in Illinois.

In 1837, as a member of the Illinois General Assembly, Lincoln issued a written protest of its passage of a resolution stating that slavery could not be abolished in Washington, D.C.

In 1841, he won a court case (Bailey v. Cromwell). He represented a black woman who claimed she had already been freed and could not be sold as a slave. In 1847, he lost a case (Matson v. Rutherford) representing a slave owner (Robert Matson) claiming the return of fugitive slaves. After he moved to Illinois, he worked as a shopkeeper and postmaster. He rode the circuit of courts for many years.

In 1846, Lincoln joined the Whig Party and was elected to one term in the House of Representatives.  After that, he ignored his political career and instead worked as a lawyer. In 1854, in reaction to the passage of the Kansas-Nebraska Act, Lincoln became involved in politics again. He joined the Republican Party, which had recently been formed in opposition to the expansion of slavery. In 1858, he wanted to become senator. He ran for senate against Stephen A. Douglas. Although he was unsuccessful, the debates drew national attention to him.

The Republican Party nominated him for the Presidential election of 1860.

Lincoln was chosen as a candidate for the Republican Party, the second candidate to be nominated from the party. He was chosen in 1860 for different reasons. Among these reasons was that his views on slavery were less extreme than those of other people who wanted to be candidates.  Lincoln was from what was then one of the Western states and had a bigger chance of winning the election there. Other candidates that were older or more experienced than him had enemies inside the party.  Lincoln's family was poor, which added to the Republican position of free labor, the opposite of slave labor. Lincoln won the election in 1860 and was made the 16th President of the United States.  He won with almost no votes in the South. For the first time, a president had won the election because of the large support he got from the states in the North. During his presidency Lincoln became well known because of his large stovepipe hat. He used his tall hat to store papers and documents when he was traveling.

After Lincoln's election in 1860, seven States (South Carolina, Mississippi, Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Texas and Louisiana) formed the Confederate States of America. When the United States refused to surrender Fort Sumter in Charleston, South Carolina, the Confederates attacked the fort, beginning the American Civil War.  Later, four more states (Arkansas, Virginia, Tennessee, and North Carolina) joined the Confederacy for a total of eleven.  In his whole period as president, he had to rebuild the Union with military force and many bloody battles.  He also had to stop the "border states", like Kentucky, Missouri, and Maryland, from leaving the Union and joining the Confederacy.

Lincoln was not a general, and had only been in the army for a short time during the Black Hawk War.  However, he still took a major role in the war, often spending days and days in the War Department.  His plan was to cut off the South by surrounding it with ships, control the Mississippi River, and take Richmond, the Confederate capital.  He often clashed with generals in the field, especially George B. McClellan, and fired generals who lost battles or were not aggressive enough.  Eventually, he made Ulysses S. Grant the top general in the army.

With the Emancipation Proclamation begun on January 1, 1863, Lincoln ordered the freedom of all slaves in those states still in rebellion during the American Civil War. It did not actually immediately free all those slaves however, since those areas were still controlled by the rebelling states of the Confederacy. Only a small number of slaves already behind Union lines were immediately freed. As the Union army advanced, nearly all four million slaves were effectively freed. Some former slaves joined the Union army after 1862.

The Proclamation also did not free slaves in the slave states that had remained loyal to the Union (the federal government of the US). Neither did it apply to areas where Union forces had already regained control, as in Tennessee. Until the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1865, only the states had power to end slavery within their own borders, so Lincoln issued the proclamation as a war measure.

The Proclamation made freeing the slaves a Union goal for the war, and put an end to movements in European nations (especially in Great Britain and France) that would have recognized the Confederacy as an independent nation.  Lincoln then sponsored a constitutional amendment to free all slaves. The Thirteenth Amendment, making slavery illegal everywhere in the United States, was passed late in 1865, eight months after Lincoln was assassinated.

Lincoln made a famous speech after the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863 called the Gettysburg Address.  The battle was very important, and many soldiers from both sides died.  The speech was given at the new cemetery for the dead soldiers.  It is one of the most famous speeches in American history.

Lincoln was re-elected president by a small number of votes in 1864 and re-inaugurated on March 4, 1865. Soon afterward, it appeared likely that the Union would win the Civil War. Lincoln wanted to make it easy for states that had rebelled to restore self-government. On April 9, 1865, the leading Confederate general, Robert E. Lee, surrendered his armies. On April 11, 1865, Lincoln gave a speech in which he promoted voting rights for black American citizens.

During the day on April 14, 1865, Lincoln signed the law that created the secret service, the US President's security force. On the evening of April 14, Lincoln went to attend a play with his wife, Mary Todd at Ford's Theater in Washington, D.C.. He had invited Ulysses S. Grant to attend the play with him and his wife Mary Todd, and Grant planned to attend. As a general, Grant would have brought his own extra military security force, but he did not attend the play because his wife Julia and Mary Todd did not get along well.

During the third act of the play, John Wilkes Booth, a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland, entered the presidential box and shot Lincoln at point-blank range, mortally wounding him and screamed "Sic semper tyrannis" ("Thus always to tyrants"). An unconscious Lincoln was carried across the street to Petersen House. He was placed diagonally on the bed because his tall frame would not fit normally on the smaller bed. He remained in a coma for nine hours before dying the next morning. According to some accounts, at his last drawn breath, on the morning after the assassination, he smiled broadly and then expired. Lincoln was the first American president to be .

Booth escaped but died from shots fired during his capture on April 26.

Lincoln has been consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as one of the greatest U.S. presidents. He is often considered the greatest president in American history for his leadership during the American Civil War and his eloquence in speeches such as the Gettysburg Address.

A computer virus is a harmful software designed to duplicate itself and spread from one device to another. Often, computer viruses are run as a part of other programs. Any program that is affected by the virus is "infected". Biological viruses also work that way, as they copy themselves as part of other organisms. This is how the computer virus got its name.

In addition to copying itself, a computer virus may perform harmful actions that damage systems or steal data.For this reason, computer viruses affect security. They are part of malware.

Very often, the term is also used for other kinds of malware, such as trojan horses and worms. Even though this is wrong, it may be difficult to tell the difference between different kinds of malware; they often occur together, and only an expert may be able to tell them apart. Such programs also fit more than one category.

Computer viruses are created for a cause, sometimes they are created to spread political messages and they are also created to hack some system files.

Computer viruses are spread through many ways. Some of the common ways of spreading are through downloads, email attachments, removable hardwares, and so on. Many viruses are extremely harmful, often causing data loss or disabling systems.

In the beginning, operating systems Certain users may only have access to certain files and are unable to access others. Other users may be able to modify or delete certain files. These privileges can be specified for each file.

The damage a virus can cause is influenced by the rights the user has; if the user has no rights to write to certain places in the system, the virus will not be able to spread to those places.

Another problem is that sometimes the system for rights management may be available, but that it is not used by default. This is the case with systems such as Windows NT or Windows XP, where by default all users have same rights.

Antivirus software can protect computers against known viruses. Some antivirus software scan files and compare a hash code for each file with its database of hash codes (or "signature"). If the code matches, it has likely found a virus. This way of doing things has created some problems. It will only protect against viruses whose hash code is known. The companies that wrote the antivirus need to keep the virus signatures up-to-date and need to give this information to the PC to be protected.

There are two possible modes of scanning: Either the file is scanned "on demand" (or "manually"), or it is scanned when the system registers an access to the file called "on access".

Antivirus software cannot offer full protection, even in the case the virus is known. Some viruses use something called polymorphic code to change their signature every time they move. No matter how many signatures the company has, they will not be able to stop these types of viruses.

Another way that antivirus software can protect against viruses is to use heuristics. Instead of knowing each virus by its signature, heuristic antivirus software look at the behavior of other software. If a software does something that seems bad, the antivirus software steps-in to stop it. Since every step needs to be watched, this is a slow way to do things.

The best protection against viruses can be obtained by using a system that boots off a read-only medium, such as a compact disc (called CD), digital versatile disc (called DVD), or USB flash drive (called USB) that does not allow write access to hard disk (or other removable media). This limits the usability of the computer as it is not possible to save documents or install new programs. Only -R media (not -RW) should be used, and the media should be finalized to prevent creating a new session that might possibly contain.

An abortion is a medical procedure (also called induced abortion) that ends a pregnancy before birth. It can be done surgically or with medicine. A sudden miscarriage (also called spontaneous abortion), sometimes called an early pregnancy loss is when pregnancy ends early. An early birth is when pregnancy ends early, after 37 weeks.

In humans, a developing embryo usually takes about 40-42 weeks to grow and be born. A premature baby can born as early as 38 weeks. The different stages are called trimesters. Normally, this occurs about forty weeks after the mother's last menstrual period. Most women won't notice their menstrual period stopped until well after 12 weeks due to periods being abnormal and not always on schedule. This developing human is called an embryo for the first eight weeks of the pregnancy, and foetus for the rest of the pregnancy. Abortion causes the embryo or foetus to die.

When an abortion occurs naturally, it is often called a miscarriage. Humans can also choose to end the pregnancy before birth takes place. This is called an induced abortion. The term abortion often refers only to an induced abortion.

In both types of abortion, the embryo or foetus usually comes out of the womb. This is called a complete abortion. In some cases, the embryo or foetus remains inside the womb. This is called a missed abortion. Surgery is needed to remove the embryo or foetus from the womb so the woman does not get an infection.

Different countries have different laws regarding induced abortion. While abortion is illegal in many countries, there are often exceptions that permit it in cases such as family incest, rape, the foetus having severe disabilities or the mother's health being at risk. Still in many countries even after rape can take place a person would be forced to give birth.

People say there has been a spontaneous abortion or miscarriage when the embryo or foetus is lost due to natural causes before the 20th week of pregnancy. A pregnancy that ends this way, but that is between 20 and 37 weeks old is known as premature birth if the baby is born alive. If the foetus dies in the womb after 20 weeks, or while it is born, this is known as a stillbirth. Premature births and stillbirths are generally not considered to be miscarriages.

Spontaneous abortions (miscarriages) are common. About fifteen percent of pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion. In many cases, the woman is not even aware she was pregnant. The pregnancy is only a few days or weeks old and the woman believes the miscarriage is just her menses. About twenty-five percent of all women will have a spontaneous abortion during their lives.

Most miscarriages occur very early. Between ten and fifty percent of pregnancies end with a miscarriage, where the mother or the doctors are aware of it. These figures depend on the age and health of the pregnant woman. Most spontaneous abortions occur so early in the pregnancy that the woman is not even aware that she was pregnant. One particular study showed that 61.9% of pregnancies end in miscarriage before 12 weeks. In 91.7% of these miscarriages, the woman did not know she was pregnant.

The risk of spontaneous abortion decreases sharply after the 10th week of pregnancy, with a loss rate between 8.5 weeks LMP and birth of about two percent; pregnancy loss is “virtually complete by the end of the embryonic period."

Those people who have already had several spontaneous or induced abortions run a greater risk of having a spontaneous one. Those with certain diseases, and those over the age 35 also run a greater risk. Other causes for abortions can be the infection of either the woman or embryo/ foetus, or their immune response. Certain diseases or an accidental trauma can also cause a spontaneous abortion. Putting the woman under trauma or stress to cause miscarriage is considered induced abortion. Some countries call this feticide.

Most miscarriages are due to problems with the copying of chromosomes, but some are caused by environmental factors. When a human is conceived, it gets 23 chromosomes from its mother and 23 from its father. If it does not get the right number its development happens wrong (it does not grow right.) It may have many bad birth defects.

Most embryos and foetuses with chromosome problems will not live for a long time. They die very early. There are a few chromosome problems that babies can sometimes be born with. For example, Down syndrome happens when there are three copies of chromosome 21. (Usually people have 2 of every chromosome.) This is called trisomy 21 (tri- means 3.)

The most common symptom is bleeding from the vagina. This can be very little blood (less blood than a normal menses.) It can be very much blood (much more than a normal menses.)

Some women have bad pains in their low abdomen when they have a miscarriage. This is sometimes like the pain of menses. It can be much worse. Or a woman may have no pain at all. If the pregnancy is many weeks old, the woman may see the embryo or foetus when it comes out. But if it is less than 12 weeks old a woman may not see anything but blood.

Usually, no treatment is needed for a miscarriage. However, sometimes some pregnancy tissue remains in the womb after the miscarriage and must be removed. Sometimes doctors do a surgical abortion. This is the same kind of surgery that is done for induced abortions. Doctors can also prescribe women medicines that can help the miscarriage finish without needing surgery.

An induced abortion is when things are done to end the pregnancy on purpose. These things are normally done by doctors. In countries where abortion can be done legally, it is often done by specialists who know a lot about women's bodies (gynecologists). Abortions done illegally are often performed by people without this special knowledge. This makes them more dangerous. Such abortions are usually called unsafe abortions, back-alley abortions or DIY abortions, mainly because the risk to the health of the mother is much higher than with abortions carried out by skilled doctors.

There can be medical reasons why an abortion is performed. These include:

There are two different types (kinds) of induced abortions. The type of abortion that is done depends on a few different things, like what the woman wants, what her doctor thinks is best, and how far along a woman is in her pregnancy (how long she has been pregnant).

One type of induced abortion is called a "medical abortion" or a "medication abortion". In this type of abortion, a doctor gives the woman one or two medications that will end her pregnancy. A medication abortion can only be done early on in the pregnancy. This is because the medications that are used work best when they are started as early as possible, and after a woman has been pregnant for about two months, the medications usually do not work very well. Because of this, medication abortion usually is not used after a woman has been pregnant for 9 weeks. Some of the benefits (or reasons why some women choose this type of abortion) are that it can be started as soon as a woman realizes she is pregnant; it does not require anesthesia; and the woman does not have to have a procedure in a hospital or clinic to have the foetus removed, like with the other kind of abortion that is done. After a woman is given the medication or medications that end her pregnancy, the abortion happens like a spontaneous abortion or a miscarriage would. The woman passes the foetus, along with the blood and tissue that have built up in the uterus, from her vagina.

The most common medications that are used for medication abortions are mifepristone and misoprostol. First, a doctor gives the woman mifepristone, which is sometimes also called "RU-468" or "the abortion pill". This drug blocks the hormone progesterone in the body. Without progesterone, the embryo cannot survive. The lining of the uterus becomes thinner, and the embryo cannot grow or stay attached to the lining of the uterus. After a few days, a doctor gives the woman misoprostol. This makes the uterus contract (or get smaller) and the embryo is expelled from (or pushed out of) the uterus through the woman's vagina. Sometimes, another medication, called methotrexate, is used along with misoprostol in medication abortions. A woman is given methotrexate, usually as a shot in a doctor's office, and the drug stops the embryo from staying attached to the lining of the uterus. Then misoprostol is given a few days later.

With the second type of abortion - called "surgical abortion" or "in-office abortion" - a doctor does a procedure that removes an embryo or foetus from the woman's uterus. This kind of abortion can be done in different ways, depending on how long the woman has been pregnant. Surgical abortion is simpler, and there are fewer problems that can happen, if it is done earlier on in the pregnancy. The most common form is called an "aspiration abortion" or a "suction curettage." This can be done in a doctor's office or clinic. First the woman's cervix (the top part of the uterus) is dilated (or made bigger). A medical tool is used to suction out everything inside the woman's uterus, including the foetus. If the woman has been pregnant for more than 12 weeks, the doctor first has to dilate the cervix (or make the cervix bigger), usually by putting small sticks into the cervix to help it open up. If another tool, called a curette, has to be used to scrape out tissue that is still inside the uterus, then this form of abortion is sometimes called a "dilation and curettage" (or "D&C") or dilation and evacuation.

A pregnancy that ends without a child being born also may cause some problems to the woman this happens to. There are two broad groups of things that can happen:

Abortion is safer than childbirth if it is done before the 16th week of pregnancy and it is done by a professional. Certain methods of abortion are pretty safe, and complications are rare. Generally, stopping a pregnancy that has gone on longer is riskier.

Women usually feel a small amount of pain during first-trimester abortion. In a 1979 study of 2,299 patients, 97% reported having some amount of pain. Patients rated the pain as being less than earache or toothache, but more than headache or backache.

Few studies have been done to see if an abortion affects the woman psychologically, or mentally. Those that have been done give contradictory results. One study looked at 13.000 women who had become pregnant even though they did not want to. The study found that having an induced abortion does not increase the risk of getting mental health problems; the group that was compared were women who also did not want to have a baby, but who did not have an abortion. Other studies showed similar results: women who had an abortion did better in school or at work after the abortion. Another study showed that women who had an abortion had a higher self-esteem and felt better than those who did not.

Many women who had an abortion felt better afterwards, they also felt relieved. They would do it again in a similar situation.

A study done in New Zealand in 2006 showed that many women who had an abortion developed severe depression up to 4 years after they had the abortion. They were also more likely to have problems with alcohol and illegal drugs than those women who did not have an abortion. The person who oversaw the study later told media that given these results it would be very hard to say that having an abortion has no psychological effects on the woman who has it. He called the abortion "a traumatic experience".

Both spontaneous and induced abortions have some risk for the woman.

If a bad thing happens because of a surgery or medicine that a doctor gives, or because of a miscarriage, it is called a complication. Complications of abortions can be infection, bleeding, pain. There may or may not be problems getting pregnant again; this is still being researched. In places where induced abortions are legal less than 1% of induced abortions have a bad complication. If doctors do induced abortions, the risk to the woman is less than the risk of complications of childbirth (giving birth to a baby). In places where induced abortions are legal, less women have complications of induced abortion than in places where induced abortion is illegal. This is because induced abortions that are not done by doctors have much more risks. For example, after induced abortions became legal in the United States in 1973, less women died from having abortions. In the United States in 2000, 11 women died from the complications of legal abortion. The risk of death from a legal abortion is 1/100 of the risk of an appendectomy. The risk of death from an injection (shot) of penicillin (an antibiotic) is bigger than the risk of death from a legal abortion.

There can be emotional problems for the woman after a spontaneous or induced abortion. She may feel sad, angry, or guilty that she had a miscarriage or asked for an abortion. She may think she has done something that made the miscarriage happen, or that having an abortion was the wrong thing to do, and because of this she may feel intense grief. There are many places where women can get help dealing with these feelings.

Some women who have induced abortions may get criticism from friends or family who have different beliefs. When scientists look at this in research studies, however, they do not usually see that women have emotional problems after induced abortions. In 1987, President Ronald Reagan told the Surgeon General of the US to look at this question. Both president Reagan and the Surgeon General C. Everett Koop did not think abortion was right. Dr Koop looked at 250 papers that scientists wrote in scientific journals. Dr Koop said that the science we know does not show that induced abortions cause emotional problems for women who have them.

The number of induced abortions done are different for different parts of the world. This is also true for the reasons why women decide to have an abortion. Estimates are that about 46 million induced abortions are done worldwide, every year. 26 million of them occur in places where abortion is legal, 20 million happen in countries where it is illegal to have an abortion. Some countries, like Belgium (11.2 per 100 known pregnancies) and the Netherlands (10.6 per 100) have a low rate of induced abortion. Others, like Russia (62.6 per 100) and Vietnam (43.7 per 100) have a comparatively high rate. Overall, there are 26 induced abortions per 100 known pregnancies.

WHO estimated in 2001 that every year, about 210 million women get pregnant, and that there are about 135 mililon live births. The remaining 75 million cases are miscarriages or induced abortions. About forty percent of pregnancies are unplanned, and about a fifth of the pregnant women decide to end the pregnancy early. This results in about 42 million abortions per year. About 20 million of these are legal, the rest are against the law. Most of the illegal abortions are performed by those who are not medically qualified, often with poor hygiene, which often threaten the lives of the women. The WHO estimated that about 47.000 women died in 2008 because of illegal abortions. This number was lower than the estimate of 1990, mainly because in South America, women opted to take drugs to end the pregnancy.

Abortion rates vary. The length the pregnancy has gone on, and the method used to do the abortion influence these rates. According to data collected in the United States, 88.2% of abortions were done in the first twelve weeks of pregnancy, 10.4% between week 13 and week 20 of the pregnancy. The remaining 1.4% were done in week 21 or later.

90.9% were done by curettage, 7.7% were medical abortions (using drugs, mifepristone in most cases), 0.4% by "intrauterine instillation" (saline or prostaglandin), and 1.0% by "other" (including hysterotomy and hysterectomy). The Guttmacher Institute estimated there were 2,200 intact dilation and extraction procedures in the U.S. during 2000 - 0.17% of the total number of abortions performed that year. Similarly, in England and Wales in 2006, 89% of terminations occurred at or under 12 weeks, 9% between 13 and 19 weeks, and 1.5% at or over 20 weeks. 64% of those reported were by vacuum aspiration, 6% by D&E, and 30% were medical. Later abortions are more common in China, India, and other developing countries than in developed countries.

In 1998, a study was done in 27 countries. This study wanted to find the reasons, why women wanted to end their pregnancy. It found that women often gave one of the following reasons:

A different study, done in the United States in 2004 came to similar conclusions.

Women who had an abortion in Finland and the United States usually did not state that the pregnancy posed a risk to their health. In Bangladesh, India and Kenya, however, more such women thought the pregnancy was a risk to their health. 1% of women in the 2004 survey-based U.S. study became pregnant as a result of rape and 0.5% as a result of incest. Another American study in 2002 concluded that 54% of women who had an abortion were using a form of contraception at the time of becoming pregnant. Inconsistent use was reported by 49% of those using condoms and 76% of those using the combined oral contraceptive pill; 42% of those using condoms reported failure through slipping or breakage. The Guttmacher Institute estimated that "most abortions in the United States are obtained by minority women" because minority women "have much higher rates of unintended pregnancy."

Some women have an abortion because the society they live in pressures them to.

Any of these factors might force a pregnant woman to have an abortion.

Induced abortion is not legal in every place. In some countries, a doctor who does an induced abortion is committing a crime. In Canada, Japan, China, many countries in Europe, and some states of the United States, abortion is legal (not a crime). In some places like Nigeria and the US state of Texas, it is legal only to save the life of the woman. In a few countries, like El Salvador, abortion is never legal, including in cases where the woman risks dying from continuing the pregnancy.

In countries where induced abortion is not legal many more women die from abortion. Women still get induced abortions, but they cannot get them in safe hospitals and clinics. These induced abortions have more complications than abortions done by doctors.

Women who live in places where abortion is illegal, or heavily frowned upon sometimes travel to other places where an abortion can be done legally, so they can have an abortion. This is a form of medical tourism.

Spontaneous abortions occur in various mammals. In sheep, it may be caused by crowding through doors, or by being chased by dogs. In cows, abortion may be caused by contagious diseases, such as Brucellosis or Campylobacter. This can often be controlled by vaccination, though.

Abortion may also be induced in animals, in the context of animal husbandry. For example, abortion may be induced in mares that have been mated improperly, or that have been purchased by owners who did not realize the mares were pregnant, or that are pregnant with twin foals.

Feticide can occur in horses and zebras. Usually this is done because males harass pregnant mares or force copulation. Scientists have raised the question, how often this occurs in the wild, though. Male Gray langur monkeys may attack females following male takeover, causing miscarriage.

Induced abortion is controversial and the subject of abortion debate. People often base their opinions on moral systems. Religion can also influence these opinion.

A number of opinion polls have been carried out around the world. They have tried to find out what people think about abortion. Results were different for different countries, but also varied with the questions that were asked.

In May 2005, a survey was done in ten European countries. The people were asked, if they could agree with the statement: "If a woman does not want children, she should be allowed to have an abortion". The highest level of approval was 81% in the Czech Republic; the lowest was 47% in Poland.

A poll was done in November 2001. The poll asked people in Canada in what circumstances they believed an abortion should be permitted. 32% responded that they believe abortion should be legal in all circumstances, 52% that it should be legal in certain circumstances, and 14% that it should never be legal. A similar poll in April 2009 surveyed people in the United States about abortion; 18% said that abortion should be "legal in all cases", 28% said that abortion should be "legal in most cases", 28% said abortion should be "illegal in most cases" and 16% said abortion should be "illegal in all cases". In a Gallup poll taken in July 2011, however, 47% of Americans identified themselves as pro-life and the same percentage of Americans identified themselves as pro-choice. A November 2005 poll in Mexico found that 73.4% think abortion should not be legalized while 11.2% think it should.

Of attitudes in South America, a December 2003 survey found that 30% of Argentines thought that abortion should be allowed in Argentina "regardless of situation", 47% that it should be allowed "under some circumstances", and 23% that it should not be allowed "regardless of situation". A March 2007 poll about abortion in Brazil found that 65% of Brazilians believe that it "should not be modified", 16% that it should be expanded "to allow abortion in other cases", 10% that abortion should be "decriminalized", and 5% were "not sure". A July 2005 poll in Colombia found that 65.6% said they thought that abortion should remain illegal, 26.9% that it should be made legal, and 7.5% that they were unsure.

Some people have strong feelings about abortion. People who think that the law should let women choose to have abortions are called pro-choice. People who think that abortion is wrong and that the law should not allow it are called pro-life.

People who are pro-choice believe that women should be allowed to have control over their own bodies when it comes to ending or continuing a pregnancy. They believe that, because the embryo or foetus is inside the woman's body and does not have developed enough organs to survive on its own until later in the pregnancy, it is not yet a person with rights. Pro-choice people also make the argument that abortion needs to be legal in order to protect women, because when abortion is illegal, it does not completely stop abortions from happening, but makes it so that women try to do abortions on themselves or get them done by people who are not trained doctors, which puts those women in danger of death or injury. Pro-choice people believe the way to prevent abortion is to make sure women only get pregnant when they want to. In addition to advocating the legality of abortion, pro-choice groups like Planned Parenthood often try to improve people's access to things used to prevent pregnancy (called contraception), and try to teach young people about sex to reduce the number of teen pregnancies.

People who are pro-life believe that all humans, including the unborn, have a right to life. For this reason, they believe abortion is wrong and that it is murder. They think the law should make abortion a crime in order to protect innocent life within the womb. However, though pro-life people think abortion is wrong, there are rare cases in which some pro-life people would allow an abortion to happen, like if the pregnancy puts the woman's life at risk or if she got pregnant from rape. Pro-life people think women who are pregnant and do not want to raise a child should look for alternatives to abortion such as giving the baby up for adoption. There are many crisis pregnancy centers pro-life people have started to discourage women from having abortions. They have also started advocacy groups, like the American Life League, Feminists for Life and Live Action, to try to convince more people to believe that abortion is wrong and to try to get governments to make laws to restrict abortion. Some pro-life people have used violence to try to stop abortions from happening. However, most people who are against abortion do not do such things and so they try to stop abortions from happening through peaceful activism.

Many religions have a view on abortion. These views span a broad spectrum from acceptance to rejection. Most religions generally oppose abortion.

Generally, when there is a debate about whether abortion laws should be changed in a country, there are advocacy groups. Some of the arguments these groups often have are outlined below.

There is a hypothesis that induced abortion raises the risk of getting breast cancer. People who support this, call it a link, rather than a hypothesis.

The subject has been controversial, but currently, scientists agree that there is no link between abortion in the first trimester, and increasing the risk to get breast cancer.

In early pregnancy, levels of estrogen increase. This causes the breast to grow, and to prepare for lactation. In the 1890s, studies were done on rats, before this hypothesis was put forward.

It is currently unclear from what moment the embryo or foetus can feel pain. This is also used in the debate about abortion. Many researchers think that a foetus is unlikely to feel pain until after the seventh month of pregnancy. Others disagree. At about twenty-six weeks of pregnancy, certain connections are made in the thalamus of the growing foetus. Developmental neurobiologists suspect that these connections may be critical to perception of pain by the foetus. However, legislation has been proposed by pro-life advocates requiring abortion providers to tell a woman that the embryo or foetus may feel pain during an abortion procedure.

Researchers from the University of California, San Francisco published a study in the Journal of the American Medical Association. The study analyzed data from dozens of medical reports and other studies. The researchers concluded that foetuses are unlikely to feel pain until the third trimester of pregnancy. However a number of medical critics have since disputed these conclusions. There are certain connections in the thalamus of the foetuse. These connections develop at about twenty-six weeks of pregnancy. At the end of the 20th century there was an emerging consensus among developmental neurobiologists that these connections are very important when it comes to the perception of pain in the foetus. Other researchers such as Anand and Fisk have challenged this late date, positing that pain can be felt around twenty weeks.

Pain can have many different aspects: It might be purely relying on sensory input, but it might also involve emotions and thought. For this reason, it is perhaps impossible to know exactly when the embryo or foetus feels pain, even if it has developed the links in the thalamus.

Abraham (originally Abram) is a man in the Bible's Book of Genesis and the Qur'an. Abraham is said to be the Patriarch (father) of the Jewish People. He is the one of the most respected figures of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, as he is considered the father of these Abrahamic religions.

Abraham was the son of Terah and the grandson of Nahor (son of Serug). Abraham's older brothers were named Nahor (son of Terah) and Haran.

According to the Bible, Abraham had children from three different women. With his wife Sarah, he had Isaac. With Sara's handmaid, Hagar, he had Ishmael. He also had additional children with Keturah, whom he marries after Sarah's death.

Abraham was also the grandfather of Jacob and Esau. He is believed to be the founding patriarch of the Israelites, Ishmaelites and Edomites.

In the Book of Genesis, God tells Abraham to leave his home in Mesopotamia and go to Canaan. There, he would become the ancestor of a great nation. At the time, his name was Abram.

The Almighty told Abram to circumcise himself and all his sons. He told Abram: “the uncircumcised male who dwells among you, his soul shall be cut off, for he has rejected my covenant”. After his circumcision, Abram changed his name to Abraham.

When Abraham was circumcised, the Almighty told him that his wife Sarah would give birth to a son. Abraham laughed because of how old he was and asked the Almighty to give a blessing to Ishmael. The Almighty told Abraham that he would bless Ishmael and that Sarah would give birth to a son whose children would inherit what the Almighty promised Abraham.

After Abraham’s circumcision three angels pretending to be humans came to him and told him that in one year his wife Sarah would give birth to a son. She laughed, since Abraham was 100 years old and she was 90. The angels responded that nothing is impossible for the Almighty. Indeed, one year later, Sarah gave birth to a son. Abraham circumcised him and named him Isaac because of the laughter.

Years after Hagar and Ishmael were sent away, the Almighty told Abraham “take your son, your only one, whom you love Isaac and sacrifice him”. So Abraham took Isaac to a mountain to be a human sacrifice for God.

However, the Almighty sent an angel to Abraham to stop him from killing Isaac and said that “I have seen that you are indeed a God-fearing man since you have not withheld your son, your only one from me”. Abraham sacrificed a ram instead of Isaac, and named the place Yireh.

After Abraham’s wife Sarah died when she was 127 years old, Abraham bought the Cave of Machpelah from Ephron the Hittite for 400 shekels and buried Sarah there. He then sent his servant to find a wife for Isaac. Then Abraham married Keturah and became the father of many children. Abraham died when he was 175 years old. Isaac and Ishmael buried him next to Sarah in the Cave of Machpelah.

According to a midrash in the Talmud, when Abraham was young, his father Terah told him to take care of his store selling idols. Instead Abraham destroyed all but the biggest idol. When he told Terah what he had done,  Terah told him that idols are mindless statues and not deities. Then Abraham asked Terah why he worshipped them. Terah took him to King Nimrod, who tried to kill him by burning him in a furnace. A miracle saved Abraham from death.

Nimrod then asked Abraham’s brother Haran what he believed. Haran said he believed in the deity of Abraham because God would save him with a miracle. Nimrod threw Haran to the furnace, and Haran died. Next Nimrod sent away Terah and his family, and God told Abraham to go to Canaan.

The African Union (AU) is a continental union consisting of fifty-five member countries located in Africa. The AU was announced in the Sirte Declaration in Sirte, Libya on 9 September 1999 and founded in Durban, South Africa on 9 July 2002, formed as a replacement for the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) and the African Economic Community (AEC).

The AU's most important decisions are made by Chairperson of the African Union. The current chairperson is President of Burundi Évariste Ndayishimiye since 2026.

According to the AU, its purpose is to unify African countries, defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of its member states, achieve political integration with an integrated defence force, maintain the continent's democracy, promote human rights, and have a sustainable economy, especially by bringing an end to conflict between African nations and creating a common market with a single unified currency, and have a cabinet for the AU Head of State in the future.

Example of the AUs relations with a country: FOCAC (or Forum on China–Africa Cooperation).

Addiction is when the body or mind badly wants or needs something in order to work right. When you have an addiction to something it is called being addicted or being an addict. People can be addicted to drugs, cigarettes, alcohol,  caffeine, and many other things.

When somebody is addicted to something, they can become sick if they do not get the thing they are addicted to. But taking more of the thing they are addicted to can also hurt their health. Some people who are addicts need to go to a doctor or hospital to cure the addiction, so they no longer crave (want or need) the drug.

Addiction takes place when the addictive element enters the body.  The blood stream moves the element around the body so that it gets to the brain, and makes the person feel that they are enjoying it; then they want more of that substance. This takes place remarkably fast for some addictions such as hashish and cocaine; but all of them control the consumer. Once under this control, the consumer does not have complete free will, and listens to the addiction's bidding.

People can also be addicted to other things which are not drugs. You may hear people talk about being "addicted to the Internet" or "addicted to chocolate" or gambling. This means that they get into a habit of enjoying that thing, so if they have to go without it for a while, they miss it a lot.

Addiction is similar to a major disease like chronic heart disease or perhaps diabetes, but addictions are not taken as seriously as these major diseases. Most people believe addiction to be a lifestyle choice, which it is but it is also part of a person's genetics. While some people can do things and control themselves others cannot due to their genetic makeup. There are ways of helping the addict but this takes the admission of a problem and then proper testing to reveal what kind of treatment is needed.

The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) defines addiction as a treatable, chronic medical disease involving complex interactions among brain circuits, genetics, the environment, and an individual's life experiences. People with addiction use substances or engage in compulsive behaviors and often continue despite harmful consequences. Prevention efforts and treatment approaches for addiction are generally as successful as those for other chronic diseases.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is an  organization. On 8th August 1967, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore, and the Philippines formed the ASEAN. At that time, communism was growing in Vietnam, and these five countries were also facing problems inside their own countries. In this background, these five countries created ASEAN as a show of common display of cooperation. In short, the purpose of the organization is political and economic cooperation. The organization is headquartered in Jakarta, Indonesia.

There had been an earlier organization called the Association of Southeast Asia (ASA). It was an international organization of Philippines, Malaysia, and Thailand. These three countries had formed ASA in 1961. It was named because all the countries in it are a part of Southeast Asia.

In 1976, the ASEAN countries held a conference in Bali. After this, these countries started closer economic cooperation. But, by the mid-1980s, the activities of the ASEAN had slowed down. By 1991, Thailand proposed a free trade area. The ASEAN countries meet every year to talk about many matters.

Originally there were only five members of the ASEAN. Brunei Darussalam joined the ASEAN on 7 January 1984. Vietnam joined the ASEAN on 28 July 1995. Laos and Myanmar joined the ASEAN on 23 July 1997. Cambodia became a member on 30th April 1999. East Timor is the only Southeast Asian country that is not a member of ASEAN. However both East Timor and Papua New Guinea (which is not considered geographically a part of Southeast Asia) are observers of ASEAN and wish to become full members of ASEAN.

The ASEAN countries had created an ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). 27 countries are members of the ASEAN Regional Forum. The leaders of these countries meet and talk about various matters, especially security and economic cooperation. The current members in the ARF are: Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, Singapore, Philippines, Vietnam, Brunei, Laos, Myanmar, Cambodia, Australia, Canada, the People's Republic of China, the European Union, India, Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Mongolia, New Zealand, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Russia, East Timor, United States, and Sri Lanka.

The ASEAN holds a meeting every year. The meeting lasts for 3 days, and the members discuss many things.

As of 2023, there are two states seeking to join ASEAN. Those countries are Papua New Guinea and East Timor. Papua New Guinea has been granted an observer status since 1976, while East Timor has been approved to join the group in 2022.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome or Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a disease caused by a virus called HIV.

As of 2018, it is estimated that there are 39.7 million people worldwide infected with HIV. The HIV pandemic is most severe in Sub-Saharan Africa. Over 60% of all people with HIV live in the region.

Many people with HIV do not know they have it. Because of this, the exact number of people with HIV is unknown.

Scientists believe the first human who got HIV was a person in Africa in the early 1900s. It infected only a small amount of people (disease not recognised), until it then turned into an epidemic reported to have started in New York (USA) in 1981. It then very quickly started spreading to other countries. This happened when Simian Immunodeficiency Virus (SIV) went from apes or chimpanzees to humans. This virus probably crossed to humans when a hunter came into contact with monkey blood while cutting up monkeys to eat. Research in October 2014 shows that the virus started in Kinshasa during the 1920s. It was quickly spread by unprotected sex, dirty needles used by intravenous drug users, and it then made its way into the medical blood supply . Some people described the spread of the disease as a sexidemic (widespread).

Not everyone who has HIV has AIDS. When people first get HIV, they can be healthy for years. A person is diagnosed as having AIDS when he or she gets specific types of illnesses or gets sick in certain ways due to their HIV. Once a person's HIV progresses to (or turns into) AIDS, the person will continue to have AIDS for the rest of their life. While there are many treatments for HIV/AIDS, at this point there is no cure.

If a person gets an "AIDS-defining illness," this is usually a sign that the person has AIDS. Healthy people do not get these illnesses, because a healthy immune system is strong enough to fight off these diseases. Because of this, getting an AIDS-defining illness is a sign that a person's immune system is seriously damaged. In a person with HIV, getting an AIDS-defining illness signals that the HIV has damaged the immune system badly enough that the person now has AIDS.

There are medicines that help people with AIDS. These are called antiretroviral medicines (or antiretrovirals.) Anti- means against. HIV is a retrovirus. So antiretroviral means it fights retroviruses.

Antiretrovirals cannot cure AIDS. This means they cannot make all of the virus leave a person's body. But they can make people with AIDS more healthy. Antiretrovirals help people fight the HIV virus. This makes their immune systems work better. So antiretrovirals are a treatment but not a cure for HIV.

People with HIV/AIDS who take antiretroviral medicines live longer. They live longer without getting AIDS defining illnesses. But after a long time, the HIV virus learns how to fight the antiretrovirals. The HIV virus is not killed by this medicine. HIV becomes resistant to the medicine. Then the resistant HIV hurts the immune system and the person may get AIDS.

Sometimes when HIV is resistant to one medicine, another medicine can be used. To make less resistance happen, people with AIDS take more than one medicine at the same time. They may take 2–4 medicines at once. This is sometimes called a cocktail or AIDS cocktail.

When HIV gets resistant to one medicine, this is changed to another medicine. So the AIDS cocktail that people with AIDS take changes over time. But after a long time, the HIV learns to be resistant to many drugs. This is called multi-drug-resistant (acronym MDR) HIV. After the HIV in a person has MDR-HIV there may be no more medicines to treat them. So scientists keep trying to find new medicines to fight HIV.

Many people who die of AIDS, especially in Africa, leave behind children who are still alive, and may need help. These children are called AIDS orphans.

The most important way to stop HIV/AIDS is education. People can get HIV from the exchange of bodily fluids and from sharing needles. Children can also get HIV from their mothers (when they grow inside pregnant mothers and when they drink breast milk.)

Sex is one way to get HIV. If people use condoms when they have sex, there is a much smaller chance of catching HIV.

A person can also get HIV by sharing needles. This means using a needle that has not been cleaned after someone else has used it. Some people who take illegal drugs like heroin and cocaine take these drugs by needle. Some of these people share needles. If one person has HIV and he shares his needles, he can give HIV to other people. But if people have clean needles or if they know how to clean needles, they do not get HIV as much.

Many people do not know that condoms and clean needles help stop HIV. They may not even know that sharing needles and sex with someone who has HIV can make them get HIV. Even if people know about condoms and clean needles, they may not have access to them.

There are some people who do not want people to know about condoms or clean needles. They believe that if people know about condoms and have condoms they will have more sex. They believe that if people have clean needles they will use illegal drugs more. Many of these people think this because of their religion. For example, the Catholic church does not want people to have or use condoms. They do not want people to have condoms because they do not think people should have sex unless they are married. They also think that married people should not use condoms, because they believe that if people have sex, they should be prepared to accept a possible pregnancy.

Scientists who study (look at and learn about) people who use condoms, see that if teenagers (children 13–19) learn about condoms (and other birth control) they have less unsafe sex. Scientists see that learning about these things does not make teenagers start having sex earlier. The teenagers also have safer sex. Safer sex means doing things (like wearing condoms) to try not to get pregnant or get sexually transmitted diseases (STDs or STIs) like HIV, gonorrhea, and syphilis. Using a condom works very well for keeping people from getting pregnant or getting STDs if people know how to use a condom the right way.

Scientists have also learned that if a city has a needle exchange program it will have fewer people who use illegal drugs. Needle exchange programs are where people can come in and trade dirty needles for clean needles. This means that if they use drugs they will be more safe. But needle exchange programs do more than give people clean needles. They teach people about drugs. If people want to stop using drugs, they help them.

The best way to stop HIV is thought to be a vaccine. There is no vaccine for HIV yet. Many scientists are looking for an HIV vaccine. Even one that protected some people from HIV would save millions of people's lives.

Some people think that HIV is not the cause of AIDS. They dispute the connection between HIV and AIDS, the existence of HIV itself, or the validity of HIV testing and treatment methods. These claims, known as "AIDS denialism", are rejected by the scientific community. However, they have had a significant impact, particularly in South Africa. There the government's official embrace of AIDS denialism (1999–2005) was responsible for its weak response to that country's AIDS epidemic. It has been blamed for hundreds of thousands of avoidable deaths and HIV infections.

Some conspiracy theories have been put about. Operation INFEKTION was a worldwide Soviet active measures operation to spread the claim that the United States had created HIV/AIDS. Surveys show that a significant number of people believed – and continue to believe – in such claims.

HIV and AIDS have severely hurt the LGBT community, especially gay men. Because of this there is a negative association with HIV/AIDS and being gay or queer. Some people even claim that only gays get HIV, or that God created AIDS to punish people for homosexuality.

A database is a computer system for storing and taking care of data (any kind of information).

When the software that runs a database is separate from the programs that use the database, it is called a database engine.

Information stored inside a database is usually stored in an organized way. Data about a person that would have been written on a piece of paper before databases would be stored in a record in a database. A collection of person records that would have been an address book before databases would be stored in a file or table.

In most databases, data can change. This also means, that in many cases, changing the data needs to be done in several steps. This is because the data is often stored in more than one tables or files that need to work together to make sense. In many cases all the steps that are needed for a given change are grouped in what is called a transaction. If something goes wrong, all the steps are undone. Being undone is another way of saying the transaction was rolled back. If all the steps are successful, they can be made a permanent part of the database. People talk about a transaction being committed. Both rollback and commit affect all the steps in a transaction.

The reason why a transaction is rolled back could be that the user or program did not want to finish the change. It could also mean that there is a problem. The database system itself might have a problem during the change. The change might break the rules of the data.

In order to be able to do this, many databases follow the ACID principle:

Most relational databases follow the ACID principle. ACID is expensive, which means that it takes the system enough time and other things to do it that it that some systems might not be able to. Because it is expensive, many database systems that are not relational databases don't use the ACID principle.

Around the year 2000, Eric Brewer presented what he called the CAP theorem. It is not as strong as the ACID principle, but many larger, distributed databases use it. Eric Brewer states that any distributed data store can provide only two of the following three guarantees:

When they talked about the CAP theorem, people also often mentioned the term eventual consistency. It means that sooner or later, the data will be consistent, if there's enough time without writes, or errors.

Data can be looked at from different perspectives, and it can be organized in different ways.

Database Normalisation was developed to organize data. Currently there are six Normal forms. These are ways to make some databases faster and make the data take less space.

An example of database normalization is storing a person's address in one place, and linking that address to all the other records about that person. When the address is updated in the one place it is stored, all the other records will be linked to the new address automatically.

Podcasting is a way to share information as digital audio files.  People often  subscribe, download, and share podcasts using a computer and listen to them on an MP3 player.

Many podcasts are similar to broadcast radio news or discussion programs.  Some use other formats such as a continuing story, comedy show, lecture, or audiobook.

As of 7 August 2022, there are at least 2,864,367 podcasts and 135,736,875 episodes.

Podcasts can be produced by individuals, organizations, or companies, covering a wide range of topics from entertainment to education and news.

Podcasts can be found for almost any topic. Radio programs, do-it-yourself projects, special interest groups, religious sermons, comedy sketches, cartoons, and just about anything else can be found. A podcast can be found using a podcast search engine. Once a podcast is found, it can be subscribed to, like a magazine or newspaper, and streamed or downloaded. Podcasting services are used to stream or download podcasts and listen to them.

Podcasting has become so popular that many people who write for magazines or report news on television have also been putting out their own podcasts. Anyone can start a podcast and share their knowledge with the world with the help of different platforms that are currently available online.

Akbar (Abu'l-Fath Jalal ud-din Muhammad Akbar, 15 October 1542   27 October 1605), also known as Akbar the Great was the 3rd Mughal Emperor. He was the son of 2nd Mughal Emperor Humayun. Akbar is considered one of the greatest emperors in Indian history.

Akbar grew up in a Hindu household and was born in a fortress of local Hindu ruler of Amarkot (modern-day Umerkot, Sindh, Pakistan). Akbar became the de jure (by Law) king in 1556 at the age of 13 when his father died. Akbar was too young to rule, so Bairam Khan was appointed as Akbar's regent and chief army commander. Soon after coming to power Akbar defeated Hemu, the general of the Afghan forces, in the Second Battle of Panipat. After a few years, he ended the regency of Bairam Khan and took charge of the kingdom. He initially offered friendship to the Hindu kings. However, he had to fight against the Rajputs who opposed him. In 1576 he fought Maharana Pratap of Mewar in the Battle of Haldighati, who defeated Akbar later and reconquered most of his territories in Battle of Dewair. Akbar's wars made the Mughal empire more than twice as big as it had been before, covering most of the Indian subcontinent except the south (excluding the Deccan Plateau).

Akbar's system of central government was based on the system that had evolved since the Delhi Sultanate, but the functions of various departments were reorganized with detailed regulations for their functioning

Akbar conquered Gujarat and expanded his reign into much of northern and Central India by having conquered Malwa. Later he expanded his realm into Rajputana  Beginning in 1561, the Mughals of delhi actively engaged the Hindu rulers in warfare and diplomacy. A few states accepted Akbar's suzerainty; however, the rulers of Mewar and Marwar—Udai Singh II and Chandrasen Rathore—remained outside the imperial fold.  Later akbar conquered the Indus valley. Due to his liberal policies and conversion to Din-I-Ilahhi, Afghans of kabul had rebelled against him, To supress the revolt akbar first sent Raja Birbal, When he died, Akbar sent Raja Man singh who successfully conquered Kabul.

Akbar was a Muslim. He realized that to establish a strong empire, he had to gain the confidence of his Hindu people who were the majority in India.

Din-i-ilahi (Religion of God) was a religious path suggested by Akbar. It was a code of moral conduct which reflected Akbar's secular ideas and he desire to achieve peace, unity, tolerance in his empire. Belief in one god, worship of source of light, non-killing of animals, Having peace with all were some features of Din-i-ilahi. It didn't have any rituals, holy books, temples or priests.

Male circumcision was not to be done before the boy was 12 years old, and after that it was optional. It was a Jewish custom adopted by Islam. Akbar's rule was that it should be made optional and should be done, if at all, at an age when boys could understand what it was. Here Akbar gave every man a choice and opportunity to have a play of his reason. Indeed, the boy of reason as he was, he could not deny it to others.

When he was at Fatehpur Sikri, he held discussions as he loved to know about others' religious beliefs. On one such day, he got to know that the religious people of other religions were often bigots (intolerant of others religious beliefs). This led him to form the idea of the new religion, Sulh-e-kul meaning universal peace. His idea of this religion did not discriminate other religions and focused on the ideas of peace, unity and tolerance. This gesture of his made the Hindus and people of other religions call him with different names and start loving him.

Akbar's reign was chronicled by his court historian Abul Fazal in the books Akbarnama and Ain-i-Akbari. Other sources of Akbar's reign include the wod Sirhindi. Akbar was an artisan, warrior, artist, armourer, administrator carpenter, emperor, general, inventor, animal trainer, technologist. He became emperor at the age of 13.

Akbar had Navaratnas (nine jewels in Sanskrit) in his court which include Abul Fazl, Faizi, Tansen, Birbal, Raja Todar Mal, Raja Man Singh, Abdul Rahim Khan-I-Khana, Fakir Azizudin and Mohd Shakil Hasan

(Pronounced as Akbar-e-Namah)The Akbarnāma means the Book of Akbar. It is the official biographical account of Akbar written by Abu Fazl. It includes vivid and detailed descriptions of his life and times. It also includes the information about the flora, fauna, life of the people of his reign, and the places Akbar used to visit.

The work was commissioned by Akbar, and written by Abul Fazl, one of the Navratnas (Nine Jewels) of Akbar's royal court. The book took seven years to complete. An illustration was done in the Mughal school of painting. A part of this is Ain-i-Akbari.

On 3 October 1605, Akbar fell ill with an attack of dysentery, from which he never recovered. Twelve days after his sixty third year he died on 27 October 1605, after which his body was buried at a mausoleum in Sikandra (Agra): Akbar's tomb.

The Sun, also known as Sol, is a star at the center of the solar system. It is a white star that gives off different types of energy such as infrared energy (heat), ultraviolet light, radio waves and light. It gives off the light and heat that make life on Earth possible. Without it, Earth would be a frozen, lifeless place. It is a huge ball of hot gases, mostly hydrogen and helium.

The Sun is nearly a perfect sphere and has a diameter of about 1.39 million kilometers (or 864,000 miles), which is about 109 times wider than Earth. Its mass is 333,000 times heavier than Earth, and it makes up over 99.8% of all the mass in the Solar System. That is why its gravity controls the movement of all the planets, moons, asteroids, and comets. The Sun’s energy comes from nuclear reactions deep inside it, where hydrogen is turned into helium. This process releases a lot of energy, which travels as light and heat across space to reach Earth. It takes about 8 minutes for sunlight to travel the 150 million kilometers (93 million miles) from the Sun to Earth. This distance is called 1 Astronomical Unit (AU). The Sun is also part of the Milky Way galaxy, slowly orbiting around the galaxy’s center at a distance of about 24,000 to 28,000 light-years. Its outer layer, called the photosphere, is mostly hydrogen (~73%) and helium (~25%), but also contains tiny amounts of other elements like oxygen, carbon, neon, and iron.

The Sun is a type of star called a G-type main-sequence star, sometimes nicknamed a yellow dwarf, even though its light is actually white, not yellow. It looks yellow because of the atmosphere. Sunlight is made up of all the colors, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. When sunlight passes through Earth’s atmosphere, the shorter wavelengths, like blue and violet, get scattered in all directions. That is also why the sky looks blue. The longer wavelengths, like yellow and red, do not scatter as much, so they reach our eyes more directly. That is why the Sun looks yellow when it is seen from the ground. But if the Sun is seen from space, where there is no atmosphere, it would look white, which is its real color.

The Sun was born about 4.6 billion years ago. It formed when a huge cloud of gas and dust in space began to collapse under its own gravity. Most of the material got pulled into the center, which became the Sun. The leftover material flattened into a spinning disk and formed the planets, moons, asteroids, and comets, creating the Solar System. As the Sun's core got hot and dense, it started a process called nuclear fusion. This is when hydrogen atoms combine to make helium, releasing an enormous amount of energy. Every second, the Sun turns about 600 billion kilograms of hydrogen into helium and converts 4 billion kilograms of matter into energy. This energy is what gives us sunlight and heat, keeping our planet warm and life-friendly.

The Sun gives off a stream of particles, which reaches Earth as "solar wind". The source of all this energy is nuclear fusion. Nuclear fusion is the reaction in the star which turns hydrogen into helium and makes huge amounts of energy. It is a nearly perfect ball of hot plasma. The Sun looks yellow to people on Earth, but it is really white. The Sun is a star like many others in our Milky Way galaxy. The Sun is a type of star called a G-type main-sequence star based on its spectral class.

The Sun is about 4.5 billion years old. The Sun is about a hundred times as wide as the Earth. It has a mass of . This is 333,000 times the mass of the Earth. 1.3 million Earths can fit inside the Sun. The Sun fuses about 600 million tons of hydrogen into helium every second.

The Sun is the main source of energy for the Earth. This energy is made deep inside the Sun in a process called nuclear fusion. Four hydrogen atoms are fused together to make one helium atom. Some of the leftover matter turns into energy. This is the same way energy is released in a hydrogen bomb.

It can take between 10,000 and 170,000 years for the energy in the core of the Sun to escape. The Sun is the most important source of energy for life on Earth. Without the Sun, there would be no vegetation on Earth: every plant needs light to live and grow. Everything on Earth would freeze over without the Sun. The Sun gives the Earth heat as well as light. Plants make oxygen by photosynthesis. All humans and animals breathe oxygen. The Earth's position in the Solar System is just right for the development of life on Earth.

The Sun is a G-type main-sequence star. It has about 99.86% of the mass of the Solar System. The Sun has an absolute magnitude of +4.83. It is brighter than about 85% of the stars in the Milky Way galaxy. The Sun is a Population I star,  i.e it a metal-rich fairly young star.

The Sun is the brightest object in the Earth's sky. It has an apparent magnitude of −26.74. It takes 8 minutes and 20 seconds for light to travel from the Sun's surface to Earth's surface.

Scientists think that the Sun started from a very large cloud of dust and small bits of ice about 4.567 billion years ago.

At the center of that huge cloud, gravity caused the material to build up into a ball. Once this got big enough, the huge pressure inside started a fusion reaction. The energy this released caused that ball to heat and shine.

At its very center, hydrogen atoms collide together at great temperature and pressure and fuse to form atoms of helium. This process is called nuclear fusion. It was proposed by Hans Bethe just before World War II.

The Sun and everything that orbits it is in the Milky Way galaxy. The Sun orbits around the centre of the Milky Way. It takes along everything in the Solar System. The Sun moves at 820,000 km an hour. At that speed, it still takes 230 million years for a full orbit. Since the Sun is all gas, surface features come and go. If the Sun is viewed through a special solar telescope, dark areas called sunspots can be seen. These areas are caused by the Sun's magnetic field. The sunspots only look dark because the rest of the Sun is very bright.

Some space telescopes, including the ones that orbit the Sun have seen huge arches of the Sun's matter extend suddenly from the Sun. These are called solar prominences. Solar prominences come in many different shapes and sizes. Some of them are so large that the Earth could fit inside of them, and a few are shaped like hands. Solar flares also come and go. Sunspots, prominences and flares become rare, and then numerous, and then rare again, every 11 years.

This is the surface of the Sun. The light that the Earth receives from the Sun is radiated from this layer. Below this layer, the Sun is opaque, or not transparent to light.

The Sun is mainly composed of hydrogen and helium. All elements heavier than hydrogen and helium, account for less than 2% of the mass of the Sun.  The Sun's chemical composition was got from the interstellar medium. The hydrogen and most of the helium in the Sun would have been produced by Big Bang nucleosynthesis in the first 20 minutes of the universe. The heavier elements were produced by stars that died before the Sun was formed. The heavier elements were released into the interstellar medium when stars exploded as supernova.

Five layers make up the atmosphere of the Sun. The chromosphere, transition region, and corona are much hotter than the outer photosphere surface of the Sun. It is believed that Alfvén waves may pass through to heat the corona.

The minimum temperature zone, the coolest layer of the Sun, is about  above the photosphere. It has a temperature of about . This part of the Sun is cool enough to allow simple molecules such as carbon monoxide and water to form. These molecules can be seen on the Sun with special instruments called spectroscopes.

The chromosphere is the first layer of the Sun which can be seen, especially during a solar eclipse when the moon is covering most of the Sun and blocking the brightest light.

The solar transition region is the part of the Sun's atmosphere, between the chromosphere and outer part called the corona.  It can be seen from space using telescopes that can sense ultraviolet light. The transition is between two very different layers. In the bottom part it touches the photosphere and gravity shapes the features. At the top, the transition layer touches the corona.

The corona is the outer atmosphere of the Sun and is much bigger than the rest of the Sun. The corona continuously expands into space forming the solar wind, which fills all the Solar System. The average temperature of the corona and solar wind is about . In the hottest regions it is . We do not understand why the corona is so hot. It can be seen during a solar eclipse or with an instrument called a coronagraph.

The heliosphere is the thin outer atmosphere of the Sun, filled with the solar wind plasma. It extends out past the orbit of Pluto to the heliopause, where it forms a boundary where it collides with the interstellar medium.

A solar eclipse appears when the moon is between the Earth and Sun. The last total solar eclipse occurred on December 26, 2019, and was visible from Saudi Arabia, India, Sumatra and Borneo, with a partial eclipse visible in Australia and much of Asia.

A lunar eclipse happens when the moon passes through the shadow of the Earth which can only occur during a full moon. The number of lunar eclipses in a single year can range from 0 to 3. Partial eclipses slightly outnumber total eclipses by 7 to 6.

Astrophysicists say our Sun is a G-type main-sequence star in the middle of its life. In about billion years, increased solar energy will boil away the Earth's atmosphere and oceans. In a few more billion years, they think the Sun will get bigger and become a red giant star. The Sun would be up to 250 times its current size, as big as  and swallow up the Earth.

Earth's fate is still unknown. In the long term, the Earth's future depends on the Sun, and the Sun is going to be fairly stable for the next 5 billion years.  Calculations suggest that the Earth might move to a wider orbit. This is because about 30% of the Sun's mass will blow away in the solar wind.

However, in the very long term the Earth will probably be destroyed as the Sun increases in size. Stars like the Sun become red giants at a later stage. The Sun will expand beyond the orbits of Mercury, Venus, and probably Earth. In any event, the ocean and air would have vanished before the Sun gets to that stage.

After the Sun reaches a point where it can no longer get bigger, it will lose its layers and form a planetary nebula. Eventually, the Sun will shrink into a white dwarf. Then, over several hundred billion or even a trillion years, the Sun would fade into a black dwarf.

The Age of Enlightenment was an 18th-century intellectual movement in Europe to make people more aware about science rather than religion and tradition. It was heavily influenced by philosophers like Locke, Voltaire, Diderot and Kant.  It was also known as the Age of Reason. The Enlightenment grew partly out of the earlier scientific revolution and the ideas of René Descartes.

The Enlightenment's most important idea was that all people can reason and think for themselves, so people should not automatically believe authority. People do not even have to believe the teachings of churches or priests. That was a very new idea at the time.

Another important idea was that a society is best when everyone works together to create it. Even people with very little power or money should have the same rights as the rich and powerful to help create the society they live in.  The nobility should no longer have special rights or privileges.

Those were very new ideas at the time. They were also dangerous thoughts for the people in power. Many Enlightenment philosophers were put in prison or were forced to leave their home countries.

Many of the Founding Fathers of the United States believed in the Enlightenment's ideas. For example, the idea that a government should benefit all of a country's people, not just the people in power, was very important to them. They created the idea of a government "for the people", one of the most important parts of the new United States Constitution and the new American government.

The Enlightenment's ideas were also important to the people who fought in the French Revolution, which started in 1789.

In some countries, kings and queens took some of the Enlightenment's ideas and made changes to their governments, although they kept power for themselves. Such kings and queens were called "enlightened despots."  Examples include Catherine the Great of Russia, Frederick the Great of Prussia, and Gustav III of Sweden.

During the Age of Enlightenment, as more and more people began to value reason, some began to disagree with the idea that God created the world, which caused conflicts and later, war.

Many ideas that are important today were created during the Enlightenment such as the following:

The Enlightenment's ideas about thinking with reason, having personal freedoms, and not having to follow the Catholic Church were important in creating capitalism and socialism.

Important people in the Enlightenment came from many different countries and shared ideas in many different ways. Here are some of the best-known Enlightenment figures, organized by home country:

Wi-Fi is a way of connecting to a computer network using radio waves instead of wires.  It was invented to connect computers that are near each other, and nowadays is much used for Internet connections.

The Wi-Fi Alliance says Wi-Fi is any "wireless local area network" (WLAN) that follows the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers' (IEEE) 802.11 specification. A Wi-Fi device can work with any Wi-Fi network anywhere in the world.

The word Wi-Fi is a play on words with hi-fi, and was invented to replace the name "IEEE 802.11b Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum".

As of 2013, most wireless networks use one of two radio frequency bands. These are not the only two bands, but are the most used. One of the bands is at around 2.4 GHz, and the other is at 5 GHz. Both of these have benefits and drawbacks: The 2.4 GHz band is widely used, and devices are usually cheaper. Microwave ovens, DECT telephones and other wireless devices also use the 2.4 GHz band, and sometimes cause interference which slows transmissions. The 5 GHz band has more frequencies and usually less interference, but there are more rules for using it.  In some places, the 5 GHz band may not be used outdoors. Because fewer devices use the 5 GHz band, devices that do are often more expensive.

The World Health Organization (WHO) says that Wi-Fi is not dangerous.

Bluetooth is a protocol for wireless communication over short distances. It was developed in the 1990s, to reduce the number of cables.  Devices such as mobile phones, laptops, PCs, printers, digital cameras and video game consoles can connect to each other, and exchange information. This is done using radio waves. It can be done securely. Bluetooth is usually only used for relatively short distances, like a few metres. Some signals can be up to 100 metres.

There are different standards. Data rates vary. Currently, they are at 1-3 MBit per second. Typical Bluetooth applications are to connect a headset to a mobile phone, or to connect a computer mouse, keyboard or printer.

Bluetooth devices use the ISM Band around 2.4 GHz. This can be used worldwide, without the need to pay license fees, but many other devices, like DECT telephones (wireless phones), smart tags with RFID, baby phones use it too. Bluetooth uses the same bands as some WLANs, but the modulation technique is different. Bluetooth uses Frequency-hopping spread spectrum.

There are many situations today where either Bluetooth or Wireless LANs can be used. Examples include setting up networks, printing or transferring files and data from a PDA to a computer. Both are versions of unlicensed wireless technology. WLANs can span bigger distances and offer higher throughput. Bluetooth does not require expensive hardware. It also needs less power to operate.

Both use the same radio frequency range, but their modulation techniques are different. Both have been developed to replace cabling. Bluetooth wanted to get rid of the peripheral equipment cables, WLANs wanted to get rid of the cables needed to set up a LAN.

Bluetooth exists in many products, such as telephones, the Wii or PlayStation 3. It has recently been built into some electronic watches, modems and headsets. The technology is useful when transferring information between two or more devices that are near each other in low-bandwidth situations. Bluetooth is commonly used to transfer sound data with telephones (i.e. with a Bluetooth headset) or byte data with hand-held computers (transferring files).

Bluetooth uses protocols that make it easy to discover devices that are nearby, and to set up a connection between these devices. Bluetooth devices can advertise all the services they offer. Using services becomes easier; a lot of the setup related to security, networking or permissions is automatic.

WLANs are more like traditional LANs. More configuration is needed to set up the network, and to make resources accessible by other devices in the network. WLAN devices also consume more power than Bluetooth ones.

Sometimes WLANs are called wireless Ethernet. WLAN needs more resources to be set up, but it also offers faster transfer speeds. The security is also better than that offered by Bluetooth.

The Moon, also known as Luna, is Earth's only natural satellite (the only object which orbits the Earth and is not man-made). It is usually visible in the night sky, but is sometimes seen during the day.

The Moon is about one-fourth of the width of Earth. Because it is so far away it looks small in the sky, about half a degree wide.

The gravity on the Moon is one-sixth of the Earth's gravity. It means that an object will be one-sixth as heavy on the Moon compared to Earth.

The Moon is a rocky and dusty place. It moves slowly away from the Earth at a rate of 3.8 centimeters per year due to the effect of tidal dissipation.

Some other planets also have moons or natural satellites. The giant impact hypothesis is a common explanation for how the Moon formed.

The giant impact hypothesis is the most common theory among scientists to explain how the Moon formed. According to this hypothesis, Earth collided with a Mars-sized proto-planet around 4.5 billion years ago, and the debris from the collision created the Moon.

Recent research has challenged this hypothesis. According to one article:[N]ew findings suggest that the Moon was primarily created from material ejected from Earth’s mantle, with minimal contribution from [the proto-planet].

Because it is smaller, the Moon has only 1/6 of the gravity on Earth. So if a person weighs 60 kilograms on Earth, the person would only weigh 10 kilograms on the Moon.

Even though the Moon's gravity is weaker than the Earth's gravity, it is still there. If a person dropped a ball while standing on the Moon, it would still fall down. However, it would fall much more slowly. A person who jumped as high as possible on the Moon would jump higher than on Earth, but still fall back to the ground.

Because the Moon has no atmosphere, there is no air resistance, so a feather will fall as fast as a hammer.

Without an atmosphere, the Moon's environment is not protected from heat or cold. Astronauts wore spacesuits to survive and carried oxygen to breathe. These suits weighed about as much as the astronauts (though they were not as heavy as on Earth because of the Moon's weak gravity). The astronauts never took their gloves or spacesuits off on the Moon.

On the Earth, the sky is blue because the Sun's blue rays bounce off the gases in the atmosphere. This makes it look like blue light is coming from the sky. On the Moon, there is no atmosphere for light to bounce off. This means the sky looks black, even in the daytime.

Earth's atmosphere causes most meteorites (space rocks) to burn up. The Moon does not have this protection. Meteorites crash into it and create wide, shallow holes called craters. The Moon has thousands of them. Newer craters overlie older ones.

In 2009 Chandrayaan-1, India's first lunar exploration mission, found a lot of water on the Moon. However, the water is not liquid; it is in the form of hydrates and hydroxides. Liquid water cannot exist on the Moon because photodissociation quickly breaks down the molecules. However, based on the data received from Chandrayaan-1, liquid surface water may have once existed on the Moon.

Because the Moon is round, half of it is lit up by the Sun. As it goes around (or orbits) the Earth, sometimes the side that people on Earth can see is all lit brightly. Other times only a small part of the side we see is lit.

This is because the Moon does not send out its own light. People only see the parts that are being lit the eclipse by the sunlight. These different stages are called Phases of the Moon.

It takes the Moon about a month (29 days, 12 hours, and 44 minutes) to complete the cycle, from big and bright to small and dim and back to big and bright. People throughout history have used the Moon's cycles to measure time.

Each of the four middle phases of the Moon lasts about seven days on average (around 7.38 days). This time can change by about ±11% because the Moon moves closer to or farther from Earth from its farthest point (apogee) to its closest point (perigee).

The number of days since the last new moon is called the Moon’s age. A full set of moon phases is called a lunation.

To find the Moon’s age and phase for any date, you can count how many days have passed since a known new moon (for example, January 1, 1900, or August 11, 1999). Then divide that number by the average length of a moon month (29.53059 days). The number left over after dividing is the Moon’s age.

This simple method is good for general or fun uses, like moon phase clocks. It is not exact because it does not use the real shape of the Moon’s orbit or the exact time of the new moon, so it can be off by a few hours. The farther you go from the reference date, the less accurate it becomes.

Because the Moon wobbles a little as it orbits Earth (a motion called libration), we can sometimes see a tiny bit more than the full moon (up to about 101%) or a small part of its far side (up to 5%).

The Moon always shows the same side to Earth. Astronomers call this phenomenon tidal locking. This means that half of it can never be seen from Earth. The side facing away from Earth is called the far side or dark side of the Moon even though the Sun does shine on it—we just never see it lit.

Before people stood on the Moon, the United States and the USSR sent robots to the Moon. Some of these robots orbited the Moon; others landed on its surface. The robots were the first man-made objects to touch the Moon.

Humans finally landed on the Moon on July 21, 1969. Astronauts Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed their lunar ship (the Eagle) on the surface of the Moon. Then, as half the world watched him on television, Armstrong climbed down the ladder of the Eagle and was the first human to touch the Moon as he said, "That's one small step for a man, one giant leap for mankind."

Even though their footprints were left on the Moon a long time ago, they could remain there for millions of years. There is no wind or rain on the Moon, so erosion happens extremely slowly. This means the footprints do not get filled in or smoothed out like they would on Earth.

Ten more astronauts landed on the moon between 1969 and 1972. All were part of the United States' Apollo program.

The last spaceship to land on the Moon was Apollo 17. Eugene Cernan was the last person to touch its surface.

During the Cold War, the United States Army thought about making a military base on the Moon so they could attack targets on Earth. They also considered testing a nuclear weapon on the Moon. The United States Air Force had similar plans. However, both plans were brushed off as NASA moved from a military agency to a civilian-based one.

Even though the Soviet Union left remains on the Moon, and the United States left a few flags, no country has control over the Moon. The U.S., the Soviet Union, and many other countries signed the Outer Space Treaty, which calls the Moon and all of outer space the "province of all mankind". This treaty also bans all use of the military on the Moon, including nuclear weapons tests and military bases.

Some governments have ideas about Colonization of the Moon. (Related page, Colonization). A U.S. agency has ideas or plans about putting a nuclear reactor, on the Moon, according to media.

As of 2025's first quarter, there is no time standard on the Moon. The U.S. government has suggested Coordinated Lunar Time.

A lunar night (or night on the moon), is each c. 14 Earth days.

The Abbasid Caliphate was the third Arab Islamic caliphate. It overthrew the Umayyad caliphs from all but Al-Andalus. It was built by the descendant of Muhammad's youngest uncle, Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib. It was created in Harran in 750 of the Christian era and shifted its capital in AD 762 from Harran to Baghdad. It flourished for two centuries, surviving the Zanj Rebellion (869-883). Abbasid rule was ended in 1258, when Hulagu Khan, the Mongol conqueror, sacked Baghdad. But they continued to claim authority in religious matters from their base in Egypt.

During the period of the Abassid dynasty, Abassid claims to the caliphate did not go unchallenged. The  Ubayd Allah al-Mahdi Billah of the Fatimid dynasty, which claimed descendency of Muhammad through his daughter, claimed the title of Caliph in 909 and created a separate line of caliphs in North Africa. Initially it covered only Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, but then the Fatimid caliphs extended their rule for the next 150 years, taking Egypt and Palestine and even ancient Pakistan, before the Abbassid dynasty was able to turn the tide, limiting Fatimid rule to Egypt. The Fatimid dynasty finally ended in 1171. The Umayyad dynasty, which had survived and come to rule over the Muslim provinces of Spain, reclaimed the title of Caliph in 929, lasting until it was overthrown in 1031.

The tenth caliph, Al-Mutawakkil, is the person who oversaw the introduction of hadiths.

A blog, also known as weblog, is a type of website that is like a diary or journal. Blog organizes content in the form of categories and posts. Posts on a blog are presented in reverse chronological order. That means your latest post goes to the top of the page. That way, when you make a new post, it will come first and the first post will go below it. Anyone can create a blog and then write on that blog. Bloggers (a word for people who write on blogs) often write about their opinions and thoughts. A blog containing video material is called a video blog or video log, usually shortened to vlog.

When a person writes on a blog, what they write is in the form of a post, which is a single piece of writing on the blog. Posts often include links to other websites.

Blogs can have one or more writers. If they have more than one writer, they are often called community blogs, team blogs, or group blogs because the thoughts are made by more than one person.

Websites and blogging applications that can be used to create a blog are called blogging platforms.

WordPress, Blogspot, Tumblr, Wix, Weebly, Joomla, Typepad, Ghost, Squarespace, etc.  are the most popular and unique blogging platforms today. Everyone is competing with each other for different services. Although everyone's main purpose is to attract bloggers, their different interfaces and facilities are unique.

On many blogs, the person reading the posts can leave comments, which are notes in which a person says what they think about the blog post. This makes blogs good for discussion — if someone writes something that someone else does not believe to be true, someone else can fix it by writing a comment on that blog or on their own blog. Someone else cannot change what the post says, but the writer of the post can. Not all blog posts need to be talked about or fixed. But if there are a lot of people interested in a topic, they can start a discussion on the original blog, on their own blogs, or both. These people can discuss a topic or their point of view.

Very often, a community blog or group blog will shrink into a small group of bloggers (writers) who know and trust each other, called a creative network. That kind of community blog will also have a larger group of people, a social network, who only read (and maybe comment on) the blog. Some blogs have scoring (ranking) of posts that makes these networks more solid, so that postings that people like the most are shown first or in a way that is easier to find.

Often people have their own blog and make an RSS feed to it. When blogs have RSS feeds, other programs, called content aggregators, can put postings from all the blogs that a person likes in one place. Many people find it easier to read all the new posts from blogs they like in one place, through RSS, instead of going to each site one at a time.

Some experts think that community blogs, and some groups of individual (one-person) blogs that talk about similar topics, have a power structure like that inside a political party. These experts think that a clique (a small, exclusive group of people) will control discussions by choosing when someone has "won" an argument, and when a matter is decided. But an advantage of blogs is that even people outside that clique can comment on the original discussion.

In 2023-2024, blogging has undergone significant transformations influenced by artificial intelligence technologies, leading to the automation of many aspects of content creation. Artificial intelligence has not only sped up the writing and publishing process but has also enhanced the quality and relevance of the content.

The blogging sphere actively utilizes various developments in artificial intelligence, including both textual and graphical models. These technologies contribute to creating higher quality and more appealing content. Here are some of the most significant tools:

These tools not only improve content quality but also provide bloggers with the opportunity to experiment with different content forms, making their materials more attractive and original. In the era of digital technologies, artificial intelligence becomes an integral part of blogging, allowing for the creation of unique and memorable works.

According to research by MarketsandMarkets, the AI sector in content management is experiencing an annual growth rate of 35%, indicating rapid adoption of these technologies in the industry. This trend is leading to changes in the profession of copywriters, many of whom are adapting to new conditions by using AI to improve their texts, or are shifting to other areas as automation makes the traditional approach to content creation less in demand.

Thus, the age of artificial intelligence opens up new opportunities and poses challenges for bloggers, significantly altering the landscape of digital content management.

The United States of America (USA or U.S.A.), also known as the United States (U.S. or US) or America, is a country that is located in North America. It is made of 50 states, a federal district (Washington, D.C., the District of Columbia), and some other territories and insular areas. Forty-eight of the states are connected (Contiguous United States), and they are bordered by Canada to the north and Mexico to the south. The state of Alaska is in the northwestern area of the continent near Asia (Russia) and is separated from the other 48 states by Canada making it an exclave. Alaska is bordered by Canada to its east. The state of Hawaii is a set of islands in the Pacific located within Polynesia and is about  from the continent. The capital city is Washington, D.C. and the largest city by population is New York, in the State of New York, with a population of 8.8 million people.

With a population of 341.7 million people and an area of 3.79 million square miles (9.83 million km2), the United States is the third-most populated country in the world, after India and China, and is the fourth-largest country in the world by total area.

The land that would one day become the United States was first settled by the ancestors of the Native American Tribes. British colonization began in the 16th and 17th century. Several European and African nations set up colonies in North America, which the British and Dutch set up colonies in present-day United States.

The thirteen colonies of Great Britain along the Atlantic coast declared independence as a nation on July 4, 1776. They issued the Declaration of Independence, which announced their independence from Great Britain and their creation of a cooperative union. The colonies defeated Great Britain in the American Revolutionary War, making it the first successful colonial war of independence in history. The Philadelphia Convention adopted the current United States Constitution on September 17, 1787; its approval the following year made the states part of a single republic with a strong central government. The Bill of Rights, making up ten constitutional amendments guaranteeing many basic civil rights and freedoms, was approved in 1791.

In the 19th century, the United States had a policy of manifest destiny where they believed that it was their right to expand across the North American continent. They conquered and took over native lands and bought territory from France, the United Kingdom, Mexico, and Russia, and annexed the Republic of Texas and Hawaii.

Political arguments over the growth of the institution of slavery led to the American Civil War. In 1861, the southern states separated from the union and founded the Confederate States of America. The Union's victory over the Confederacy prevented a split of the country and led to the end of legal slavery in the United States. By the 1870s, the national wealth was the world's largest. The Spanish–American War and World War I confirmed the country's status as a military power. In 1945, the United States came out of World War II as a superpower and was the first country with nuclear weapons. After World War II the United States along with its allies founded the United Nations. Today the United States is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council. The United States also became engaged in an arms race called the Cold War with the Soviet Union. The United States participated in the Space Race against the Soviet Union that produced rapid advancements in rocket technology. They created the Apollo 11 rocket and it was the first to send people to the moon. It was done by NASA, an American space agency. It went up to space on July 16, 1969, carrying three astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins. On July 20, 1969, Armstrong and Aldrin became the first humans to land on the moon, while Collins stayed in orbit around the Moon. In 1991, the Soviet Union broke up, ending the Cold War and leaving the United States as the only superpower.

Today, the United States is one of the world's most ethnically mixed and multicultural nations. It is the product of large-scale immigration from many countries. The U.S. economy is the largest national economy in the world, with an estimated 2020 gross domestic product (GDP) of US$ 20.9 trillion (about a quarter of worldwide GDP).

The United States is a federal republic of fifty states, a federal district, and several territories.

The land area of the contiguous United States is . Alaska, separated from the contiguous United States by Canada, is the largest state at . Hawaii, occupying an archipelago in the central Pacific, southwest of North America, is  in area.

The United States is the world's fourth largest nation by total area (land and water), ranking behind Russia, Canada, and China or behind Russia, Canada, and ahead of China. The ranking varies depending on how two territories disputed by China and India are counted and how the total size of the United States is measured: calculations range from  to  to . Measured by only land area, the United States is third in size behind Russia and China, just ahead of Canada.

The coastal plain of the Atlantic seaboard gives way further inland to deciduous forests and the rolling hills of the Piedmont. The Appalachian Mountains divide the eastern seaboard from the Great Lakes and the grasslands of the Midwest. The Mississippi–Missouri River, the world's fourth longest river system, runs mainly north-south through the heart of the country. The flat, fertile prairie of the Great Plains stretches to the west, interrupted by a highland region in the southeast.

The Rocky Mountains, at the western edge of the Great Plains, extend north to south across the country, reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet (4,300 m) in Colorado. Further west is the rocky Great Basin and deserts such as the Chihuahua and Mojave. The Sierra Nevada and Cascade mountain ranges run close to the Pacific coast, both ranges reaching altitudes higher than 14,000 feet. The Alaskan Range passes through much of Alaska and is home to Denali which stands at a height of 20,310 ft (6,190 m) above sea level and is the tallest mountain in the United States and in North America. Denali is in fact the tallest mountain in the World on land from base to summit standing at about 18,000 ft (5,490 m), which is about 4,000 ft (1,220 m) higher than Mount Everest which sits at a height of about 14,000 ft (4,270 m) from base to summit.

The United States, with its large size and geographical variety, includes most climate types. To the east of the 100th meridian, the climate ranges from humid continental in the north to humid subtropical in the south. The southern tip of Florida is tropical, as is Hawaii. The Great Plains west of the 100th meridian are semi-dry. Much of the western mountains are alpine. The climate is dry in the Great Basin, desert in the Southwest, Mediterranean in coastal California, and oceanic in coastal Oregon and Washington and southern Alaska. Most of Alaska is subarctic or polar. Extreme weather is not unusual—the states bordering the Gulf of Mexico are prone to hurricanes, and most of the world's tornadoes happen within the country, mainly in the Midwest's Tornado Alley.

The U.S. ecology is considered "megadiverse"; about 17,000 species of vascular plants occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska, and over 1,800 species of flowering plants are found in Hawaii, few of which occur on the mainland. The United States is home to more than 400 mammal, 750 bird, and 500 reptile and amphibian species. About 91,000 insect species have been described.

The Endangered Species Act of 1973 protects threatened and endangered species and their habitats. They are watched by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. There are 63 national parks, and hundreds of other federally managed parks, forests, and wilderness areas. The United States government owns 28.8% of the country's land area. Most of this is protected, but some is leased for oil and gas drilling, mining, logging, or cattle ranching. 2.4% is used for military purposes.

Many animals are native to the United States such as opossums, raccoons, pumas, and bears. Endangered animals in the United States include the jaguar, the California condor, and the Florida panther.

There are many types of small trees and shrubs in the United States. Some of these are hackberries, hawthorn, serviceberry, blackberry, wild cherry, dogwood, and snowberry. Wildflowers grow all around the United States. They even grow in deserts and places with mountains. Wildflowers include forget-me-not, fringed and closed gentians, jack-in-the-pulpit, black-eyed Susan, columbine, and common dandelion, as well as many types of aster, orchid, lady's slipper, and wild rose.

It is believed that the indigenous peoples of the continental United States, including the natives of Alaska, moved in from Asia. They began arriving more than twelve thousand years ago, if not earlier. Some, such as the pre-Columbian Mississippian culture in the southeast, developed advanced farming, grand construction, and state-level communities. The native population of America decreased after  arrived, and for different reasons, mostly sicknesses such as smallpox and measles.

In 1492, Italian explorer Christopher Columbus from Genoa, under contract to the Spanish crown, reached some Caribbean islands, making the first Contact with the native people. On April 2, 1513, Spanish conquistador Juan Ponce de León landed on what he called "La Florida" — the first recorded European coming on what would become the U.S. mainland. Spanish settlements in the area were followed by ones in the present-day southwestern United States that drew thousands through Mexico. French fur traders established outposts of New France around the Great Lakes; France eventually claimed much of the North American interior, down to the Gulf of Mexico. The first successful English settlements were the Colony of Virginia in Jamestown in 1607 and the Pilgrims' Plymouth Colony in 1620. The 1628 chartering of the Massachusetts Bay Colony resulted in a wave of relocation; by 1634, New England had been settled by some 10,000 Puritans. Between the late 1610s and the American Revolution, about 50,000 convicts were shipped to Britain's American colonies. Beginning in 1614, the Dutch settled along the lower Hudson River, including New Amsterdam on Manhattan Island.

Tensions between American colonials and the British during the rebel period of the 1760s and early 1770s led to the American Revolutionary War, fought from 1775 through 1781. On June 14, 1775, the Continental Congress, a meeting in Philadelphia, established a Continental Army led by George Washington. The Congress said that "all men are created equal" and are born with "certain natural rights," and adopted the Declaration of Independence, written mostly by Thomas Jefferson, on July 4, 1776. That date is now celebrated every year as America's Independence Day. In 1777, the Articles of Confederation established a weak federal government that operated until 1789. Morocco was the first country in the world to recognize America’s independence (As in they let American trade boats into the country).

After the British defeat by American forces helped by the French, Great Britain recognized the independence of the United States and the states' sovereignty over American land west to the Mississippi River. A constitutional convention was organized in 1787 by people who wanted to establish a stronger national government, with powers of taxation. The United States Constitution was approved in 1788, and the new republic's first Senate, House of Representatives, and President (George Washington) took office in 1789. The Bill of Rights, forbidding federal restriction of personal freedoms and certifying a range of legal protections, was adopted in 1791.

Attitudes toward slavery were shifting; a clause in the Constitution protected the African slave trade only until 1808. The northern states permanently stopped slavery between 1780 and 1804, leaving the slave states of the south as defenders of the "peculiar institution." The Second Great Awakening, beginning about 1800, made evangelicalism a force behind different social reform movements, including abolitionism.

Americans' eagerness to expand westward caused a long series of Indian Wars and an Indian removal policy that removed native peoples from their land. The Louisiana Purchase of French-claimed land under President Thomas Jefferson in 1803 almost doubled the nation's size. The War of 1812, declared against Britain over different complaints and fought to a draw, strengthened U.S. nationalism. A series of U.S. military invasions into Florida led Spain to give up it and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819. The United States took over the Republic of Texas in 1845. The idea of Manifest destiny became popular during this time. The 1846 Oregon Treaty with Britain led to U.S. control of the present-day American Northwest. The U.S. victory in the Mexican–American War resulted in the 1848 cession of California and much of the present-day American Southwest. The California Gold Rush of 1848–49 further encouraged western relocation. New railways made relocation easier for settlers and increased conflicts with Native Americans. Over a half-century, up to 40 million American bison, or buffalo, were killed for skins and meat and to ease the railways' spread. The loss of the buffalo, which were valuable to the plains Indians, caused many native cultures to become gone forever.

Tensions between slave and free states mounted with arguments over the relationship between the state and federal governments, as well as violent conflicts over the spread of slavery into new states. Abraham Lincoln, a candidate of the antislavery Republican Party, was elected president in 1860. Before he took office, seven slave states declared their secession and formed the Confederate States of America. With the Confederate attack upon Fort Sumter, the American Civil War began and four more slave states joined the Confederacy. Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation committed the Union to end slavery. Following the Union victory in 1865, three changes to the U.S. Constitution secured freedom for the nearly four million African Americans who had been slaves, made them citizens, and gave them voting rights. The war and its resolution led to a big increase in federal power.

After the war, the assassination of Abraham Lincoln was followed by the Reconstruction era, where policies were put together directed at getting back and rebuilding the Southern states while securing the rights of the newly freed slaves. The resolution of the disputed 1876 presidential election by the Compromise of 1877 ended this era, and the Jim Crow laws soon began to negatively affect many African Americans. In the North, urbanization and a never-before-seen inflow of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe made the country's industrialization grow rapidly. The wave of immigration, lasting until 1929, provided labor and changed American culture. High tax protections, national infrastructure building, and new banking laws also encouraged growth. The 1867 Alaska Purchase from Russia completed the country's mainland expansion. The Wounded Knee Massacre in 1890 was the last major armed conflict of the Indian Wars. In 1893, the native monarchy of the Pacific Kingdom of Hawaii was ended in a secret and successful plan led by American residents. The United States took over the archipelago in 1898. Victory in the Spanish–American War the same year proved that the United States was a world power and led to the addition of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines. The Philippines gained independence fifty years later. Puerto Rico and Guam are still U.S. territories.

The First World War started in Europe in 1914. The United States said it was neutral and did not join the war at first. Later, the Americans helped the British and French, even though many citizens, especially those from Ireland and Germany, were against it. In 1917, the United States joined the Allies. They helped defeat the Central Powers. At the end of the war, many Americans did not want to stay involved in Europe. The Senate did not approve the Treaty of Versailles (1919). The United States stayed out of the League of Nations. The country became more isolationist.

In 1920, the women's rights movement gained the approval of a constitutional amendment to grant women the right to vote. For most of the 1920s, the country enjoyed a period of success, decreasing the inequality in the balance of payments while profiting from industrial farms. This period, known as the Roaring Twenties, ended with the Wall Street Crash of 1929 that triggered the Great Depression.

After his election as president in 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt responded with the New Deal, a series of policies that increased government interference in the economy. From 1920 to 1933 a prohibition banning alcohol was in place. The Dust Bowl of the 1930s left many poor farmer communities and encouraged a new wave of emigration to the West Coast.

The United States, officially neutral during the early stages of World War II, began supplying supplies to the Allies in March 1941, through the Lend-Lease program. On December 7, 1941, the country joined the Allies' fight against the Axis Powers, after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. World War II boosted the economy by providing investment capital and jobs, making many women enter the labor market. Among the significant fighters, the United States was the only nation to be enriched by war. The discussions at Bretton Woods and Yalta created a new system of an international organization that placed the country and the Soviet Union at the heart of world affairs. In 1945, when the end of the Second World War in Europe came, and an international gathering held in San Francisco drafted the Charter of the United Nations, which came into force after the war. Having developed the first nuclear weapon, the government decided to use it in the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August of that same year. Japan gave up on September 2, ending the war.

After World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union started the Cold War. This was because both of them thought their own type of government was the best. The United States was supported by NATO, and the Soviet Union was supported by the Warsaw Pact. They never fought each other directly, but did many proxy wars. In the Korean War, the United States sent soldiers to help South Korea. They fought Chinese soldiers that were helping communist North Korea. In the 1960s, the Cuban Missile Crisis almost led to a real war between the two countries. However, the Soviets agreed to take their missiles out of Cuba if the United States did not attack them. Because of the Cold War, many Americans were scared of communist spies taking over the United States. This started the Second Red Scare, and hundreds of people were arrested because they were communist. Later, many cases in the Supreme Court made arresting communists illegal, because it is free speech.

In 1957, the Soviet Union launched a satellite named Sputnik 1 into outer space. Later, they were the first to put people in outer space. Because of this, President John F. Kennedy wanted to send a man to the Moon. This started the Space Race, and the United States began the Apollo program, a project used for outer space. In 1969, the United States launched Apollo 11, and was the first country to send people to the Moon.

The economy of the United States grew a lot during the 1950s and 1960s, with Americans having the highest average income in the world. Because of this, many people moved to large cities and suburbs, and had more children. The country built the Interstate Highway System, which made it easier to travel and move things across the country. In 1959, Alaska and Hawaii became U.S. states.

There were many social movements in the United States during this time. The Civil Rights Movement wanted to give African Americans more rights. It was led by people such as Rosa Parks, Martin Luther King, Jr. and Malcolm X. It was very successful, and helped make many laws that protected African Americans, such as the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and 1968. John F. Kennedy was murdered in 1963, and Lyndon B. Johnson became the President. Johnson sent United States soldiers to the Vietnam War, and many people did not like this. This started the counterculture movement. Counterculture included many things, such as people who wanted black nationalism, peace, and more rights for women. In 1969, the Stonewall riots in New York marked the start of the gay rights movement.

In 1974, Richard Nixon became the first President to resign. This was because of the Watergate scandal, where people broke into the Democratic headquarters and took a lot of information to help Nixon. During the Yom Kippur War, the United States helped Israel. Because of this, countries in OPEC did not let the United States buy their oil. This started an oil crisis. In the 1970s, the country's economy had a problem with stagflation, something that happens when prices go up but production does not. When Ronald Reagan was elected in 1980, he tried to stop this with lower taxes and less government control over the economy. These changes were called Reaganomics. The Cold War ended in 1991. This was because the Soviet Union dissolved. With no Soviet Union, the United States became the largest superpower in the world.

Under President George H. W. Bush, the country took on a global dominant role worldwide, as in the Gulf War (1991). The longest economic expansion in modern American history, from March 1991 to March 2001, spanned the presidency of Bill Clinton and the dot-com bubble. A civil lawsuit and a sex scandal led to his impeachment in 1998, although he managed to finish his period. The 2000 presidential election was one of the most competitive in American history, it was settled by the Supreme Court: George W. Bush, son of George H. W. Bush, became president, even though he gained fewer votes than his opponent Al Gore.

On September 11, 2001, the terrorists of the Al-Qaeda group attacked the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City (which were destroyed) and the Pentagon near Washington, D.C., in a series of attacks that killed nearly three thousand people. In response, the Bush administration launched the "War on Terror." At the end of 2001, U.S. forces invaded Afghanistan, removed the Taliban government and destroyed Al-Qaeda's training camps. Taliban insurgents continued to fight a guerrilla war. In 2002, Bush began to discuss a regime change in Iraq. With a lack of support from NATO and without a clear UN order for military intervention, Bush organized a coalition of governments to begin an invasion. The coalition forces quickly invaded Iraq in 2003 and ended the government of Saddam Hussein. The following year, Bush was re-elected as the most voted president in an election.

In 2005, Hurricane Katrina, which would end up being the deadliest natural disaster in national history, caused severe destruction along the Gulf Coast: the city of New Orleans was mostly destroyed, with 1833 dead.

On November 4, 2008, during a global economic downturn, Barack Obama was elected president, having been the first African American to take office. In May 2011, American Special forces managed to kill Osama bin Laden, hiding in Pakistan. The following year, Barack Obama was re-elected. Under his second term, he led the war against the Islamic State and restored diplomatic relations with Cuba.

On November 8, 2016, the Republican Party leader Donald Trump defeated former First Lady Hillary Clinton for presidency.

The massacres in Orlando of June 12, 2016 at the gay disco Pulse (51 dead) and in Las Vegas on October 1, 2017 (60) are listed as the largest massacres in the country since 9/11. The murder of George Floyd in late May 2020 sparked many protests all over the world that demanded racial justice. On January 6, 2021, the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C. was stormed during a riot and violent attack against the U.S. Congress.

The United States is the world's oldest surviving federation. It is a constitutional republic and representative democracy, "in which majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law." The government is controlled by a system of checks and balances from the United States Constitution. The constitution is the country's main legal document. There are three branches. They are the executive branch, the legislative branch, and the judicial branch. State governments and the federal government work in very similar ways. Each state has its own executive, legislative, and judicial branches. The executive branch of a state government is led by a governor, instead of a president.

The executive branch is the part of the government that enforces the law. Members of the U.S. Electoral College elect a president who is the leader of the executive branch, as well as the leader of the armed forces. The president may veto a bill that Congress has passed, so it does not become a law. The President may also make "executive orders" to ensure that people follow the law.

The president is in charge of many departments that control much of the day-to-day actions of the government. For example, the Department of Commerce makes rules about trade. The president chooses the heads of these departments and also nominates federal judges. However, the Senate, part of the legislative branch, must agree with all of the people the president chooses. The president may serve two 4-year terms.

The legislative branch makes laws. The legislative branch is called the United States Congress. Congress is divided into two "houses".

One house is the House of Representatives. The Representatives are each elected by voters from set areas within the states. The number of Representatives a state has is based on how many people live there. Representatives serve two-year terms. The total number of representatives today is 435. The leader of the House of Representatives is the Speaker of the House.

The other house is the Senate. In the Senate, each state is represented equally, by two senators. Because there are 50 states, there are 100 senators. The President's treaties or appointments of officials need the Senate's approval. Senators serve six-year terms. The Vice President of the United States serves as president of the Senate. In practice, the vice president is usually absent from the Senate, and a senator serves as president pro tempore, or  president, of the Senate.

Representatives and senators propose laws, called "bills", in their respective houses. A bill may be voted upon by the entire house right away or may first go to a small group, known as a committee, which may recommend a bill for a vote by the whole house. If one house votes to pass a bill, the bill then gets sent to the other house; if both houses vote for it, it is then sent to the president, who may sign the bill into law or veto it. If the president vetoes the bill, it is sent back to Congress. If Congress votes again and passes the bill with at least a two-thirds majority, the bill becomes law and cannot be vetoed by the president.

Under the American system of federalism, Congress may not make laws that directly control the states; instead, Congress may use the promise of federal funds, or special circumstances such as national emergencies, to encourage the states to follow federal law. This system is both complex and unique.

The judicial branch is the part of government that interprets what the law means. The Judicial Branch is made up of the Supreme Court and many lower courts. If the Supreme Court decides that a law is not allowed by the Constitution, the law is said to be "struck down" and is no longer a valid law.

The Supreme Court is made up of nine judges, called justices, who are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. One of these justices, called the chief justice, heads the court. A Supreme Court justice serves until he or she dies or resigns. When that happens, the president nominates someone new to replace the justice who left. If the Senate agrees with that choice, the person becomes a justice. If the Senate does not agree with the president's choice, then the president must nominate someone else.

Famous court cases such as Marbury v Madison (which was decided in 1803) have firmly established that the Supreme Court is the ultimate interpreter of the United States Constitution and has the power to strike down any law that conflicts with it.

The United States of America consists of 50 states, 5 territories, and 1 district (Washington D.C.). States can make laws about things inside the state, but only federal laws can apply to more than one state or dealing with other countries. In some areas, if the federal government makes laws that say different things from the state laws, people must follow the federal law. Each state has a constitution of its own, different from the federal (national) constitution. Each of these is like the federal constitution because they say how each state's government is set up, but some also talk about specific laws.

The federal and most state governments are dominated by two political parties: the Republicans and the Democrats. There are many smaller parties; the largest of these are the Libertarian Party and the Green Party. People help in political campaigns that they like. They try to persuade politicians to help them; this is called lobbying. All Americans are allowed to do these things, but some have and spend more money than others, or in other ways do more in politics. Some people think this is a problem, and lobby for rules to be made to change it.

The USA's large cultural, economic, and military influence has made the foreign policy of the United States, or relations with other countries, a topic in American politics, and the politics of many other countries.

The United States conquered and bought new lands over time, and grew from the original 13 colonies in the east to the current 50 states, of which 48 of them are joined together to make up the contiguous United States. These states, called the "lower 48", can all be reached by road without crossing a border into another country. They go from the Atlantic to the east to the Pacific in the west. There are two other states which are not joined to the lower 48 states. Alaska can be reached by passing through British Columbia and the Yukon, both of which are part of Canada. Hawaii is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.

Washington, D.C., the national capital, is a federal district that was split from the states of Maryland and Virginia in 1791. Not part of any US state, it used to be in the shape of a square, with the land west of the Potomac River coming from Virginia and the land east of the river coming from Maryland. In 1846, Virginia took back its part of the land. Some people living in DC want it to become a state, or for Maryland to take back its land, so that they can have the right to vote in Congress.

The United States territories and possessions consist of sixteen lands that do not state, many of which are colonial territories. None of them have any land borders with the rest of the US. People live in five of these places, which are de facto American:

The Philippines was a possession of the United States. Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, and other Pacific island nations were governed by the United States as a United Nations "Trust Territory". All of these places have become independent: the Philippines in 1946, Palau in 1947, and Micronesia in 1986.

The U.S. armed forces has bases in many countries, and the U.S. Navy's base at Guantanamo Bay was rented from Cuba after that country had a Communist revolution.

All the states are divided into administrative subdivisions. Most of them are called counties, but Louisiana uses the word "parish," and Alaska uses the word "borough."

There are many cities in the United States. One city in each state is the state capital, where the government of the state meets and the governor works. This city is not always the largest in its state. For example, the city with the most people living in is New York City in New York State, but the state capital is Albany, New York. Some other big cities are Los Angeles, California; Chicago, Illinois; Seattle, Washington; Miami, Florida; Indianapolis, Indiana; Las Vegas, Nevada; Houston and Dallas, Texas; Philadelphia and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Boston, Massachusetts; Denver, Colorado; St. Louis, Missouri, Memphis, Tennessee, Atlanta, Georgia, San Francisco, California, San Diego and Detroit, Michigan.

The United States is very influential in global economics, politics, and the military. It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and the headquarters of the United Nations is in New York City. It is a member of the G7, G20, and Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Almost all countries have embassies in Washington, D.C., and many have consulates around the country. Likewise, nearly all nations host American diplomatic missions. However, Iran, North Korea, Bhutan, and Taiwan do not have formal diplomatic relations with the United States. The United States has a "special relationship" with the United Kingdom and strong ties with Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Japan, South Korea, and Israel.

The president is the  of the country's armed forces and appoints its leaders, the secretary of defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The United States Department of Defense administers the armed forces, including the Army, Marine Corps, Navy, and Air Force. The Coast Guard is run by the Department of Homeland Security in peacetime and by the Department of the Navy during times of war. In 2008, the armed forces had 1.4 million personnel on active duty, along with several hundred thousand each in the Reserves and National Guard for a total of 2.3 million troops. The Department of Defense also employed about 700,000 civilians, not including contractors.

The military budget of the United States in 2011 was more than $700 billion, 41% of global military spending and equal to the next 14 largest national military expenditures combined. At 4.7% of GDP, the rate was the second-highest among the top 15 military spenders, after Saudi Arabia. U.S. defense spending as a percentage of GDP ranked 23rd globally in 2012 according to the CIA. The proposed base Department of Defense budget for 2012, $553 billion, was a 4.2% increase over 2011; an additional $118 billion was proposed for the military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan. The last American troops serving in Iraq departed in December 2011; 4,484 service members were killed during the Iraq War. Approximately 90,000 U.S. troops were serving in Afghanistan in April 2012; by November 8, 2013 2,285 had been killed during the War in Afghanistan.

The US boasts of the biggest economy in the world. By the early 2026, its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is estimated to be more than 31 trillion dollars. The economy is improving at an average growth of 2.6 percent per year.

The economy of the U.S. is a mixed market economy. This implies that the majority of the business belong to individuals (private) but the government issues regulations to maintain a balanced situation. Natural resources (oil and natural gas) are very abundant in the country.

The U.S. has been on the forefront in the way of discovering new things in the world. It invests hundreds of billions of dollars annually in research and development (R&D).

The United States of America has people of many different race and ethnic backgrounds. 80% of the people in the United States descend from European immigrants. Many people are descended from Germany, England, Scotland, Ireland, Africa, and Italy. 13% of the people in the United States are African-American. Most of them descend from the African slaves that were brought to America. African Americans are concentrated in the Southern United States. Asian-Americans make up only 5% of the population in America but make up a bigger portion in the west coast. For example, in California, Asian-Americans make up 13% of the population of that state. Hispanic-Americans or people of Latin origins make up 15% of the nation. Mexicans are the largest Hispanic national group, followed by Puerto Ricans, Cubans, Salvadorans and Dominicans. The original peoples, called Native American, American Indians, or Amerindians and Inuit (Eskimos) are a very small group. There are 574 federally recognized Native American tribes in the United States.

11% of the people in the United States are foreign-born. 18% speak a language other than English at home. For people 25 and older, 80% are high school graduates while 25% have a bachelor's degree or higher.

The 2000 Census counted self-reported ancestry. It identified 43 million German-Americans, 30.5 million Irish-Americans, 24.9 million African-Americans, 24.5 million English-Americans, and 18.4 million Mexican Americans.

The United States has the largest number of immigrants of any country in the world. The United States attracts immigrants from other countries due to the American Dream. Most immigrants in the United States come from Mexico, China, India, the Philippines, and El Salvador.

The currency of the land is the United States dollar ($). It is the world reserve currency meaning most of the other countries hold U.S dollars to conduct business internationally.

There are many different religions in the U.S. Statistically, the largest religion is Christianity, including groups such as Catholicism and Protestantism. Other religions include Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Unitarian Universalism, Wicca, Druidry, Baha'i, Raelism, Zoroastrianism, Taoism, and Jainism. Religions which were founded within the United States include Eckankar, Satanism, and Scientology. Native American religions have various animistic beliefs.

The United States is one of the most religious countries in the Western World, and most Americans believe in God. The number of Christians in the U.S. has gone down. 86.2% called themselves Christian in 1990 and 78.4% said this in 2007. The others include Judaism (2.3%), Islam (0.8%), Buddhism (0.7%), Hinduism (0.4%), and Unitarian Universalism (0.3%). Those who have no religion are at 16.1%. There is a large difference between those who say that they belong to a religion and those who are members of a religious body of that religion.

Doubts about the existence of a God, gods or goddesses are higher among young people. Among the non-religious population of the U.S., there are deists, humanists, ignostics, atheists, and agnostics.

English (American English) is the de facto national language. Although there is no official language at the federal level, some laws (such as U.S. naturalization requirements) standardize English. In 2010, about 230 million, or 80% of the population aged five years and older, spoke only English at home. Spanish, spoken by 12% of the population at home, is the second most common language and the most widely taught second language. Some Americans advocate making English the country's official language, as it is in at least twenty-eight states. Both Hawaiian and English are official languages in Hawaii by state law.

While neither has an official language, New Mexico has laws providing for the use of both English and Spanish, as Louisiana does for English and French. Other states, such as California, order the publication of Spanish versions of certain government documents including court forms. Many jurisdictions with large numbers of non-English speakers produce government materials, especially voting information, in the most commonly spoken languages in those jurisdictions.

Several insular territories grant official recognition to their native languages, along with English: Samoan and Chamorro are recognized by American Samoa and Guam, respectively; Carolinian and Chamorro are recognized by the Northern Mariana Islands; Spanish is an official language of Puerto Rico and is more widely spoken than English there.

Many Native American languages in the United States are endangered.

The school in the U.S. is primarily a state, rather than a federal run school. The majority of children have to attend school since the age of 5-6 up to 16-18.

American popular culture goes out to many places in the world. It has a large influence on most places, especially the Western world. American music is everywhere, and American movies and television shows can be seen in most countries.

The American flag is made up of 50 stars on a blue background and has 13 stripes, seven red and six white. It is one of many symbols of the United States like the Bald Eagle. The 50 stars represent the 50 states. The red stands for courage, the blue stands for justice, and the white represents peace and cleanliness. The 13 stripes represent the 13 original colonies.

A hamburger is one of the popular foods of the United States. Fast food in the United States is home to many regional cuisines such as the Cuisine of the Southern United States, also known as Southern food. There are Americanized versions of Chinese, Italian, Japanese, Italian and Mexican cuisine. Native American cuisine is the cuisine of the indigenous Native Americans. A lot of American dishes are influenced by many countries around the world. American cuisine has Native American, British, French, German, and Spanish influences. Soul food is traditional southern African American food.

The most popular genres in the United States are rock and roll, pop, country, R&B, and hip hop. Native American music is the indigenous music of the United States. American singers that became global superstars include Whitney Houston, Michael Jackson, Ariana Grande and Madonna.

Native Americans played lacrosse before Europeans arrived. Baseball is the country sport for the United States, and American football is the most popular sport. Basketball is also very popular in the USA, which the USA has its own league called the NBA.

The video game industry of the United States is one of the largest of any country. It is the second largest market for video games after China. Many of the world's largest video game developers are based in the USA, like Take-Two Interactive, Electronic Arts, Activision Blizzard, and Xbox Game Studios.

Iron is a chemical element and a metal. It is the most common chemical element on Earth (by mass), and the most widely used metal. It makes up much of the Earth's core, and is the fourth most common element in the Earth's crust. Its atomic number is 26, because each atom has 26 protons.

The metal is used a lot because it is strong and cheap. Iron is the main ingredient used to make steel. Raw iron is magnetic (attracted to magnets), and its compound magnetite is permanently magnetic.

In some regions iron was used around 1200 BCE. That event is considered the transition from Bronze Age to Iron Age.

Iron is a grey, silvery metal. It is magnetic, though different allotropes of iron have different magnetic qualities. Iron is easily found, mined and smelted, which is why it is so useful. Pure iron is soft and very malleable.

Iron is reactive. It reacts with most acids like sulfuric acid. It makes ferrous sulfate when it reacts with sulfuric acid. This reaction with sulfuric acid is used to clean metal.

Iron reacts with air and water to make rust. When the rust flakes off, more iron is exposed allowing more iron to rust. Eventually, the whole piece of iron is rusted away. Other metals like aluminum do not rust away. Iron can be alloyed with chromium to make stainless steel, which does not rust under most conditions.

Iron powder can react with sulfur to make iron(II) sulfide, a hard black solid. Iron also reacts with the halogens to make iron(III) halides, like iron(III) chloride. Iron reacts with the hydrohalic acids to make iron(II) halides like iron(II) chloride.

Iron makes chemical compounds with other elements. Normally the other element oxidizes iron. Sometimes two electrons are taken and sometimes three. Compounds where iron has two electrons taken are called ferrous compounds. Compounds where iron has three electrons taken are called ferric compounds. Ferrous compounds have iron in its +2 oxidation state. Ferric compounds have iron in its +3 oxidation state. Iron compounds can be black, brown, yellow, green, or purple.

Ferrous compounds are weak reducing agents. Many of them are green or blue. The most common ferrous compound is ferrous sulfate.

Ferric compounds are oxidizing agents. Many of them are brown. The most common ferric compound is ferric oxide, the same thing as rust. One reason why iron rusts is because ferric oxide is an oxidizing agent. It oxidizes iron, rusting it even under paint. That is why if there is a small scratch in the paint, the whole thing can rust.

Compounds in the +2 oxidation state are weak reducing agents. They are normally light colored. They react with oxygen in air. They are also known as ferrous compounds.

These compounds are rare; only one is common. They are found in the ground.

Compounds in the +3 oxidation state are normally brown. They are oxidizing agents. They are corrosive. They are also known as ferric compounds.

There is a lot of iron in the universe because it is the end point of the nuclear reactions in large stars. It is the last element to be produced before the violent collapse of a supernova scatters the iron into space.

The metal is the main ingredient in the Earth's core. Near the surface it is found as a ferrous or ferric compound. Some meteorites contain iron in the form of rare minerals. Normally iron is found as hematite ore in the ground, much of which was made in the Great Oxygenation Event. Iron can be extracted from the ore in a blast furnace. Some iron is found as magnetite.

There are iron compounds in meat. Iron is an essential part of the hemoglobin in red blood cells.

Iron is made in large factories called ironworks by reducing hematite with carbon (coke). This happens in large containers called blast furnaces. The blast furnace is filled with iron ore, coke and limestone. A very hot blast of air is blown in, where it causes the coke to burn. The extreme heat makes the carbon react with iron ore, taking off the oxygen from iron oxides, and making carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide is a gas and it leaves the mix. There is some sand in with the iron. The limestone, which is made of calcium carbonate, turns into calcium oxide and carbon dioxide when the limestone is very hot. The calcium oxide reacts with the sand to make a liquid called a . The slag is drained, leaving only the iron. The reaction will leave pure liquid iron in the blast furnace, where it can be shaped and hardened after cooling down. Almost all ironworks are today part of steel mills, and almost all iron is made into steel.

There are many ways to work iron. Iron can be hardened by heating a piece of metal and splashing it into cold water. It can be softened by heating it and allowing it to slowly cool. It can also be stamped by a heavy press. It can be pulled into wires. It can be rolled to make sheet metal.

In the United States, much of the iron was taken from the ground in Minnesota and then sent by ship to Indiana and Michigan where it was made into steel.

Iron is used more than any other metal. It is strong and cheap. It is used to make buildings, bridges, nails, screws, pipes, girders, and towers.

Iron is not very reactive, so it is both easy and cheap to extract from ores. It is very strong once made into steel, and is used to reinforce concrete.

There are different types of iron. Cast iron is iron made by the way described above in the article. It is hard and . It is used to make things like  covers, manhole covers, and engine blocks (the main part of an engine).

Steel is the most common form of iron. Steels come in several forms. Mild steel is steel with a low percentage of carbon. It is soft and easily bent, but it does not crack easily. It is used for nails and wires. Carbon steel is harder but more brittle. It is used in tools.

There are other types of steel. Stainless steel, because of the chromium content, is rust resistant, and nickel-iron alloys can remain strong at high temperatures. Other steels can be very hard, depending on the alloys added.

Wrought iron is easily shaped and used to make fences and chains.

Very pure iron is soft, and can rust (oxidize) easily. It is also fairly reactive.

Iron compounds are used for several things. Iron(II) chloride is used to make water clean. Iron(III) chloride is also used. Iron(II) sulfate is used to reduce chromates in cement. Some iron compounds are used in vitamins.

Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency in the world. A lack of iron in the body can lead to iron deficiency anaemia and other iron deficiencies.

Iron is important for making red blood cells. Human bodies need iron to help oxygen get to our muscles, which uses red blood cells. Iron is at the heart of some essential macromolecules such as hemoglobin. The amount of iron that the body needs is different for men and women. Women need more iron until they reach age 50 or older. At that age, the amount of iron that women need is the same as in men. Men and women older 50 need 8.7mg of iron a day, and women aged 19 to 49 need 14.8mg.

Many cereals have some added iron (the elemental metal iron). It is added to cereal in the form of tiny metal filings. It is even possible to see the slivers sometimes by taking an extremely strong magnet and putting it into the box. The magnet will attract pieces of iron in the food. Eating these small metal  are not harmful to the body.

Bitcoin  (₿) is a digital and global money system cryptocurrency. It allows people to send or receive cryptocurrency units across the internet, even to someone they don't know or don't trust. It is the first of its kind technology that allows the transfer of digital scarcity across the internet without needing a third party. Cryptocurrency units can be exchanged without being linked to a real identity. The mathematical field of cryptography is the basis for Bitcoin's security.

Bitcoin was invented by someone using the name . A Bitcoin address, or simply address, is an identifier of 26-35 letters and numbers, beginning with the number 1, 3, or bc1, that represents a possible destination for a bitcoin payment. Addresses can be generated at no cost by any user of Bitcoin. For example, using Bitcoin Core, one can click "New Address" and be assigned an address. It is also possible to get a Bitcoin address using an account at an exchange or online wallet service.

The domain name "bitcoin.org" was registered on 18 August 2008. On 31 October 2008, a link to a paper authored by Satoshi Nakamoto titled Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System was posted to a cryptography mailing list (they were the forerunners of social media).

In June 2021, El Salvador became the first country in the world to make Bitcoin a legal tender. In April 2022, the Central African Republic made bitcoin a legal tender.

One of the differences between using bitcoin and using regular money online is that bitcoin can be used without having an internet connection to link any sort of real-world identity to it. Unless someone chooses to link their name to a bitcoin address, it is hard to tell who owns the address. Bitcoin does not keep track of users; it keeps track of addresses where the money is. Each address has two important pieces of cryptographic information, or keys: a public one and a private one.

The public key, which is what the "bitcoin address" is created from, is similar to an email address; anyone can look it up and send bitcoins to it. The private address, or private key, is similar to an email password; only with it can the owner send bitcoins from it. Because of this, it is very important that this private key is kept secret. To send bitcoins from an address, you prove to the network that you own the private key that belongs to the address, without revealing the private key. This is done with a branch of mathematics known as public-key cryptography.

A public key is what determines the ownership of bitcoins, and is very similar to an ID number. If someone wanted to send you bitcoins, all you would need to do is supply them your bitcoin address, which is a version of your public key that is easier to read and type. For example, if Bob has 1 bitcoin at the bitcoin address "ABC123," and Alice has no bitcoins at the bitcoin address "DEF456," Bob can send 0.5 bitcoins to "DEF456." As soon as the transaction is processed, Alice and Bob both have 0.5 bitcoins. Anyone using the system can see how much money "ABC123" has and how much money "DEF456" has, but they cannot tell anything about who owns the address.

A Bitcoin private key has 52 characters consisting of letters and numbers. It is, simply, a random number. The set of numbers that can make up a private key is extremely large. The Bitcoin private key can be any number from a maximum of 2 to the power of 256.

In the example above, "ABC123" and "DEF456" are the bitcoin addresses of Bob and Alice. But Bob and Alice each have a second key which only they individually know. This is the private key, and it is the "other half" of a Bitcoin address. The private key is never shared, and allows the owner of the bitcoins to control them. However, if the private key is not kept secret, then anyone who sees it can also control and take the bitcoins there. This happened on live TV when Bloomberg's Matt Miller accidentally showed a private key to viewers. The money was taken immediately. The person who took it, told others about it later, saying "I'll send it back once Matt gives me a new address, since someone else can sweep [empty] out the old one."

Sites or users using the Bitcoin system are required to use a global database called blockchain. Blockchain is a record of all transactions that have taken place in the Bitcoin network. It also keeps track of new bitcoins as they are generated.  With these two facts, the blockchain can keep track of who has how much money at all times.

The process of generating the bitcoins is called mining. To generate a bitcoin, a miner must solve a math problem. However, the difficulty of the math problem depends on how many people are mining for bitcoin at the moment. Because of how complicated the math problems usually are, they must be calculated with very powerful processors. These processors can be found in CPUs, graphics cards, or specialized machines called ASICs. People who use these machines to mine bitcoins are called miners. Miners either compete with one another or work together in groups to solve a mathematical puzzle. The first miner or group of miners to solve the particular puzzle are rewarded with new bitcoins.

The puzzle is determined by the transactions being sent at the time and the previous puzzle solution. This means the solution to one puzzle is always different from the puzzles before. Attempting to change an earlier transaction, maybe to fake bitcoins being sent or change the number of someone's bitcoins, requires solving that puzzle again, which takes a lot of work, and also requires solving each of the following puzzles, which takes even more work. This means a bitcoin cheater needs to outpace all the other bitcoin miners to change the bitcoin history. This makes the bitcoin blockchain very safe to use.

When miners mine a block of bitcoin, they receive a reward. This reward gets cut in half every 210,000 blocks, which occurs roughly once every 4 years. During Bitcoin's inception, the block reward was 50 BTC. It was halved to 25 BTC on November 28th, 2012, and to 12.5 BTC on July 9th, 2016. As of May 11th, 2020, the block reward has been 6.25 BTC.

A popular image associated with Bitcoin is a QR code. QR codes are a group of black and white boxes that are similar to barcodes.  Barcodes are a row of lines, and QR codes are a grid of squares. Bitcoin uses QR codes because they can store more information in a small space, and a camera such as a smartphone can read them. The two QR codes on the Bitcoin note are the public and private addresses, and can be scanned with a number of online tools.

Everyone in the Bitcoin network is considered a peer, and all addresses are created equal. All transactions can take place solely from peer to peer, but a number of sites exist to make these transactions simpler. These sites are called exchanges. Exchanges provide tools for dealing in Bitcoin. Some allow the purchase of Bitcoin from external accounts, and others allow trading with other cryptography-based currencies like Bitcoin. Most exchanges also provide a basic "wallet" service.

Wallets provide a handy way to keep track of all of a user's public and private addresses. Because addresses are pseudo and anonymous, anyone can have as many addresses as they want. This is useful for dealing with multiple people, but it can get complicated to manage multiple accounts. A wallet holds all of this information in a convenient place, just like a real wallet would. A backup of a wallet prevents 'losing' the bitcoins.

During the 2010s, Bitcoin has gained the attention of the mainstream media. Adoption growth has not only happened for consumers, but also for many companies, who are looking to make use of all of the advantages of Bitcoin.

As of 2018, Bitcoin was most popular cryptocurrency, followed by Ethereum and Litecoin.

In 2021, El Salvador became the first country in the world to make Bitcoin an official form of money.

Bitcoin has often been criticized for its unstable price, its network's high electricity consumption, and for its high transaction fees. Additionally, it has been criticized for having characteristics in common with Ponzi, pyramid schemes and abuse for money laundering. Bitcoin owners regularly complain about losing their password, making their bitcoins permanently inaccessible. Also, people often use Bitcoin to buy illegal things on the dark web because it hides their identity, isn't controlled by one group, and is easy to use across countries.

A password is a way of authentication. It can be used as a means to identify a person. Since the password is the only way to identify a person, it has to be kept secret. A password can be static. This means it will remain the same unless the user changes it, or it rarely changes. Or a password can be dynamic. A dynamic password changes regularly and does not remain the same.  One type of a dynamic password is a one-time pad that can only be used once.

Passwords were first used in the military. This was to be able to tell who was a friend and who was an enemy when it was dark.

Modern passwords are made of characters, letters and numbers. Sometimes a password will require a minimum number of characters. Usually this is from six to eight.  Some websites allow only the use of letters and numbers, but no other characters on the keyboard. Other websites advise using a combination of letters and numbers to increase the "strength" of a password. Websites also advise changing a password once a year or more often to prevent hacking. A person may be able to guess a password if it is too easy. While being typed, each letter of a password is shown as * or •.

Other ways of verifying the identity of a person include using fingerprint scanners and face detection.

Encryption is the translation of data to achieve data security. To read an encrypted string a secret key or password must be provided to decrypt it.

In systems that uses login based actions, the password can be converted to the original string if the key is provided. Hashing is a one-way function and is irreversible.

Brute-force attacks work by calculating every possible combination that could make up a password and testing it to see if it is the correct password. As the password's length increases, the amount of time, on average, to find the correct password increases exponentially.

it includes preventing the capture of the hash of the transmitted password and protection against multiple authentication attempts in the system. Secure (encrypted) communication channels can be used to prevent interception.

A computer network is a group of two or more computers that are linked together. Networks are usually used to share resources, to exchange files, or to communicate with others.

A network is a set of nodes connected by communication links.  A node can be a computer, printer, or any other device capable of sending or receiving data from or to the other node in the network.

Other devices are often needed for the network to work correctly.  These include hubs and switches.  Different kinds of network can be connected to each other with a router.  In general, networks that use cables to connect can operate at higher speeds than those using wireless technology.

Computers in a network can be near each other, or far. A Local Area Network (LAN) connects computers which are close together.  Building a LAN is easier than connecting different networks (by a Wide Area Network).  The largest Wide Area Network is the Internet.

Computers can be part of several different networks. Networks can also be parts of bigger networks. The local area network in a small business is usually connected to the corporate network of the larger company.  These connections may allow access to the Internet.  For example, a shop may use it to show merchandise on its Web site through a web server, or to convert received orders into shipping instructions.

A network must be connected with appropriate hardware. This can be wired or wireless. For a simple LAN, computers, media and peripherals are sufficient. WANs (wide area networks) and some large LANs (local area networks) need some additional devices like a bridge, gateway or router to connect different small or large networks.

A network needs a communication protocol (a system for exchanging messages between computing systems.) Microsoft Windows, Linux and most other operating systems use TCP/IP. Apple Macintosh computers used Appletalk in the 20th century, but use TCP/IP now.

One large network of communication technology would be difficult to implement. As a result, we split up various components of the network into smaller modules or layers. The standard model of a network is the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) model set by the International Organization Standard (ISO).

Other network models exist, though they are all split into similar layers. Each layer uses the services that the layer below provides, while providing services for the layer above it. Each layer can only communicate with the same layer on the destination device.

OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) is a 7-layer network model specified by ISO (International Organization for Standardization) norm and is widely used all around the world. The concept of a seven-layer model was provided by the work  of Charles Bachman, Honeywell information Services. Various aspects of OSI design evolved from experiences with the ARPANET, NPLNET, EIN and CYCLADES networks and the work in IFIP WG6.1.

The physical layer defines electrical and physical specifications for devices. It also specifies modulated and baseband transmission.

Baseband is digital data in their raw form (in binary, the language understood by the computer in the form of 0s and 1s - 1001 1101 1010 0011).  This allows very fast and reliable transmission over short distances; however, the media tend to make the bits interfere with each other, the range of baseband transmission is very limited.  It becomes worse with increasing speed.  Baseband technology is frequently used on LAN.

In telecommunications, modulation is the process of conveying a message signal, for example a digital bit stream or an analog audio signal, inside another signal that can be physically transmitted. The device that provides modulation of the baseband signal is called a modulator, and the device that provides demodulation of the modulated signal back to baseband is called a demodulator. Today, the modulator and demodulator are integrated into one device called Modem (modulator-demodulator). Frequently used on WAN, WLAN, WWAN.

The data link layer provides the functional and procedural means to transfer data between network entities and to detect and possibly correct errors that may occur in the physical layer.

The network layer provides the functional and procedural means of transferring variable length data sequences from a source host on one network to a destination host on a different network using the IP address.

An Internet Protocol address (IP address) is a numerical label assigned to each device (e.g., computer, printer) participating in a computer network that uses the Internet Protocol for communication. At present there are two versions of protocols in use – IPv4 and IPv6.

The transport layer provides transparent transfer of data between end users, providing reliable data transfer services to the upper layers. The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) of the Internet Protocol Suite are commonly categorized as layer-4 protocols within OSI.

Commonly united into one layer in simplified network models, its main purpose is to interact with applications, encrypting and establishing dedicated connections if necessary.

Latency, incorrectly called ping, is a value that measures how much time packets need to travel to their destination. It is measured in milliseconds (ms). The tool that measures latency is called ping, commonly using special ICMP packets which are smaller than standard data packets so they do not weight the network by their presence.

Capacity is a measure of transfer capacity of a network and is measured in bits per second (bit/s or b/s), today commonly Mbit/s or Mb/s. It shows us how many data units are transferred each second. At present, the average bandwidth is far higher than is necessary and it is not a limiting factor in most cases.

Broadcast is a special transmission that is not meant for a single device but is addressed to all devices in specific network. It is mostly used to automatically issue IP addresses to devices by a DHCP server and to create an ARP table that maps the network and speeds up the traffic.

Online shopping is how people directly buy goods or services from a seller in real-time over the Internet. It is a kind of electronic commerce.

In 1991 the Worldwide Web opened for commercial use.  In 1994 online banking started and an online pizza shop from Pizza Hut.   During that same year, Netscape introduced Secure Sockets Layer for secure online shopping.  Also, in 1994, the German company Intershop introduced its first online shopping system.  In 1995, Amazon started its online shopping site, and in 1996, eBay appeared.

Cryptocurrency is a type of currency which uses digital files as money. Often, people create these files using the same ways as cryptography (the science of hiding information). Cryptocurrency users can use Digital signatures to keep the transactions safe, and to let other people check that the transactions are real. The creators of the first cryptocurrencies made them to be free of government-given currencies.

No single person controls cryptocurrencies. Instead they are decentralized and controlled by many people. This is different from 'centralized' electronic money and central banks, which a small group of people control. The control of each cryptocurrency works through a distributed ledger (a list of transactions shared by everyone), usually a blockchain. This lets everyone know all of the financial transactions that happen.

Bitcoin, first released as open-source software in 2009, is famous because it was the first decentralized cryptocurrency. Since then, people have created more than 4,000 cryptocurrencies (sometimes called altcoins, or alternative coins).

People can use cryptocurrencies to buy things, if sellers agree to accept them. However, it is not always possible to exchange cryptocurrencies for real currencies such as the US dollar.

Cryptocurrencies usually have high volatility, (their price changes very often) so holding them is risky since they can lose value quickly.  They are also a target for Pump-and-Dump-Attacks.

They act like a big distributed economic system: because they are not issued or controlled by central banks, their value  is difficult for governments to influence.  For this reason, they cannot really take the place of a stable currency.

People often use cryptocurrencies to do speculation.  That makes building a system of more or less stable exchange rates very difficult.

Another problem is the inequality of distribution of cryptocurrency. A small number of people have most of the cryptocurrency. About 1.000 people hold half of the total amount of bitcoins in the world.  If any of these people decide to sell very many of the Bitcoin that they own, they will change the exchange rate. These people can influence the value of the currency.

The currency itself only tells you who owns it.  Exchange rates of cryptocurrencies are established outside the system. Traders and brokers set the exchange rate at which they are willing to buy or sell. This is not a guarantee that they trade cryptocurrency at the value that they suggest.  The unit of cryptocurrency doesn't have value by itself.

In contrast to cryptocurrencies, central banks control "real" currencies such as the US dollar, Japanese yen, euro, or Chinese renminbi. Certain economic phenomena such as inflation or deflation may change the value (and exchange rate) of a currency. The people who own units of the currency have no direct influence on its value.

According to Jan Lansky, a cryptocurrency is a system that meets six conditions:

In March 2018, the word "cryptocurrency" was added to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

Cryptocurrency mixing is a service where tainted bitcoins can become unmarked bitcoins. Bitcoin mixing, also called Bitcoin tumbling or Bitcoin blending, is the process of using a service to make your Bitcoin purchases and transactions untraceable. Instantly mixing Bitcoin is the only way to hide bitcoin exchanges and make them impossible to track. This protects against criminals, hackers, and activities prohibited by the law where people use bitcoin. It also protects against law enforcement. The huge amount of bitcoins on mixing services come from mining pools around the world.

Crypto mining is the process of using specialized hardware and software to verify transactions on a blockchain network. The process involves solving complex mathematical equations to validate transactions and add them to the blockchain. Miners are rewarded for their efforts with cryptocurrency, usually in the form of the coin that they are mining. There are three main types of crypto mining: Proof of Work (PoW), Proof of Stake (PoS) and Proof of Authority (PoA)

Proof of Work is the most widely used consensus mechanism in the crypto space. It is used by Bitcoin and many other cryptocurrencies. In PoW, miners have to solve complex mathematical equations to validate transactions and add them to the blockchain. The miner who solves the equation first is rewarded with cryptocurrency.

Proof of Stake is a newer consensus mechanism that is becoming increasingly popular. In PoS, instead of solving complex equations, miners are chosen to validate transactions based on the amount of  cryptocurrency they hold. This is known as ‘staking’. The more cryptocurrency a miner holds, the more likely they are to be chosen to validate transactions.

Proof of Authority (PoA) is a consensus algorithm for private or consortium chains. It uses a set of trusted nodes, or validators, to secure the network. These nodes are pre-selected by the network administrator and are responsible for validating transactions and adding them to the blockchain.

In January 2009, bitcoin was created by Satoshi Nakamoto (a pseudonym). That currency used SHA-256, a cryptographic hash function, in its proof-of-work scheme. Peercoin, created in August 2012, used a (mix of, or) hybrid of proof-of-work and proof-of-stake.

As of August 2014, the Treasury of the UK had (ordered or) commissioned a study to be made, about cryptocurrencies and if they were to have any part in the UK economy. Its last report, was published in 2018; An opinion was given, regarding cryptoassets and stablecoins in January 2021. (A stablecoin, is "an attempt [... at making] a cryptocurrency token with a stable price", according to media; Furthermore, stability can come from "pegging the token to ... gold or fiat" currency, or a similar kind of asset.)

In September 2025, a courtcase started in a North European country; Five of its people have criminal charges (in that case); They supposedly scammed Norwegian kroner 960 million, from [people outside the country, that were] foreigners; The case sometimes gets called, "one of the largest scams in" that country; The trial is supposed to last until December.

Alan Mathison Turing (London, 23 June 1912 – Wilmslow, Cheshire, 7 June 1954) was an English mathematician and computer scientist. He is known as the father of computer science. He was born in Maida Vale, London.

Turing was born in Maida Vale, London. His father came from a Scottish merchant family. His mother, Ethel Sara Stoney, was the daughter of an engineer from Ireland. Turing was very good at math when he was young.

He went to school at St. Michael’s in St Leonards-on-Sea. Later, he studied at Cambridge University and Princeton University.

In 1936, Turing wrote about a theoretical machine called the Turing machine. This idea became important in the development of computers. He also created the idea of a computer program.

During World War II, Turing worked at Bletchley Park. He helped break secret German messages made by the Enigma machine. This helped the Allies win the war and may have saved millions of lives.

He worked for the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS), using cryptanalysis to break Nazi codes. Later, he helped design the Automatic Computing Engine (ACE), one of the first stored-program computers. He presented the design in 1946.

Turing was also interested in artificial intelligence. He proposed the Turing test to check if a machine can "think".

Turing was homosexual. In 1952, he admitted to having sex with a man. At that time, being gay was illegal in the UK. He was convicted and had to choose between prison or taking hormones to reduce his sex drive. He chose the medicine. This caused him health problems like impotence and breast growth.

In 1954, Turing died from cyanide poisoning. Some say he ate a poisoned apple, but the apple was never tested. It is believed he died by suicide.

In 2009, a petition asked the UK Government to say sorry for how Turing was treated. Prime Minister Gordon Brown later gave an apology and called Turing's treatment "appalling".

The “Turing Law” was later passed to pardon other men who were punished under old anti-gay laws.

The apple tree comes from southern Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan; Uzbekistan; Turkey; and the northwestern part of China. Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Asia and in Europe. They were brought to North America by European World Colonial settlers. Apples have religious and mythological significance in many cultures.

Apples are generally grown by grafting, although wild apples grow readily from seed. Apple trees are normally large if grown from seed, but small if grafted onto roots (rootstock). There are more than 10,000 known variants of apples, with a range of desired characteristics. Different variants are bred for various tastes and uses: cooking, eating raw and cider production are the most common uses. In addition to that, when it comes to food toxicity, the seeds in apples can be fatal, but only if they've been crushed. Apples contain amygdalin, which can release cyanide when digested. Apple seeds contain a chemical that can make cyanide, but the amount is too small to harm people who eat a few seeds.

Trees and fruit are attacked by fungi, bacteria and pests. In 2010, the fruit's genome was sequenced as part of research on disease control and selective breeding in apple production.

Worldwide production of apples in 2013 was 90.8 million tonnes. China grew 49% of the total.

The apple tree is a small, leaf-shedding tree that grows up to  tall. The apple tree has a broad crown with thick twigs. The leaves are alternately arranged simple ovals. They are 5 to 12 centimetres long and  wide. It has a sharp top with a soft underside. Blossoms come out in spring at the same time that the leaves begin to bud. The flowers are white. They also have a slightly pink color. They have five petals, and  in diameter. The fruit matures in autumn. It is usually  in diameter. There are five carpels arranged in a star in the middle of the fruit. Every carpel has one to three seeds.

The wild ancestor of apple trees is Malus sieversii. They grow wild in the mountains of Central Asia in the north of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Xinjiang, China, and possibly also Malus sylvestris. Unlike  apples, their leaves become red in autumn. They are being used recently to develop Malus domestica to grow in colder .

The apple tree was possibly the earliest tree to be cultivated. Its fruits have become better over thousands of years. It is said that Alexander the Great of Greek civilisation discovered  apples in Asia Minor in 300 BC. Asia and Europe have used winter apples as an important food for thousands of years. From when Europeans arrived, Argentina and the United States have used apples as food as well. Apples were brought to North America. The first apple orchard on the North American continent was said to be near Boston in 1625. In the 1900s, costly fruit industries, where the apple was a very important species, began developing.

In Norse mythology, the goddess Iðunn gives apples to the gods in Prose Edda (written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson) that makes them young forever. English  H. R. Ellis Davidson suggests that apples were related to religious practices in Germanic paganism. It was from there, she claims, that Norse paganism developed. She points out that buckets of apples were discovered in the place of burial for the Oseberg ship in Norway. She also remarks that fruit and nuts (Iðunn having been described as changing into a nut in Skáldskaparmál) have been discovered in the early graves of the Germanic peoples in England. They have also been discovered somewhere else on the continent of Europe. She suggests that this may have had a symbolic meaning. Nuts are still a symbol of fertility in Southwest England.

Sometimes apples are eaten after they are cooked. Often, apples are eaten uncooked. Apples can also be made into drinks. Apple juice and apples cider are drinks made with apples. They can also be used for many desserts such as apple pie or crumble.

The flesh of the fruit is firm with a taste anywhere from sour to sweet. Apples used for cooking are sour, and need to be cooked with sugar, while other apples are sweet, and do not need cooking. There are some seeds at the core, that can be removed with a tool that removes the core, or by carefully using a knife.

The scientific name of the apple tree genus in the Latin language is Malus. Most apples that people grow are of the Malus domestica species.

Most apples are good to eat raw (not cooked), and are also used in many kinds of baked foods, such as apple pie and baked apples, Apples are  cored and peeled and then cooked until they are  to make apple sauce or apple butter.

Apples are also made into the drinks apple juice and cider. Usually, cider contains a little alcohol, about as much as beer. The regions of Brittany in France and Cornwall in England are known for their apple ciders.

If one wants to grow a certain type of apple, it is not possible to do this by planting a seed from the wanted type. The seed will have DNA from the apple that the seeds came from, but it will also have DNA from the apple flower that pollinated the seeds, which might be a different variant of apple. This means that the tree which would grow from planting would be a mixture of two, or a hybrid. In order to grow a certain type of apple, a small twig, or 'scion', is cut from the tree that grows the type of apple desired, and then added on to a specially grown stump called a rootstock. The tree that grows will create apples of the type needed.

There are more than 7,500 known variants of apples. Different variants are available for temperate and subtropical climates. One large collection of over 2,100 apple variants is at the National Fruit Collection in England. Most of these variants are grown for eating fresh (dessert apples). However, some are grown simply for cooking or making cider. Cider apples are usually too  to eat immediately. However, they give cider a rich flavor that dessert apples cannot.

Most popular apple cultivars are soft but . Colorful skin, easy shipping, disease resistance, 'Red Delicious' apple shape, and popular flavor are also needed. Modern apples are usually sweeter than older cultivars. This is because popular tastes in apples have become different. Most North Americans and Europeans enjoy sweet apples. Extremely sweet apples with hardly any acid taste are popular in Asia and India.

Apples are grown around the world.  China produces more than half of all commercially grown apples.  In 2020/2021, China produced 44,066,000 metric tons. Other important producers were the European Union (11,719,000 metric tons), the United States (4,490,000 metric tons), and Turkey (4,300,000 metric tons).    Total world production was 80,522,000 metric tons.

In the United Kingdom there are about 3000 different types of apples. The most common apple type grown in England is the 'Bramley seedling', which is a popular cooking apple.

Apple orchards are not as common as they were in the early 1900s, when apples were rarely brought in from other countries. Organizations such as Common Ground teach people about the importance of rare and local varieties of fruit.

Many apples are grown in temperate parts of the United States and Canada. "Washington State currently produces over half the Nation's domestically grown apples and has been the leading apple-growing State since the early 1920s."  New York and Michigan are the next two leading states in apple production. "The total reported area dedicated to the crop in the United States is 336,940 acres or 526.47 square miles."

In many areas where apple growing is important, people have huge celebrations:

Apples are in the group Maloideae. This is a subfamily of the family Rosaceae. They are in the same subfamily as pears.

Algebra is a part of mathematics. It uses variables to represent a value that is not yet known or can be replaced with any value. When an equals sign (=) is used, this is called an equation. A very simple equation using a variable is: . In this example, , or it could also be said that " equals five". This is called solving for .

Besides equations, there are inequalities (less than and greater than). A special type of equation is called the function. This is often used in making graphs because it always turns one input into one output.

Algebra can be used to solve real problems because the rules of algebra work in real life and numbers can be used to represent the values of real things. Physics, engineering and computer programming are areas that use algebra all the time. It is also useful to know in surveying, construction and business, especially accounting.

People who do algebra use the rules of numbers and mathematical operations used on numbers. The simplest are adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing. More advanced operations involve exponents, starting with squares and square roots.

Algebra was first used to solve equations and inequalities. Two examples are linear equations (the equation of a straight line,  or ) and quadratic equations, which has variables that are squared (multiplied by itself, for example: , , or ).

Early forms of algebra were developed by the Babylonians and Greek geometers such as Hero of Alexandria. However the word "algebra" is a Latin form of the Arabic word Al-Jabr ("casting") and comes from a mathematics book Al-Maqala fi Hisab-al Jabr wa-al-Muqabilah, ("Essay on the Computation of Casting and Equation") written in the 9th century by a Persian mathematician, Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī, who was a Muslim born in Khwarizm in Uzbekistan. He flourished under Al-Ma'moun in Baghdad, Iraq through 813-833 CE, and died around 840 CE. The book was brought into Europe and translated into Latin in the 12th century. The book was then given the name "Algebra". (The ending of the mathematician's name, al-Khwarizmi, was changed into a word easier to say in Latin, and became the English word algorithm).

With practice, algebra can be used when faced with a problem that is too hard to solve any other way. Problems such as building a freeway, designing a cell phone, or finding the cure for a disease all require algebra.

As in most parts of mathematics, adding  to  (or  plus ) is written as ;

In algebra, multiplying  by  (or  times ) can be written in 3 different ways: ,  or just . All of these notations mean the same thing:  times . The symbol "" used in arithmetic is not used in algebra, because it looks too much like the letter , which is often used as a variable.

When we multiply a number and a variable in algebra, we can simply write the number in front of the letter: . When the number is 1, then it is not written because 1 times any number is that number () and so it is not needed. And when it is 0, we can completely remove the terms, because 0 times any number is zero ().

As a side note, you do not have to use the letters  or  in algebra. Variables are just symbols that mean some unknown number or value, so you can use almost any letter for a variable. The main exceptions are mathematical constants, like  (Euler's number),  (imaginary unit), or the Greek letter  (Pi).  and  are the most common, though.

An important part of algebra is the study of functions, since they often appear in equations that we are trying to solve. A function is like a machine you can put a number (or numbers) into and get a certain number (or numbers) out. When using functions, graphs can be powerful tools in helping us to study the solutions to equations.

A graph is a picture that shows all the values of the variables that make the equation or inequality true. Usually this is easy to make when there are only one or two variables. The graph is often a line, and if the line does not bend or go straight up-and-down it can be described by the basic formula . The variable  is the y-intercept of the graph (where the line crosses the vertical axis) and  is the slope or steepness of the line. This formula applies to the coordinates of a graph, where each point on the line is written .

In some math problems like the equation for a line, there can be more than one variable ( and  in this case). To find points on the line, one variable is changed. The variable that is changed is called the "independent" variable. Then the math is done to make a number. The number that is made is called the "dependent" variable. Most of the time the independent variable is written as  and the dependent variable is written as , for example, in . This is often put on a graph, using an  axis (going left and right) and a  axis (going up and down). It can also be written in function form: . So in this example, we could put in 5 for  and get . Put in 2 for  would get . And 0 for  would get . So there would be a line going through the points , , and  as seen in the graph to the right.

If  has a power of 1, it is a straight line. If it is squared or some other power, it will be curved. If it uses an inequality ( or ), then usually part of the graph is shaded, either above or below the line.

In algebra, there are a few rules that can be used for further understanding of equations. These are called the rules of algebra. While these rules may seem senseless or obvious, it is wise to understand that these properties do not hold throughout all branches of mathematics. Therefore, it will be useful to know how these axiomatic rules are declared, before taking them for granted. Before going on to the rules, reflect on two definitions that will be given.

Commutative means that a function has the same result if the numbers are swapped around. In other words, the order of the terms in an equation does not matter. When two terms (addends) are being added, the commutative property of addition is applicable. In algebraic terms, this gives .

Note that this does not apply for subtraction (i.e.  except if ).

When two terms (factors) are being multiplied, the commutative property of multiplication is applicable. In algebraic terms, this gives .

Note that this does not apply for division (i.e. , when  and , except if ).

Associative refers to the grouping of numbers. The associative property of addition implies that, when adding three or more terms, it doesn't matter how these terms are grouped. Algebraically, this gives . Note that this does not hold for subtraction, e.g.  (see distributive property).

The associative property of multiplication implies that, when multiplying three or more terms, it doesn't matter how these terms are grouped. Algebraically, this gives . Note that this does not hold for division, e.g. .

The distributive property states that the multiplication of a term by another term can be distributed. For instance: . (Do not confuse this with the associative properties! For instance: .)

Identity refers to the property of a number that it is equal to itself. In other words, there exists an operation of two numbers so that it equals the variable of the sum. The additive identity property states that any number plus 0 is that number: . This also holds for subtraction: .

The multiplicative identity property states that any number times 1 is that number: . This also holds for division: .

The additive inverse property is somewhat like the inverse of the additive identity. When we add a number and its opposite, the result is 0. Algebraically, it states the following: , which is the same as . For example, the additive inverse (or opposite) of 1 is -1.

The multiplicative inverse property means that when we multiply a number and its reciprocal, the result is 1. Algebraically, it states the following: , which is the same as . For example, the multiplicative inverse (or reciprocal) of 2 is 1/2. To get the reciprocal of a fraction, switch the numerator and the denominator: the reciprocal of  is .

In addition to "elementary algebra", or basic algebra, there are advanced forms of algebra, taught in colleges and universities, such as abstract algebra, linear algebra, and universal algebra. This includes how to use a matrix to solve many linear equations at once. Abstract algebra is the study of things that are found in equations, going beyond numbers to the more abstract with groups of numbers.

Many math problems are about physics and engineering. In many of these physics problems time is a variable. The letter used for time is . Using the basic ideas in algebra can help reduce a math problem to its simplest form making it easier to solve difficult problems. Energy is , force is , mass is , acceleration is  and speed of light is sometimes . This is used in some famous equations, like  and  (although more complex math beyond algebra was needed to come up with that last equation).

Architecture is the process of designing structures and buildings. It uses both art and engineering. Examples include houses, churches, hotels, office buildings, roads, tunnels and bridges.

Architecture is the profession of an architect. Usually, a person must  at an institution of higher education (university) to become an architect. There were architects long before there was higher education. They learnt by being an apprentice to an established architect.

Architecture can do small designs, such as for a garage, or large designs, such as for a whole new town. The capital cities of Brasília, and Canberra were designed. Architects often work with structural engineers to make structurally sound buildings.

In the past, people built s and wood houses to protect themselves from the weather. For safety, they were often close together. Great civilizations like the Ancient Egyptians built large temples and structures, like the Great Pyramids of Giza. The Ancient Greeks and Romans made what we now call "Classical Architecture". The Romans, working over 2000 years ago, copied the arch from the Etruscans, who copied it from the Mesopotamians.

Classical architecture was formal, and it always obeyed laws. It used symmetry, which really means , and it used proportion between shapes. The Golden Mean was a rule which said, (to put it simply) if you are making a room, or any other thing, it will work best if you always make the long side 1.6 times as long as the short side. There are many 'laws' in classical architecture, like how high the middle of an arched bridge needs to be (which depends on how wide the bridge needs to be). These laws were learned from thousands of years of experience and they are often used today. However, today more notice is taken of specific facts, such as what wind speeds occur once or twice in a century. Several bridges have blown down because that was not properly taken into consideration.

In some parts of the world, like India, the architecture is famous for carving the stone on temples and palaces. Different architectural styles occur in China, Japan, Southeast Asia, Africa, Mexico, and Central and South America.

Architects in Western Europe in the Middle Ages made Romanesque architecture, then Gothic architecture. Gothic buildings have tall, pointed windows and arches. Many churches have Gothic architecture. Castles were also built at this time. In Eastern Europe, churches usually had domes. People added their own ideas and decoration to the Classical Architecture of the past. The Renaissance brought a return to classical ideas.

In the late 18th century with the Industrial Revolution, people began to invent machines to make things quickly and cheaply. Many factories and mills were built during, or after this revolution. Decades later, in the Victorian era, architects like George Fowler Jones and Decimus Burton still followed the Gothic style to build new churches. Up to this point, buildings were limited in size and style by the strength of the wood and masonry used to construct them. Gothic cathedrals were among the largest buildings because the gothic arch when combined with buttresses allowed stone buildings to be built taller. For example, the cathedral in Ulm, Germany is over 500 feet tall. However, building with stone has its limits, and building too tall could result in collapse. This happened to the Beauvais Cathedral, which was never completed.

Towards the end of the 19th Century with a second Industrial Revolution, steel became much cheaper. Architects began to use inventions like metal girders and reinforced concrete to build. An example is the Eiffel Tower in Paris. Buildings can now be built taller than ever before. We call them skyscrapers. This new technology has made us free from traditional limitations, and because of the new possibilities presented by these materials, many traditional methods of construction and ideas about style were reevaluated, replaced, or abandoned. Cheap, strong glass soon brought transparent exterior walls, especially for office buildings.

Modernism is the name for the architectural style which developed because of these new building technologies, and its beginnings can been seen as early as 1890. Modernism can also refer to a specific group of architects and buildings from the early to late 20th century, and so may not be the proper term to use for many building built since then, which are sometimes called "post-modern".

Many of the world's greatest structures were built by modern-day architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright; Sir Hugh Casson; Norman Foster; I. M. Pei; Adrian Smith; Edward Durell Stone; Frank Gehry; Fazlur Khan; Gottfried Böhm; and Bruce Graham.

Anatomy is the study of the bodies of people and other animals. Anatomy is the study of the inside of the body and outside the body. Anatomy notes the position and structure of organs such as muscles, glands and bones. A person who studies anatomy is an anatomist.

The history of anatomy dates back to 1600 BC when Egyptians began studying human anatomy. They discovered the functions of many organs like the liver, spleen, kidneys, heart etc. and were the first to discover the structure and functions of the lymphatic system.

For long periods the dissection of deceased people was forbidden, and correct ideas about human anatomy was a long time coming.

Academic human anatomists are usually employed by universities, medical schools and teaching hospitals. They are often involved in teaching and research.  Gross anatomy studies parts of the body that are big enough to see. Micro-anatomy studies smaller parts.

There are different organ systems, such as the cardiovascular system, also known as the circulatory system (the system that gets blood around the body), the muscular system (the system that contains muscles), the nervous system (the system that controls the nerves, and the brain) and the skeleton (the bones).

Anatomy, physiology and biochemistry are similar basic medical sciences.

Argentina, officially the Argentine Republic, is a country in South America. Argentina is the second-largest country in South America and the eighth-largest country in the world.

Spanish is the most spoken language, and the official language, but many other languages are spoken. There are minorities speaking Italian, German, English, Quechua and even Welsh in Patagonia.

In eastern Argentina is Buenos Aires, the capital of Argentina, it is also one of the largest cities in the world. In order by number of people, the largest cities in Argentina are Buenos Aires, Córdoba, Rosario, Mendoza, La Plata, Tucumán, Mar del Plata, Salta, Santa Fe, Neuquén and Bahía Blanca.

Argentina is between the Andes mountain range in the west and the southern Atlantic Ocean in the east and south. It is bordered by Paraguay and Bolivia in the north, Brazil and Uruguay in the northeast, and Chile in the west and south. It also claims the Falkland Islands (Spanish: Islas Malvinas) and South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands. Most citizens of the Argentine Republic are descendants of immigrants from Europe. They are united by citizenship and not necessarily by ethnicity. Most Argentines embrace both their ethnic origins and Argentine nationality.

The name Argentina comes from the Latin argentum (silver) as the Spanish conquistadors believed the area had silver. In the Americas (South and North), Canada, US, Brazil and Argentina are the largest countries (in that order).

The oldest signs of people in Argentina are in the Patagonia (Piedra Museo, Santa Cruz), and are more than 13,000 years old. In 1480 the Inca Empire conquered northwestern Argentina, making it part of the empire. In the northeastern area, the Guaraní developed a culture based on yuca and sweet potato however typical dishes all around Argentina are pasta, red wines (Italian influence) and beef.

Other languages spoken are Italian, English and German. Lunfardo is Argentinean slang and is a mix of Spanish and Italian. Argentinians are said to speak Spanish with an Italian accent.

Argentina declared independent from Spain in 1816, and achieved it in a War led by José de San Martín in 1818. Many immigrants from Europe came to the country. By the 1920s it was the 7th wealthiest country in the world, but it began a decline after this. In the 1940s, following the "infamous decade" where the country's politics were not stable, Juan Peron came to power. Peron was one of the most important people in the country's history and many politicians today call themselves Peronist. Peron was forced out of power in 1955. After spending years in exile he returned to power in the 1970s.

In 1976, the country was falling into chaos, and the military took power. This was not the first time the military had done this. Leading the new government was Jorge Rafael Videla. Videla was one of history's most brutal dictators. Thousands of people disappeared or were killed during his time as president. Videla retired in 1980.

One of his successors was another general turned dictator, Leopoldo Galtieri. By the time Galtieri was in office in 1981 the dictatorship became unpopular. To stir up support, Galtieri ordered an invasion of the Falkland Islands, starting the Falklands War. Argentina lost the war, and soon the country fell into chaos again. Galtieri was removed from power and eventually democracy was restored. Galtieri and Videla would be charged with "crimes against humanity" because of the mass murder and other crimes that they ordered as president.

In the early 21st century Argentina is one of the most important countries in Latin America, though it still has many problems. It has a large economy and is influential in the "southern cone" of South America and a member of the G20 developing nations.

In December 2023, Argentina was the invitee country but it did not joined to the BRICS bloc.

Argentina is a federal republic. The people of Argentina vote for a President to rule them and Senators and Deputies to speak for them and make laws for them. The President is Javier Milei since December 2023.

Argentina is divided into 23 provinces (provincias; singular: provincia), and 1 city (commonly known as capital federal):

Argentina is almost 3,700 km long from north to south, and 1,400 km from east to west (maximum values). It can be divided into three parts: the Pampas in the central part of the country, Patagonia in the southern part down to Tierra del Fuego; and the Andes mountain range along the western border with Chile, with the highest point in the province of Mendoza. Cerro Aconcagua, at 6,960 metres (22,834 ft), is the Americas' highest mountain.

The most important rivers include the River Plate, Paraguay, Bermejo, Colorado, Uruguay and the largest river, the Paraná. River Plate was incorrectly translated though, and should have been translated to English as River of (the) Silver. River Plate is also a famous Buenos Aires soccer team.

See List of cities in Argentina for the many places people live in Argentina.

The majority of the Argentineans are descendants of Europeans mainly from Spain, Italy, Russia, France, Germany , Arabs other Europeans countries and Mestizo representing more than 90% of the total population of the country. More than 300,000 Roma gypsies live in Argentina. Since the 1990s, Romanian, Brazilian and Colombian gypsies arrived in Argentina.

Football or soccer is the most popular sport, although the national sport of the country is Pato. Argentina has a number of highly ranked Polo players. Field hockey (for women) rugby and golf are also favorites.

Argentina is a Christian country. Most of Argentina's people (80 percent) are Roman Catholic. Argentina also has the largest population of Jewish community after Israel and US. Middle Eastern immigrants who were Muslims converted to Catholicism, but there are still Muslims as well.

Medicine is socialized and so is education, making Argentina's literacy rate about 98%. State University is free as well.

Animals (or Metazoa) are living creatures with many cells that make up the kingdom Animalia.

Animals get their energy from other living things. Usually, they eat them or are parasites. Animals, plants, fungi, and some other living things have complex cells, so they are grouped together as eukaryotes.

The study of animals is called zoology. The study of ancient life is called palaeontology.

Most animals are mobile, meaning they can move around. Animals take in oxygen, and give out carbon dioxide. This cellular respiration is part of their metabolism (chemical working). In both these ways they are different from plants. Also, the cells of animals have different cell membranes to other eukaryotes like plants and fungi.

Plants are also multicellular eukaryotic organisms, but live by using light, water and basic elements to make their tissues.

There are many different types of animals. The common animals most people know are only about 3% of the animal kingdom. When biologists look at animals, they find things that certain animals have in common. They use this to group the animals in a biological classification. Several million species may exist, but biologists have only identified about one million.

Animals can mainly be divided into two main groups: the invertebrates and the vertebrates. Vertebrates have a backbone, or spine; invertebrates do not. Vertebrates are the only group to have an adaptive immune system, which may be partly responsible for their size and success.

The animal mode of nutrition is called heterotrophic because they get their food from other living organisms. Some animals eat only plants; they are called herbivores. Other animals eat only meat and are called carnivores. Animals that eat both plants and meat are called omnivores. Some animals get their energy from photosynthetic protists that live inside them.

The environments animals live in vary greatly. By the process of evolution, animals adapt to the habitats they live in. A fish is adapted to its life in water and a crab is adapted to a life catching and eating insects. A mammal living on the savannahs of East Africa lives quite a different life from a dolphin or porpoise catching fish in the sea.

The fossil record of animals goes back about 600 million years to the Ediacaran period, or somewhat earlier. During the whole of this long time, animals have been constantly evolving, so that the animals alive on Earth today are very different from those on the edges of the sea-floor in the Ediacaran.

Antarctica is the Earth's  and the continent with the least people. It is on the South Pole. It is almost entirely south of the Antarctic Circle. Around Antarctica is the Southern Ocean. It is the fifth-largest continent in area after Asia, Africa, North America, and South America. About 99% of Antarctica is covered by ice. This ice averages at least 1.6 kilometers (1.0 miles) thick.

Antarctica is the coldest, driest and windiest continent. It is also, on average, the highest of all the continents. Antarctica is considered a desert. It is the largest and coldest desert in the world. It has yearly precipitation of only 200 mm (8 inches) near the sea and far less inland. No humans live in Antarctica . However, about 1,000 to 5,000 people live through the year at the science stations in Antarctica. Only plants and animals that can live in cold live there. The animals include penguins, seals, nematodes, tardigrades and mites. Plant life includes some grass and shrubs, algae, lichen, fungi, and bacteria.

The first known polar sighting of the continent was in 1820. Antarctica was mostly forgotten for the rest of the 19th century. This was because of its  environment, few , and . The first official use of the name Antarctica as a continental name in the 1890s is said to have been used by Scottish cartographer John George Bartholomew.

The Antarctic Treaty was signed in 1959 by 21 countries. More countries have signed the treaty since then. So far, 46 countries have signed the treaty. The treaty declares that military activities and mineral mining are against the law. However, it supports scientific research. It also helps the continent's ozone. More than 4,000 scientists from different nations and different interests experiment together.

Antarctica is covered by an ice sheet about four kilometers thick. Under the ice it is mostly land, although the ice shelves are glossing over the ocean.  The Trans Antarctic Mountains divide the land between East Antarctica in the Eastern Hemisphere and West Antarctica in the Western Hemisphere.

Antarctica has some important features hidden by the ice. One is Lake Vostok, which has been covered by ice for at least 15 million years. The lake is 250 km long and 50 km wide. Another is the huge Gamburtsev mountain chain, which are the size of the Alps, yet entirely buried under the ice. The Gamburtsev range has a nearby massive rift valley similar to the East African Great Rift Valley. It is called the Lambert system. Scientists used radar that can work under ice to survey the whole of Antarctica.

Antarctica was formed by the breaking of the Gondwana supercontinent. Scientists say Antarctica used to be much farther from north and much warmer, moving to where it is now through continental drift.  From 2010 to 2015, scientists collected fossils of frogs, water lilies, and shark and ray teeth, showing that these life forms used to live on Antarctica.  The frog fossils were about 40 million years old. Scientists say marsupials, animals that keep their babies in pouches, could have started in South America, went to a warm ancient Antarctica, and gone to Australia from there.

Few land plants grow in Antarctica. This is because Antarctica does not have much moisture (water), sunlight, good soil, or a warm temperature. Plants usually only grow for a few weeks in the summer when penguins produce the most feces. However, moss, lichen and algae do grow.  The most important organisms in Antarctica are the plankton which grow in the ocean.

One important source of food in the Antarctic is the krill, which is a general term for the small shrimp-like marine crustaceans. Krill are  near the bottom of the food chain: they feed on phytoplankton and to a lesser extent zooplankton. Krill are a food form suitable for the larger animals for whom krill makes up the largest part of their diet.  Whales, penguins, seals, and even some of the birds that live in Antarctica, all depend on krill.

Whales are the largest animals in the ocean, and in Antarctica. They are mammals, not fish. That means that they breathe air and do not lay eggs. Many different kinds of whales live in the oceans around Antarctica.

Whalers have hunted whales for hundreds of years, for meat and blubber.  Nowadays most whaling is done in the Antarctic area.

Penguins only live south of the equator. Several different kinds live in and around Antarctica. The biggest ones can stand nearly 4 feet (1.2m) tall and can weigh almost 100 pounds (40 kg). The smallest kinds are only about one foot (30 cm) tall. Penguins are large birds that swim very well but cannot fly. They have black backs and wings with white fronts.  Their feathers are very tightly packed and make a thick cover.  They also have a layer of woolly down under the feathers.  The feathers themselves are coated with a type of oil that makes them .   A thick layer of blubber also keeps them warm.  Penguins eat fish and are at home in the ocean.  They come up on the land or ice to lay their eggs and raise the chicks.  They nest together in a huge group.

The largest animal in Antarctica that lives entirely on land is a wingless midge.

For a long time, people had believed that there was a great continent in the far south of Earth. They thought this Terra Astral-is would "balance" the lands in the north like Europe, Asia and North Africa. People have believed this from the times of Ptolemy (1st century AD). He suggested this idea to keep the balance of all known lands in the world. Pictures of a large land in the south were common in maps. In the late 17th century, people discovered that South America and Australia were not part of the mythical "Antarctica". However, geographers still believed that Antarctica was much bigger than it really was.

European maps continued to show this unknown land until Captain James Cook's ships, HMS Resolution and Adventure, first crossed the Antarctic Circle on 17 January 1773. In fact, he did come within about  of the Antarctic . However, he was forced to go back because of ice.

The first  sighting of Antarctica were by three different men. According to different organizations, three different ships saw Antarctica in 1820. The three ships were captained by Fabian von Bellingham (a captain in the Russian Imperial Navy), Edward Mansfield (a captain in the Royal Navy), and Nathaniel Palmer (an American seal hunter out of Stonington, Connecticut). The first recorded landing on mainland Antarctica was by the American sealer John Davis. He landed on West Antarctica on 7 February 1821. However, some historians are not sure about this claim.

People began discovering different parts of Antarctica and mapping them. This was slow work because they could only work in the summer. At last a map was made, and people began to talk about exploring the land, not only the sea. However, this would have been very hard work. They would have to break through the ice that was around Antarctica. Then they would have to land on it and bring in enough things to live on while they explored the land.

The first serious exploration of the Antarctic land was the Nimrod Expedition led by Ernest Shackleton in 1907–09. They were the first to climb Mount Erebus and to reach the South Magnetic Pole. Shackleton himself and three other members of his expedition made several firsts in December 1908 – February 1909. They were the first humans to cross the Ross Ice Shelf, and the Trans-antarctic Mountain Range (via the Beardmore Glacier). They were the first to set foot on the South Polar Plateau.

Robert Falcon Scott, the most well known of all of the explorers, wanted to be the first man to reach the South Pole. At the same time, another team from Norway lead by Roald Amundsen started. They both raced each other to the South Pole, but in the end Amundsen won because he had made a good use of his sleigh dogs. Scott had used ponies and motor sleds, but when he got to the South Pole he found a message from Amundsen, showing that he had beaten Scott.

On his way back, Scott and two of his men met a  and froze to death while waiting for it to finish. The people who found him eight months later also found his records and diary, which he had written to the day he died.

Climate change and global warming are showing effects in Antarctica, particularly the Antarctic Peninsula.

No one lives in Antarctica all the time. People who go to Antarctica are there to learn about Antarctica, so most of the people who live there are scientists. Most live at national science stations on the coast. Some bases are far from the sea, for example at the South pole. They study the weather, animals, glaciers, and the Earth's atmosphere. Some scientists  ice cores to find out about the weather long ago. People who work in the Antarctic must be careful, because a blizzard can start any time and anywhere. When they go far away from their shelter, they must always take lots of food just in case.

Today, people explore Antarctica using snowmobiles, which are faster than dogs and can pull heavier loads. Many come to Antarctica just for a short visit. There are companies in South America that have vacations to Antarctica, so people pay to go there on a ship. Some people take their own boats.

The Arctic Ocean is the ocean around the North Pole. The most northern parts of Eurasia and North America are around the Arctic Ocean. Thick pack ice and snow cover almost all of the ocean in winter and most of it in summer. An icebreaker and a nuclear-powered submarine can use the Northwest Passage through the Arctic Ocean to go between the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans.

The Arctic Ocean has an ocean area of 14.056 million km2, the smallest of the world's five oceans, and it has a coastline of . The central surface is covered by ice about  thick.

Its biology is quite special. Endangered species include walruses, whales, and polar bears. Year by year, the Arctic Ocean is becoming less icy as a result of global warming.

The average depth of the Arctic Ocean is . Its deepest point is in the Eurasian Basin, at .

The Arctic Ocean covers an area of about 14,056,000 km2.  The coastline is 45,390 km (28,200 mi) long It is surrounded by Eurasia, North America, and Greenland and several other islands.

The ocean is generally taken to include Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea, East Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, White Sea, and other bodies of water. It is connected to the Pacific Ocean by the Bering Strait and to the Atlantic Ocean by the Greenland Sea and the Labrador Sea.

Countries bordering the Arctic Ocean are Russia, Norway, Iceland, Greenland (part of Denmark), Canada, and the United States.

The Arctic Ocean has a polar climate. Its winter is characterized by the polar night, cold and stable weather conditions, and clear skies.

The temperature of the surface of the ocean is fairly constant, near the freezing point of seawater. The ocean consists of saltwater but has less salinity than other oceans have. The ocean's temperature must reach −1.8 °C (28.8 °F) before freezing occurs.

Ice covers almost all of the Arctic Ocean in late winter and the majority of it in late summer. Much of the Arctic ice pack is covered in snow for about 10 months of the year. The maximum snow cover is in March or April, at about 20–50 cm (7.9–19.7 in.).

The climate of the Arctic region has varied significantly in the past. As recently as 55 million years ago, during the Eocene epoch, the region reached an average annual temperature of 10–20 °C (50–68 °F). The surface waters of the Arctic Ocean warmed enough to support tropical lifeforms.

Endangered marine species in the Arctic Ocean include walruses and whales. The area has a fragile ecosystem. The Arctic Ocean has relatively little plant life except for phytoplankton. A crucial part of the ocean, phytoplankton feeds on nutrients from the rivers and currents of the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans.

Albert Einstein (14 March 1879 – 18 April 1955) was a German-born Jewish scientist. He worked on theoretical physics. He is most famous for the theory of relativity. He won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for theoretical physics.

His most famous equation is  in which E is for Energy, m for mass, c is the speed of light is therefore Energy equals mass multiplied by the speed of light squared.

At the start of his career, Einstein didn't think that Newtonian mechanics was enough to bring together the laws of classical mechanics and the laws of the electromagnetic field. Between 1902 and 1909 he made the theory of special relativity to fix it.

Einstein also thought that Isaac Newton's idea of gravity was not completely correct. So, he extended his ideas on special relativity to include gravity. In 1916, he published a paper on general relativity with his theory of gravitation.

In 1933, Einstein was visiting the United States but in Germany, Adolf Hitler and the Nazis came to power (this is before World War II). Since Einstein was Jewish, he did not go back to Germany because of  Hitler’s anti-Semitic laws. He lived in the United States and became an American citizen in 1940. On the beginning of World War II, he and Leó Szilárd sent a letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt explaining to him that Germany was in the making an Atomic bomb; so Einstein and Szilard  that the U.S. should also make one. This led to the Manhattan Project, and the U.S. became the first nation in history to create and use the atomic bomb (not on Germany but on Japan). Einstein and other physicists like Richard Feynman who worked on the Manhattan Project later regretted that the bomb was used on Japan.

Einstein lived in Princeton, New Jersey and was one of the first members invited to the Institute for Advanced Study, where he worked for the rest of his life.

He is now thought to be one of the greatest scientists of all time.

His contributions helped lay the foundations for all modern branches of physics, including quantum mechanics and relativity.

Einstein was born in Ulm, Württemberg, Germany, on 14 March 1879. His family was Jewish, but was not very . However, later in life Einstein became very interested in his Judaism. Einstein did not begin speaking until he was 4 years old. According to his younger sister, Maja, "He had such difficulty with language that those around him feared he would never learn". When Einstein was around 4 years old, his father gave him a magnetic compass. He tried hard to understand how the needle could seem to move itself so that it always pointed north. The needle was in a closed case, so clearly nothing like wind could be pushing the needle around, and yet it moved. So in this way Einstein became interested in studying science and mathematics. His compass gave him ideas to  the world of science.

When he became older, he went to school in Switzerland. After he graduated, he got a job in the patent office there. While he was working there, he wrote the papers that first made him famous as a great scientist.

Einstein married with a 20-year-old Serbian woman Mileva Marić in January 1903.

In 1917, Einstein became very sick with an illness that almost killed him, fortunately he survived. His cousin Elsa Löwenthal nursed him back to health. After this happened, Einstein divorced Mileva on 14 February 1919, and married Elsa on 2 June 1919.

Einstein's first daughter was Lieserl Einstein. She was born in Novi Sad, Vojvodina, Austria-Hungary on January 27, 1902. She spent her first years in the care of Serbian grandparents because her father Albert did not want her to be brought to Switzerland, where he had a job offer at the patent office. Some historians believe she died from scarlet fever.

Einstein's two sons were Hans Albert Einstein and Eduard Tete Einstein. Hans Albert was born in Bern, Switzerland in May 1904. He became a professor in Berkeley (California). Eduard was born in Zürich, Switzerland in July 1910. He died at 55 years old of a stroke in the Psychiatric University Hospital Zurich "Burghölzli" . He had spent his life in and out of hospitals due to his schizophrenia.

In spring of 1914, he moved back to Germany, and became ordinary member of the Prussian Academy and director of a newly established institute for physics of the Kaiser-Wilhelm-Gesellschaft. He lived in Berlin and finished the General Theory of Relativity in November 1915. In the Weimar Republic, he was politically active for socialism and Zionism. In 1922, he received the Nobel prize for Physics for his explanation of the photoelectric effect in 1905. He then tried to formulate a general field theory uniting gravitation and electromagnetism, without success. He had reservations about the quantum mechanics invented by Heisenberg (1925) and Schrödinger (1926). In spring of 1933, Einstein and Elsa were traveling in the US when the Nazi party came to power. The Nazis were violently antisemitic. They  Einstein's relativity theory "Jewish physics," and some German physicists started polemics against his theories. Others, like Planck and Heisenberg, defended Einstein.

After their return to Belgium, considering the threats from the Nazis, Einstein resigned from his position in the Prussian Academy in a letter from Oostende. Einstein and Elsa decided not to go back to Berlin and moved to Princeton, New Jersey in the United States, and in 1940 he became a United States citizen.

Before World War II, in August 1939, Einstein at the suggestion of Leó Szilárd wrote to the U.S. president, Franklin D. Roosevelt, to say that the United States should invent an atomic bomb so that the Nazi government could not beat them to the punch. He signed the letter. However, he was not part of the Manhattan Project, which was the  that created the atomic bomb.

Einstein, a Jew but not an Israeli citizen, was offered the presidency in 1952 but turned it down, stating "I am deeply moved by the offer from our State of Israel, and at once saddened and ashamed that I cannot accept it." Ehud Olmert was reported to be considering offering the presidency to another non-Israeli, Elie Wiesel, but he was said to be "very not interested".

He did his research on gravitation at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, New Jersey until his death on 18 April 1955 of a  aortic aneurysm. He was still writing about quantum physics hours before he died.

In 1905 he came up with a theory that light was made of small particles called photons . Using this theory he was able to explain the photoelectric effect. The formula relating the energy and frequency of a photon is . This means that higher frequency light has more energy per photon.

The photoelectric effect happens when light shining on a metal surface causes it to emit electrons. The difficulty for the classical wave theory was to explain why this effect only seems to occur for high frequency light such as UV, but not lower frequency such as red or infrared.

Einstein showed that, since higher frequency light has photons with more energy, it has a greater chance of forcing electrons out of the metal.

Einstein was also able to explain other phenomena with photons, such as fluorescence and ionization. In 1921 he was awarded the Nobel Prize for this discovery.

The theory of special relativity was published by Einstein in 1905, in the paper On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies. It says that both distance measurements and time measurements change near the speed of light. This means that as one get closer to the speed of light (nearly 300,000 kilometres per second), lengths appear to get shorter, and clocks tick more slowly. Einstein said that special relativity is based on two ideas. The first is that the laws of physics are the same for all  that are not moving  each other.

Things going in the same direction at the same speed are said to be in an inertial frame.

People in the same "frame" measure how long something takes to happen. Their clocks keep the same time. But in another "frame" their clocks move at a different rate. The reason this happens is as follows. No matter how an observer is moving, if he measures the speed of the light coming from that star it will always be the same number.

Imagine an astronaut were all alone in a different universe. It just has an astronaut and a spaceship. Is he moving? Is he standing still? Those questions do not mean anything. Why? Because when we say we are moving we mean that we can measure our distance from something else at various times. If the numbers get bigger we are moving away. If the numbers get smaller we are moving closer. To have movement you must have at least two things. An airplane can be moving at several hundred kilometers per hour, but passengers say, "I am just sitting here."

Suppose some people are on a spaceship and they want to make an accurate clock. At one end they put a mirror, and at the other end they put a simple machine. It shoots one short burst of light toward the mirror and then waits. The light hits the mirror and bounces back. When it hits a light detector on the machine, the machine says, "Count = 1," it simultaneously shoots another short burst of light toward the mirror, and when that light comes back the machine says, "Count = 2." They decide that a certain number of bounces will be defined as a second, and they make the machine change the seconds counter every time it has detected that number of bounces. Every time it changes the seconds counter it also flashes a light out through a porthole under the machine. So somebody outside can see the light flashing every second.

Every grade school child learns the formula d=rt (distance equals rate multiplied by time). We know the speed of light, and we can easily measure the distance between the machine and the mirror and multiple that to give the distance the light travels. So we have both d and r, and we can easily calculate t. The people on the spaceship compare their new "light clock" with their various wrist watches and other clocks, and they are satisfied that they can measure time well using their new light clock.

Now this spaceship happens to be going very fast. They see a flash from the clock on the space ship, and then they see another flash. Only the flashes do not come a second apart. They come at a slower rate. Light always goes at the same speed, d = rt. That is why the clock on the spaceship is not flashing once a second for the outside observer.

Special relativity also relates energy with mass, in Albert Einstein's E=mc2 formula.

E=mc2, also called the mass-energy equivalence, is one of the things that Einstein is most famous for. It is a famous equation in physics and math that shows what happens when mass changes to energy or energy changes to mass. The "E" in the equation stands for energy. Energy is a number which you give to objects depending on how much they can change other things. For instance, a brick hanging over an egg can put enough energy onto the egg to break it, but a feather can not.

There are three basic forms of energy: potential energy, kinetic energy, and rest energy. Two of these forms of energy can be seen in the examples given above, and in the example of a pendulum.

A cannonball hangs on a rope from an iron ring. A horse pulls the cannonball to the right side. When the cannonball is released it will move back and forth as diagrammed. It would do that forever except that the movement of the rope in the ring and rubbing in other places causes friction, and the friction takes away a little energy all the time. If we ignore the losses due to friction, then the energy provided by the horse is given to the cannonball as potential energy. (It has energy because it is up high and can fall down.) As the cannonball swings down it gains more and more speed, so the nearer the bottom it gets the faster it is going and the harder it would hit you if you stood in front of it. Then it slows down as its kinetic energy is changed back into potential energy. "Kinetic energy" just means the energy something has because it is moving. "Potential energy" just means the energy something has because it is in some higher position than something else.

When energy moves from one form to another, the amount of energy always remains the same. It cannot be made or destroyed. This rule is called the "conservation law of energy". For example, when you throw a ball, the energy is transferred from your hand to the ball as you release it. But the energy that was in your hand, and now the energy that is in the ball, is the same number. For a long time, people thought that the conservation of energy was all there was to talk about.

When energy transforms into mass, the amount of energy does not remain the same. When mass transforms into energy, the amount of energy also does not remain the same. However, the amount of matter and energy remains the same. Energy turns into mass and mass turns into energy in a way that is defined by Einstein's equation, E = mc2.

The "m" in Einstein's equation stands for mass. Mass is the amount of matter there is in some body. If you knew the number of protons and neutrons in a piece of matter such as a brick, then you could calculate its total mass as the sum of the masses of all the protons and of all the neutrons. (Electrons are so small that they are almost negligible.) Masses pull on each other, and a very large mass such as that of the Earth pulls very hard on things nearby. You would weigh much more on Jupiter than on Earth because Jupiter is so huge. You would weigh much less on the Moon because it is only about one-sixth the mass of Earth. Weight is related to the mass of the brick (or the person) and the mass of whatever is pulling it down on a spring scale – which may be smaller than the smallest moon in the solar system or larger than the Sun.

Mass, not weight, can be transformed into energy. Another way of expressing this idea is to say that matter can be transformed into energy. Units of mass are used to measure the amount of matter in something. The mass or the amount of matter in something determines how much energy that thing could be changed into.

Energy can also be transformed into mass. If you were pushing a baby buggy at a slow walk and found it easy to push, but pushed it at a fast walk and found it harder to move, then you would wonder what was wrong with the baby buggy. Then if you tried to run and found that moving the buggy at any faster speed was like pushing against a brick wall, you would be very surprised. The truth is that when something is moved then its mass is increased. Human beings ordinarily do not notice this increase in mass because at the speed humans ordinarily move the increase in mass is almost nothing.

As speeds get closer to the speed of light, then the changes in mass become impossible not to notice. The basic experience we all share in daily life is that the harder we push something like a car the faster we can get it going. But when something we are pushing is already going at some large part of the speed of light we find that it keeps gaining mass, so it gets harder and harder to get it going faster. It is impossible to make any mass go at the speed of light because to do so would take infinite energy.

Sometimes a mass will change to energy. Common examples of elements that make these changes we call radioactivity are radium and uranium. An atom of uranium can lose an alpha particle (the atomic nucleus of helium) and become a new element with a lighter nucleus. Then that atom will emit two electrons, but it will not be stable yet. It will emit a series of alpha particles and electrons until it finally becomes the element Pb or what we call lead. By throwing out all these particles that have mass it has made its own mass smaller. It has also produced energy.

In most radioactivity, the entire mass of something does not get changed to energy. In an atomic bomb, uranium is transformed into krypton and barium. There is a slight difference in the mass of the resulting krypton and barium, and the mass of the original uranium, but the energy that is released by the change is huge. One way to express this idea is to write Einstein's equation as:

The c2 in the equation stands for the speed of light squared. To square something means to multiply it by itself, so if you were to square the speed of light, it would be 299,792,458 meters per second, times 299,792,458 meters per second, which is approximately

About 60 terajoules were released by the atomic bomb that exploded over Hiroshima. So about two-thirds of a gram of the radioactive mass in that atomic bomb must have been lost (changed into energy), when the uranium changed into krypton and barium.

The idea of a Bose-Einstein condensate came out of a collaboration between S. N. Bose and Prof. Einstein. Einstein himself did not invent it but, instead, refined the idea and helped it become popular.

The concept of zero-point energy was developed in Germany by Albert Einstein and Otto Stern in 1913. It is the lowest possible energy a quantum mechanical system can have, even at absolute zero temperature. It's the energy that remains in a system due to inherent quantum fluctuations and cannot be reduced further.

When Einstein generalized classical physics to include the increase of mass due to the velocity of the moving matter, he arrived at an equation that predicted energy to be made of two components. One component involves "rest mass" and the other component involves momentum, but momentum is not defined in the classical way. The equation typically has values greater than zero for both components:

A photon has no rest mass, but it has momentum. (Light reflecting from a mirror pushes the mirror with a force that can be measured.) In the case of a photon, because its m0 = 0, then:

The energy of a photon can be computed from its frequency ν or wavelength λ. These are related to each other by Planck's relation, E = hν = hc/λ, where h is the Planck constant (6.626×10−34 joule-seconds). Knowing either frequency or wavelength, you can compute the photon's momentum.

In the case of motionless particles with mass, since p = 0, then:

Therefore, the quantity "m0" used in Einstein's equation is sometimes called the "rest mass." (The "0" reminds us that we are talking about the energy and mass when the speed is 0.) This famous "mass-energy relation" formula (usually written without the "0"s) suggests that mass has a large amount of energy, so maybe we could convert some mass to a more useful form of energy. The nuclear power industry is based on that idea.

Einstein said that it was not a good idea to use the classical formula relating momentum to velocity, p = mv, but that if someone wanted to do that, he would have to use a particle mass m that changes with speed:

In this case, we can say that E = mc2 is also true for moving particles.

The General Theory of Relativity was published in 1915, ten years after the special theory of relativity was created. Einstein's general theory of relativity uses the idea of spacetime. Spacetime is the fact that we have a four-dimensional universe, having three spatial (space) dimensions and one temporal (time) dimension. Any physical event happens at some place inside these three space dimensions, and at some moment in time. According to the general theory of relativity, any mass causes spacetime to curve, and any other mass follows these curves. Bigger mass causes more curving. This was a new way to explain gravitation (gravity).

General relativity explains gravitational lensing, which is light bending when it comes near a massive object. This explanation was proven correct during a solar eclipse, when the sun's bending of starlight from distant stars could be measured because of the darkness of the eclipse.

General relativity also set the stage for cosmology (theories of the structure of our universe at large distances and over long times). Einstein thought that the universe may curve a little bit in both space and time, so that the universe always had existed and always will exist, and so that if an object moved through the universe without bumping into anything, it would return to its starting place, from the other direction, after a very long time. He even changed his equations to include a "cosmological constant," in order to allow a mathematical model of an unchanging universe. The general theory of relativity also allows the universe to spread out (grow larger and less dense) forever, and most scientists think that astronomy has proved that this is what happens. When Einstein realized that good models of the universe were possible even without the cosmological constant, he called his use of the cosmological constant his "biggest blunder," and that constant is often left out of the theory. However, many scientists now believe that the cosmological constant is needed to fit in all that we now know about the universe.

A popular theory of cosmology is called the Big Bang. According to the Big Bang theory, the universe was formed 15 billion years ago, in what is called a "gravitational singularity". This singularity was small, dense, and very hot. According to this theory, all of the matter that we know today came out of this point.

Einstein himself did not have the idea of a "black hole", but later scientists used this name for an object in the universe that bends spacetime so much that not even light can escape it. They think that these ultra-dense objects are formed when giant stars, at least three times the size of our sun, die. This event can follow what is called a supernova. The formation of black holes may be a major source of gravitational waves, so the search for proof of gravitational waves has become an important scientific pursuit.

Many scientists only care about their work, but Einstein also spoke and wrote often about politics and world peace. He liked the ideas of socialism and of having only one government for the whole world. He also worked for Zionism, the effort to try to create the new country of Israel.

In his final days, Einstein faced a crucial decision. Doctors offered surgery to treat his condition, but he chose a different path. He believed in living life naturally, saying, “I want to go when I want to go. It is tasteless to prolong life artificially.” With these words, Einstein showed us the dignity in accepting life’s natural cycle. On January 3, 1954, Einstein sent the following reply to Gutkind: "The word God is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses, the Bible a collection of honourable, but still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish. .... For me the Jewish religion like all other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions." In 2018 his letter to Gutkind was sold for $2.9 million.

Even though Einstein thought of many ideas that helped scientists understand the world much better, he disagreed with some scientific theories that other scientists liked. The theory of quantum mechanics discusses things that can happen only with certain probabilities, which cannot be predicted with more precision no matter how much information we might have. This theoretical pursuit is different from statistical mechanics, in which Einstein did important work. Einstein did not like the part of quantum theory that denied anything more than the probability that something would be found to be true of something when it was actually measured; he thought that it should be possible to predict anything, if we had the correct theory and enough information. He once said, "I do not believe that God plays dice with the Universe."

Because Einstein helped science so much, his name is now used for several different things. A unit used in photochemistry was named for him. It is equal to Avogadro's number multiplied by the energy of one photon of light. The chemical element Einsteinium is named after the scientist as well. In slang, we sometimes call a very smart person an "Einstein."

Most scientists think that Einstein's theories of special and general relativity work very well, and they use those ideas and formulas in their own work. Einstein disagreed that phenomena in quantum mechanics can happen out of pure chance. He believed that all natural phenomena have explanations that do not include pure chance. He spent much of his later life trying to find a "unified field theory" that would include his general relativity theory, Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, and perhaps a better quantum theory. Most scientists do not think that he succeeded in that attempt.

Area is the amount of space a two dimensional (flat) surface takes up. It is useful because it is how much of a material is needed to make a hollow container.  Area is the amount of surface covered by a close object or shape.

Some units used to measure area are square foot, square mile, square metre and square kilometre. The area of a planar figure is often written as . Areas of regular shapes such as square, rectangle, triangle and circle can be calculated through formulas. The area of an irregular shape can be approximated through grid or graph paper.

One can use different formulas to find the area of different shapes. For example:

The area of a flat object is related to the surface area and volume of a three-dimensional object.

The area under a curve can be found using integration, a concept from calculus.

As demonstrated with honeycombs, the best shape to have when you want plenty of area with little perimeter is the circle, with the hexagon being a good alternative.

If you want a lot of perimeter and just a little area, simply make the shape into a square, then make it twice as long and half as wide.

When two straight lines come together, they make an angle. The two lines are called the sides of the angle, and they meet at a point. A flat surface (called a plane) also forms an angle when it meets another.

To represent an angle, Greek letters such as  (alpha),  (beta),  (gamma) and  (theta) are sometimes used. An angle indicates the space between its sides, or the amount of rotation needed to make one side coincide the other.

To measure the size of an angle, we use units called degrees. A degree is a standard unit and we use the symbol ° after a number to show that it is a number of degrees. We can use a decimal number or a fraction for part of a degree, but a degree can also be divided into 60 minutes (1° = 60'), and a minute can be divided into 60 seconds (1' = 60"). So 22.5°, 22° and 22° 30' are all the same angle.

In mathematics, angles can also be (and often are) measured in radians instead of degrees, by using the conversion factor  (for example, ). Yet another unit of angle is gradian, with  .

Angles are studied in geometry, where an angle where edges meet is often called a vertex. For example, the three sides of a triangle are its edges and two of the edges meet at each vertex. Similarly, two of the six sides (or faces) of a cube meet at each of its twelve edges, and three edges meet at each of its eight corners (or , which is the plural version of vertex).

In geometry, there are pairs angles having a special relationship with each other, making them interesting and convenient.There is a pair of angles called complementary angles to which the sum of their measure (wideness) is equal to one right angle (which is equal to  turn, 90°, or  radians). Supplementary angles are also two angles, this time their combined measure is a straight angle ( turn, 180°, or  radians). Two angles that total to a full angle ( turn, 360°, or  radians) are referred to as  or conjugate angles.

Aristotle (Stagira, Macedonia, 384 BC – Chalicis, Euboea, Greece, 7 March 322 BC) was a Greek philosopher. He was one of the most important philosophers in the history of Western civilization.  Aristotle wrote many books, and some of those books survive. Aristotle tutored Alexander the Great when Alexander was a child.

Aristotle's father was named Nicomachus. He was a soldier for King Amyntas of Macedonia.

At about the age of eighteen, Aristotle went to Athens to become a student of Plato at Plato's Academy. Aristotle stayed at the academy until he was 37. He left after Plato died in 347 BC.

He then traveled with Xenocrates to Asia Minor. While in Asia, Aristotle traveled with Theophrastus to the island of Lesbos. They looked at the botany and zoology of the island.

In 343 B.C. Philip II of Macedon invited Aristotle to tutor his son Alexander the Great. Aristotle was put in charge of the royal academy of Macedon. During that time, he not only taught Alexander; he also taught two other future kings: Ptolemy and Cassander.

Aristotle believed Greek culture was better than all of the other cultures. He encouraged Alexander to conquer Persia, which was an empire to the east. One time, he advised Alexander to be 'a leader to the Greeks and a despot to the barbarians, to look after the former as after friends and relatives, and to deal with the latter as with beasts or plants'.p58

By 335 BC Aristotle returned to Athens. He started his own school there. It was called the Lyceum. Aristotle taught courses at the school for twelve years.

It was probably then (335 to 323 B.C.) that Aristotle wrote most of his works. Aristotle wrote many dialogues. Only parts of his dialogues survive. The works that have survived are probably lecture notes for his students. All of Aristotle's works are like an encyclopedia of everything the Greeks knew. Some people think Aristotle was probably the last person to know everything there was to know about in his own time.

Near the end of Alexander's life, he began to think people might be trying to kill him. He threatened Aristotle in letters he wrote to him. Aristotle often said that he disliked Alexander calling himself a god. The king executed Aristotle's grandnephew Callisthenes as a traitor. Alexander died in Babylon in 323 B.C. without ever going back to Greece. When Alexander died, Athenians started to dislike Macedonians again and Aristotle left the city. He died in Euboea of natural causes that same year, 322BC.

The three greatest ancient Greek philosophers were Aristotle, Plato, and Socrates. Socrates taught Plato, then Plato taught Aristotle. These three thinkers turned early Greek philosophy into the beginnings of Western philosophy as it is today.

Plato's main ideas were that knowledge from the senses was always confused and not pure. True knowledge can be got from the thinking soul that turns away from the world. Only the soul can have knowledge of "Forms", the real way things are. The world is only a copy of these "Forms" and is not perfect.

Aristotle thought differently. He thought that knowledge from the senses was more important. These thoughts became roots of the scientific method after hundreds of years. Most of the things Aristotle wrote that we still have today are notes from his speaking and teaching. Some of his important writings are Physics, Metaphysics, (Nicomachean) Ethics, Politics, De Anima (On the Soul), and Poetics.

He also had problems with the atomic theory. He did not believe in Democritus' theories about the atomic theory. He believed that all matter was continuous whereas Democritus stated that all matter was made up of tiny indivisible things called "atoms".

Aristotle created a form of logic. His logic is called sentential logic because it uses sentences for the syllogism.

Aristotle's logic influenced the history of Western thought. It was his logic which was copied and used in the Arabic and Latin mediaeval traditions. It was dominant for two and a half thousand years, until the late 19th century. Then modern logic was started by Gottlob Frege, Charles Sanders Peirce and others.

Aristotle is the earliest natural historian whose work has survived in some detail. He certainly did research on the natural history of Lesbos, and the surrounding seas and neighbouring areas. The works History of Animals, Generation of Animals and Parts of Animals have observations and interpretations, along with some myths and mistakes.

The most striking passages are about the sea-life near Lesbos. As well as live observation, he got specimens from the catches of fishermen. His observations on catfish, electric fish (Torpedo) and angler-fish are detailed. His writing on cephalopods such as Octopus, Sepia (cuttlefish) and the paper nautilus (Argonauta argo) are accurate. His description of the hectocotyl arm, used in sexual reproduction, was disbelieved by many people until it was discovered again in the 19th century. He separated the aquatic mammals from fish, and knew that sharks and rays were part of the group he called Selachē (Selachimorpha).

Another good example of his methods comes from the Generation of Animals in which Aristotle describes breaking open fertilized chicken eggs at intervals to observe when visible organs formed.

He gave accurate descriptions of ruminants' four-chambered fore-stomachs, and of the ovoviviparous egg development of the houndshark Mustelus mustelus.

Aristotle is still one of the most influential people who ever lived. He contributed to almost every kind of knowledge in his day, and he started many new fields.

Aristotle was the founder of formal logic, pioneered the study of zoology, and helped to develop scientific method.

Despite these achievements, Aristotle's errors are thought by some, such as Peter Medawar, to have held back science considerably. Bertrand Russell notes that "almost every serious intellectual advance has had to begin with an attack on some Aristotelian doctrine". Russell also refers to Aristotle's Ethics as "repulsive", and calls his logic "as definitely antiquated as Ptolemaic astronomy". Russell says these errors make it difficult to do historical justice to Aristotle, until one remembers what an advance he made on his predecessors.

The immediate influence of Aristotle's work was felt as the Lyceum grew into the Peripatetic school of philosophers. Aristotle's influence over Alexander the Great is seen in the latter's bringing with him, on his expedition, biologists and researchers.

Anarchism is an idea and philosophy that says no one should be forced into any kind of hierarchy. For example, anarchism says that the government and capitalism are harmful and not needed. It also says that people's actions should never be forced by other people. It is usually described as a libertarian type of socialism.

The word "anarchism" is from the Greek word "αναρχία", which means "no rulers" or "no government", but that does not have to mean no rules at all. People often use the word "anarchy" to mean  and crime, but anarchists usually do not want this. They say anarchy is just a way of relations between people. They believe that once put into place, those relations work on their own. Anarchists are usually opposed by the systems they wish to remove.

Individual freedom, voluntary association, and opposition to the state are important beliefs of anarchism. There are also big differences between anarchist philosophies on things like whether violence can be used to bring about anarchy; the best type of economy; the relationship between technology and hierarchy; the idea of equality; and the usefulness of some organization.

The word "authority" is not clear, but anarchists are against not some types of authority (such as the authority of someone skilled in self-defence over someone that wants to learn self-defence) but only control by force.

Aluminium (in American English: aluminum) is a chemical element. The symbol for aluminium is Al, and its atomic number is 13. Aluminium is the most abundant metal. It is a mononuclidic element.

People have tried to produce aluminium since 1760. The first successful attempt, finished in 1824 by Danish physicist and chemist Hans Christian Ørsted. He reacted anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium amalgam, yielding a lump of metal looking similar to tin. He presented his results and showed a sample of the new metal in 1825. In 1827, German chemist Friedrich Wöhler repeated Ørsted's experiments but did not identify any aluminium. (The reason for this inconsistency was only discovered in 1921.) He conducted a similar experiment in the same year by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium and produced a powder of aluminium. In 1845, he was able to produce small pieces of the metal and described some physical properties of this metal. For many years thereafter, Wöhler was credited as the person who discovered aluminium.

Aluminium is a very good conductor of electricity and heat. It is light and strong. It can be hammered into sheets (malleable) or pulled out into wires (ductile). It is a highly reactive metal, although it is corrosion resistant.

A fresh film of aluminium is a good reflector of visible light and an excellent reflector of medium and far infrared radiation.

Aluminium prevents corrosion by forming a small, thin layer of aluminium oxide on its surface. This layer protects the metal by preventing oxygen from reaching it. Corrosion can not occur without oxygen. Because of this thin layer, the reactivity of aluminium is not seen. As a powder it burns hot. Uses include fireworks displays and rocket fuel.

Pure aluminium is made from bauxite, a kind of rock that has aluminium oxide and many impurities. The bauxite is crushed and reacted with sodium hydroxide. The aluminium oxide dissolves. Then the aluminium oxide is dissolved in liquid cryolite. Natural cryolite is a rare mineral, so most is produced artificially. The aluminium oxide is electrolyzed with carbon to make aluminium and carbon dioxide. The largest producer of aluminium is China. China produces about 31,873 thousand tonnes of aluminium.

Aluminium was once considered a precious metal that was even more valuable than gold. This is no longer true because new ways of smelting it are cheaper and easier.

Aluminium is the 12th most abundant of all elements. It is the 3rd most abundant among the elements that have odd atomic numbers. The only stable isotope of aluminium is aluminium-27. It is the 18th most abundant nucleus in the Universe. It is created after fusion of carbon in massive stars that will later become Type II supernovae: this fusion creates magnesium-26, which, when capturing free protons and neutrons becomes aluminium. Essentially all aluminium now in existence is aluminium-27; aluminium-26 was there in the early Solar System but is now extinct. The trace quantities of aluminium-26 that do exist are the most common gamma ray emitter in the interstellar gas.

Overall, the Earth is about 1.59% aluminium by mass. In the Earth's crust, aluminium is the most abundant metallic element by mass (8.23%). It is also the third most abundant of all elements in the Earth's crust. A lot of silicates in the Earth's crust contain aluminium. But, the Earth's mantle is only 2.38% aluminium by mass. aluminium also occurs in seawater at a concentration of 2 μg/kg.

Feldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earth's crust, are aluminosilicates. aluminium also occurs in the minerals beryl, cryolite, garnet, spinel, and turquoise. Native aluminium has been reported in cold seeps in the northeastern continental slope of the South China Sea.

Aluminium forms chemical compounds in the +3 oxidation state. They are generally unreactive. aluminium chloride and aluminium oxide examples. Very rarely are compounds in the +1 or +2 oxidation state.

Many things are made of aluminium. Much of it is used in overhead power lines. It is also widely used in window frames and aircraft bodies. It is found at home as kitchenware, soft drink cans, and cooking foil. aluminium is also used to coat car headlamps and compact discs. It is used in electrical transmission lines because of its light weight. It can be deposited on the surface of glass to make mirrors, where a thin layer of aluminium oxide quickly forms that acts as a protective coating. Aluminium oxide is also used to make synthetic rubies and sapphires for lasers. Aluminium can now be produced from clay, but the process is not economically feasible at today.

Pure aluminium is very soft, so a harder metal is almost always added. The harder metal is usually copper. Copper/aluminium alloys are to make ships, because the aluminium prevents corrosion, and the copper prevents barnacles.

Aluminium compounds are used in deodorants, water processing plants, food additives, and antacids. Lithium aluminium hydride is a strong reducing agent used in organic chemistry.

Aluminium sulfate is used in water treatment. It is also used as a mordant in dyeing, in pickling seeds, deodorizing of mineral oils, in leather tanning, and in production of other aluminium compounds.

Anhydrous aluminium chloride is used as a catalyst in chemical and petrochemical industries, the dyeing industry, and in synthesis of many inorganic and organic compounds.

Aluminium hydroxychlorides are used in purifying water, in the paper industry, and as antiperspirants. Sodium aluminate is used in treating water and as an accelerator for drying of cement.

Aluminium phosphate is used to make glass, ceramic, pulp and paper products, cosmetics, paints, varnishes. aluminium hydroxide is used as an antacid, and mordant. It is used also in water purification, the manufacture of glass and ceramics, and in the waterproofing of fabrics.

Aluminium is used in automobiles, trucks, railway cars, marine vessels, bicycles, spacecraft. aluminium is used in making doors, siding, building wire, sheathing, roofing and other building materials.

Since aluminium needs to be made by electrolysis, it requires a very large amount of electrical power. Recycling aluminium would be much cheaper. That's why recycling plants were opened. The cost of recycling aluminium is much less than the cost of making it from bauxite.

Recycling involves melting the scrap. This is a process that only needs 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore. But, 15% of the input material part is lost as dross (ash-like oxide). An aluminium stack melter makes a lot less dross, about 1%.

White dross from primary aluminium production and from secondary recycling processes still contains useful amounts of aluminium that can be extracted industrially. The process produces aluminium billets, together with a very complex waste. This waste is difficult to manage. It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases (including, hydrogen, acetylene, and ammonia), which ignites on contact with air. Even with these difficulties, the waste is used as a filler in asphalt and concrete.

Aluminium is not used in the human body, although it is very common. People debate whether its use in deodorants and water treatment is healthy. aluminium ions slow down plant growth in acidic soils. aluminium may be a factor in Alzheimer's disease (a disease when the brain stops working and the patient is confused). But the Alzheimer's Society says overwhelming medical and scientific opinion is that studies have not convincingly demonstrated a causal relationship between aluminium and Alzheimer's disease.

In most people, aluminium is not as toxic as heavy metals. aluminium is classified as a non-carcinogen by United States Department of Health and Human Services. There is little proof that normal exposure to aluminium is a risk to healthy adult. There is proof of no toxicity if it is taken in amounts not greater than 40 mg/day per kg of body mass. Most aluminium taken will leave the body in feces. Most of the small part that enters the blood, will be excreted via urine.

Aluminium rarely causes vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia, erythropoietin-resistant microcytic anemia, and central nervous system changes. People with kidney insufficiency are at a risk the most. Chronic ingestion of hydrated aluminium silicates may result in aluminium binding to the things in the intestines. It also increases the removal of other metals, like iron or zinc. Really high doses (>50 g/day) can cause anemia.

A small percentage of people have contact allergies to aluminium and experience itchy red rashes, headache, muscle pain, joint pain, poor memory, insomnia, depression, asthma, irritable bowel syndrome, or other symptoms when touching products containing aluminium.

Exposure to powdered aluminium or aluminium welding fumes can cause pulmonary fibrosis. Fine aluminium powder can also explode.

Food is the main source of aluminium. Drinking water has more aluminium than solid foods. Aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water. Major sources of human exposure by mouth to aluminium include food (because of its use in food additives, food and beverage packaging, and cooking utensils), drinking water (because of its use in water treatment), and medicines that have aluminium in them. Very high exposure to aluminium is mostly limited to miners, aluminium production workers, and dialysis patients.

Taking of antacids, antiperspirants, vaccines, and cosmetics give possible ways of exposure. Eating acidic foods or liquids with aluminium increases aluminium absorption. Maltol has been shown to increase the build up of aluminium in nerve and bone tissues.

In case of suspected sudden consumption of a large amount of aluminium, the only treatment is deferoxamine mesylate. It may be given to help remove aluminium from the body by chelation. This should be applied with caution as it not only remove aluminium in the body, but also other metals such as copper or iron.

High levels of aluminium occur near mining sites. Small amounts of aluminium are released to the environment at the coal-fired power plants or incinerators. aluminium in the air is washed out by the rain or normally settles down. But, small particles of aluminium remain in the air for a long time.

Acid rain is the main natural factor to move aluminium from natural sources. It is also the main reason for the effects of aluminium on the environment. The main factor for the presence of aluminium in salt and freshwater are the industrial processes that also release aluminium into air.

In water, aluminium acts as a toxiс agent on animals that with gills like fish by causing loss of plasma- and hemolymph ions leading to osmoregulatory failure.

Aluminium is one of the primary factors that reduce the growth of plants on acidic soils. In acid soils the concentration of toxic Al3+ cations increases and disturbs the growth and function of the root. It is generally harmless to plant growth in pH-neutral soils. Wheat has developed a tolerance to aluminium. It releases organic compounds that bind to harmful aluminium cations. Sorghum is thought to have the same method of tolerating aluminium.

Aluminium production has its own problems to the environment on each step of the production process. The major problem is the greenhouse gas. These gases are caused by the electrical consumption of the smelters and the byproducts of processing. The strongest of these gases are perfluorocarbons from the smelting process.

A Spanish scientific report from 2001 claimed that the fungus Geotrichum candidum eats the aluminium in compact discs. The better studied bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa and the fungus Cladosporium resinae are commonly found in aircraft fuel tanks that use kerosene-based fuels, and laboratory cultures can decompose aluminium. However, these types of bacteria do not eat the aluminium; but rather, the metal is corroded by microbe waste products.

Algeria ( or ), officially the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria is a North African country. It is the second biggest nation in Africa and the 10th largest world over in terms of total land area. It is situated along the Mediterranean Sea with its borders being Tunisia, Libya, Niger, Mali, Mauritania, Western Sahara and Morocco. It has its capital and largest city as Algiers, which is in the far north.

By 2026, the population of Algeria will exceed 48 million. With fertile land in the north, the majority of the population is situated in the north and the weather is favorable. The Sahara Desert is one of the driest and hottest areas on the Earth that covers over 80% of the country in the south. The country also has the highest point, which is the mountain Tahat, which is of the height of 3,003 meters in this desert area.

Algerian history is quite long. The people of Berber (Amazigh) originally inhabited it. In the course of several centuries, it fell under the reign of various other empires, such as Romans, Arabs, and Ottoman Empire. In 1830, Algeria was overrun by France and monitored a period of more than 130 years. Algeria was finally accorded its independence on July 5, 1962 after a protracted violent war.

Algeria is presently a member of the United Nations, African union and OPEC. The Arabic and Tamazight languages are the official languages, but French is also commonly used. Virtually, all Algerians are Sunni Muslims. The economy of the country is one of the strongest in Africa, this is primarily due to the fact that it contains some of the largest reserves of natural gas and oil in the world. The government has also in the recent years been working towards expanding other sections of the economy like farming and mining.

People have lived in Algeria for thousands of years, which can be seen from the cave paintings at Tassili National Park that date to around 7000 BC. By 600 BC, Phoenicians were in Hippo Regius (now called Annaba), Rusicade (now Skikda), and Tipasa in the central coastal part of the country. The Romans had annexed the region by the conclusion of the Punic Wars in 146BC, with what is now modern-day Algeria staying in Roman hands until the fall of the Roman Empire in the 5th century, after which the region was taken over by the Germanic Vandals.

Algeria would become part of the Islamic world when the first Muslim Arabs came to Algeria in the mid-7th century, resulting in many people converting to the new religion of Islam. In the 11th century, the Arab tribes of Banu Hilal and Banu Sulaym were living between Tunisia and eastern Algeria (Constantois). The famous mathematician  Fibonacci (1170—1250) lived in Algeria as a teenager. This is where he learned the Hindu–Arabic numeral system. Algeria was made part of the Ottoman Empire in 1517. Enslavement of black people was practiced there as it was throughout the empire.

In the 1500s and 1700s, the Spanish Empire ruled a lot of Algeria. Spain was expelled from Algeria by the Ottoman Empire, who ended up controlling a region known as the Regency of Algiers, before it was attacked and taken by France in 1830, who pushed inwards into Africa, creating the modern day borders of Algeria. In 1954, the National Liberation Front (Front de Libération Nationale or FLN) wanted freedom from France. They fought a war against France to free Algeria. It became independent from France on July 5, 1962.

In 1963, Ahmed Ben Bella became the first President of Algeria.

The Algerian Civil War began in 1991 and ended in 2002. The government decided to end the state of emergency on February 24, 2011.

A large part of southern Algeria is the Sahara Desert. The Aures and Nememcha mountain ranges are in the north. The highest point is Mount Tahat (3,003 m).

Algeria borders Morocco, Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic, Libya, Tunisia, Niger, Mali and Mauritania.

Many Algerians speak French. French is considered the lingua franca of Algeria.

Algeria has one of the largest economies in Africa. It is projected to have a total wealth (GDP) of approximately $288 billion in 2026. The role of government in the process of money-making and expenditure in the country is very great.

Despite the fact that a large portion of Algeria is desert, agriculture also plays a significant role in the economy.

Since the prices of oil and gas fluctuate frequently, the government is attempting to diversify the other areas of the economy. This is referred to as diversification.

Algeria's population is about 45 million people. There are over 40 cities with more than 100,000 people. The three biggest cities are Algiers, Oran and Boumerdès, as of 2025

Islam is the country's main religion. 99% of Algerians are Muslims, most likely due to the Ummayad Caliphate's (Khalifa)  conquest of North Africa .

Algeria used to have one of the oldest and largest Jewish communities in the world. Jews have been in the country since the first century. Now less then 200 Jews live in the country because of harassment by Muslims after the creation of Israel on Palestinian lands.

There are 58 provinces in Algeria. In 2019, the number of provinces was changed from 48 to 58. The provinces are:

There are several UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Algeria including Al Qal'a of Beni Hammad, the first capital of the Hammadid empire; Tipasa, a Phoenician and later Roman town; and Djémila and Timgad, both Roman ruins; M'Zab Valley, a limestone valley containing a large urbanized oasis; also the Casbah of Algiers is an important citadel. The only natural World Heritage Sites is the Tassili n'Ajjer, a mountain range.

Ants are a species of insect that live together in large colonies. They are in the family Formicidae. it is an authentic animal for organisation.

Ants are a lot like bees and wasps. They all originate from the same common ancestor a long time ago, but now have evolved into very different forms. Ants are flightless compared to other members of the order Hymenoptera. It is believed that there are about 22,000 different species of ants, but scientists have only documented around 12,500 of them. Every species of ant has a thin middle segment, known as a thorax, as well as two long rods on their head called antennae.

Ants are social animals, and live in colonies that can range wildly in terms of size. Some species of ants live in small groups, and others work together in large groups of millions of ants. Ants are small, but they are very strong. Some ants are strong enough to carry things as heavy as 10 times their body weight.

The groups that ants live in are called colonies. A colony has a female ant called a queen which lays eggs for the colony. Those eggs will grow into more ants. Big colonies of ants have different kinds of ants that grow from the eggs. These are called different castes of ants. Some are workers which do jobs like carrying and digging, and soldiers which fight other animals. Worker and soldier ants are females. Another type of ant are drones which are male ants.

Really big ant colonies are sometimes called superorganisms. This means the ants work together so well that they are like little parts of one big animal. Ants cannot live by themselves for very long because they need to work with other ants.

Ants have colonies almost everywhere on planet Earth. Antarctica lacks ants because it's very cold and there's not much food. Small islands may not have ants.

The family Formicidae belongs to the order Hymenoptera, which also includes bees, sawflies and wasps. Ants evolved from a lineage within the vespoid wasps. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that ants arose in the Lower Cretaceous period about 110 to 130 million years ago, or even earlier. One estimate from DNA studies places the origin of ants at ≈140 million years ago (mya). Another study puts it in the Jurassic at 185 ± 36 mya (95% confidence limits).

After the rise of flowering plants about 100 million years ago ants diversified. They became ecologically dominant about 60 million years ago.

In 1966, E.O. Wilson and his colleagues identified the fossil remains of an ant (Sphecomyrma freyi) from the Cretaceous period. The specimen, trapped in amber dating back to more than 80 million years ago, has features of both ants and wasps. Sphecomyrma was probably a ground forager but some suggest that primitive ants were likely to have been predators underneath the surface of the soil.

During the Cretaceous period, a few species of primitive ants ranged widely on the Laurasian super-continent (the northern hemisphere). They were scarce in comparison to other insects, representing about 1% of the insect population. Ants became dominant after adaptive radiation at the beginning of the Cainozoic. By the Oligocene and Miocene ants had come to represent 20-40% of all insects found in major fossil deposits. Of the species that lived in the Eocene epoch, approximately one in ten genera survive to the present. Genera surviving today comprise 56% of the genera in Baltic amber fossils (early Oligocene), and 92% of the genera in Dominican amber fossils (apparently early Miocene).p23

Termites, though sometimes called white ants, are not ants and belong to the order Isoptera. Termites are actually more closely related to cockroaches and mantids. Termites are eusocial but differ greatly in the genetics of reproduction. The similar social structure is attributed to convergent evolution. Velvet ants look like large ants, but are wingless female wasps.

The life of an ant starts from an egg. If the egg is fertilised, the progeny will be female (diploid); if not, it will be male. Ants develop by complete metamorphosis with the larval stages passing through a pupal stage before emerging as an adult. The larva is fed and cared for by workers. Food is given to the larvae by trophallaxis, a process in which an ant regurgitates liquid food held in its crop. This is also how adults share food, stored in the 'social stomach', among themselves. Larvae may also be given solid food brought back by foraging workers, and may even be taken to captured prey in some species. The larvae grow through a series of moults and enter the pupal stage.

The differentiation into queens and workers (which are both female), and different castes of workers, is influenced in some species by the food the larvae get. Genetic influences, and the control of gene expression by the feeding are complex. The determination of caste is a major subject of research.p351, 372

A new worker spends the first few days of its adult life caring for the queen and young. It then does digging and other nest work, and later, defends the nest and forages. These changes are sometimes fairly sudden, and define what are called temporal castes. An explanation for the sequence is suggested by the high casualties involved in foraging, making it an acceptable risk only for ants that are older and are likely to die soon of natural causes.

Most ant species have a system in which only the queen and breeding females can mate. Contrary to popular belief, some ant nests have multiple queens (polygyny). The life history of Harpegnathos saltator is

The winged male ants, called drones, emerge from pupae with the breeding females (although some species, like army ants, have wingless queens), and do nothing in life except eat and mate.

Most ants produce a new generation each year. During the species specific breeding period, new reproductives, winged males and females leave the colony in what is called a nuptial flight.

Typically, the males take flight before the females. Males then use visual cues to find a common mating ground, for example, a landmark such as a pine tree to which other males in the area converge. Males secrete a mating pheromone that females follow. Females of some species mate with just one male, but in some others they may mate with anywhere from one to ten or more different males. Mated females then seek a suitable place to begin a colony. There, they break off their wings and begin to lay and care for eggs. The females store the sperm they obtain during their nuptial flight to selectively fertilise future eggs.

The first workers to hatch are weak and smaller than later workers, but they begin to serve the colony immediately. They enlarge the nest, forage for food and care for the other eggs. This is how new colonies start in most species. Species that have multiple queens may have a queen leaving the nest along with some workers to found a colony at a new site,p143 a process akin to swarming in honeybees.

A wide range of reproductive strategies have been noted in ant species. Females of many species are known to be capable of reproducing asexually through parthenogenesis, and one species, Mycocepurus smithii is known to be all-female.

Ant colonies can be long-lived. The queens can live for up to 30 years, and workers live from 1 to 3 years. Males, however, are more transitory, and survive only a few weeks. Ant queens are estimated to live 100 times longer than solitary insects of a similar size.

Ants are active all year long in the tropics but, in cooler regions, survive the winter in a state of dormancy or inactivity. The forms of inactivity are varied and some temperate species have larvae going into the inactive state (diapause), while in others, the adults alone pass the winter in a state of reduced activity.

It may seem strange that ants have uses, but there are some. Some people use ants for food, medicine and rituals. Some species of ants are used for pest control (they eat pests that destroy food for humans). They can damage crops and enter buildings, though. Some species, like the red imported fire ant, live in places where they came to by complete accident.

Amphibians are members of the class Amphibia. The living ones are frogs (including toads), salamanders (including newts) and caecilians. They are four-legged vertebrates which are cold blooded.

Amphibians lay their eggs in water, usually in a foam nest. After  they are tadpoles, which live in the water and have gills. The tadpoles change into adults in a process called metamorphosis.  When they are adult, they have lungs to breathe instead of gills, and legs. Adult amphibians also use their skin to take in oxygen, and some species of salamanders do not have lungs.

The earliest amphibians evolved in the Devonian from lobe-finned fish which had jointed leg-like fins with digits. They could crawl along the sea bottom. Some had developed primitive lungs to help them breathe air when the stagnant pools of the Devonian swamps were low in oxygen. They could also use their strong fins to hoist themselves out of the water and onto dry land if necessary.

For tens of millions of years, during the Carboniferous and early Permian, amphibia were top predators on land, especially in the low-lying tropical river systems.  In drier conditions, they were less effective, and the ancestors of mammals and reptiles (the Synapsids and Sauropsids) gradually took over the land. They laid cleidoic eggs, which had hard shells, and could be laid out of water. Most of the early large amphibians went extinct in the Triassic period; a few survived to the Lower Cretaceous.

The only living amphibiana today are the Lissamphibia. These include the Anura (frogs and toads), Caudata (salamanders and newts) and Gymnophiona (caecilians). They are all rather small, compared with mammals or reptiles. The smallest frog and vertebrate in the world is the New Guinea frog (Paedophryne amauensis). The biggest amphibian is the Chinese giant salamander (Andrias davidianus).

Amphibia are found everywhere in the world, except Antarctica, and there are about 5,565 different species: 88% of them are in the Anura. In number of species, they are more successful than mammals, though they occupy a smaller range of habitats. However, it is said that amphibian populations have been  all over the world. Conservation is therefore an important concern.

Amphibians like to live near freshwater in warm weather. There have also been species which live in forests, deserts and arctic conditions. Adult amphibians use lungs, and they also get oxygen through their skin, so long as it is .

Amphibians may be camouflaged in brown and green, and if so they are prey for birds and reptiles. Their colour gives them camouflage, which is their main defence.

Alternatively, many other amphibia have toxic skin, which is  to predators. These are poisonous to eat. This is an important defence against predation. Connected to this is the use of warning colouration. They may be in vivid colours of red, black, and yellow. Research into the rough-skinned newt and the garter snake shows this is a typical case of co-evolution. Where they live in the same area, the newts get more poisonous, and the snakes develop more resistance to the poison.

Amphibians have colour vision and depth of focus for clear sight. They also have eyelids, glands and ducts which keep the eyes moist. These are adaptations to life on land: amphibia were the first vertebrates to have these features.

Some amphibia, such as the frog known as the common coquí, lay eggs out of water (in this case, on palm leaves). The eggs develop directly into adult frogs, by-passing the tadpole stage. Others, like mudpuppies and olms, have a different development. In a process called neoteny, they become sexually developed as tadpoles with gills. They continue to live in the water.

The order Anura includes the frogs and toads. There is no fundamental difference between frogs and toads. Frogs have a short body, webbed digits (fingers or toes), protruding eyes, forked tongue and no tail. They are exceptional jumpers: many of their features, particularly their long, powerful legs, are adaptations to improve jumping performance. They often live in semi-aquatic or inhabit humid areas.

A popular distinction is often made between frogs and toads on the basis of their appearance. Toads' warty skin is an adaptation for making their toxic slime. Apart from these glands, their skin is dry, and that is an adaptation to drier habitats. These features have evolved a number of times independently: convergent evolution. The distinction has no taxonomic basis. The only family exclusively given the common name "toad" is Bufonidae (the "true toads"), but many species from other families are commonly called "toads".

Newts are salamanders which spend their life in the water even though they are adults. They are classified in the subfamily Pleurodelinae of the family Salamandridae.

Respiration differs between species of salamanders. Species that lack lungs respire through gills. In most cases, these are external gills, visible as tufts on either side of the head. Some salamanders that are terrestrial have lungs that are used in respiration, although these are simple and sac-like, unlike the more complex organs found in mammals. Many species, such as the Olm, have both lungs and gills as adults.

Some terrestrial species lack both lungs and gills and perform gas exchange through their skin. Even some species with lungs also respire through the skin in this manner.

The skin of salamanders secretes mucus. This helps to keep the animal moist when on dry land, keeps their salt balance while in water, and lubricates during swimming. Salamanders also secrete poison from glands in their skin, and some additionally have skin glands for secreting courtship pheromones.

Axolotls, from  the genus Ambystoma (or mole salamanders),  are neotenic amphibians. This means they get to sexual maturity and reproduce while still in a larval form.

Most salamanders and newts have some defence against predators, usually a poison which makes them uneatable. Their bright colours are warning colouration. If, instead, they are camouflaged, this means they are probably not protected by a toxin.

The second line of defence is to shed their tail, which can grow again. The tail wriggles a bit, attracts the predator while the business part of the salamander moves off.

There are over 350 lungless salamanders. Most of them are terrestrial and are active in daytime. Lungless salamanders may communicate with their nose.p168 Slender salamanders are found in the Pacific Coast. They are sometimes called "worm salamanders". This is because they have slimmer (skinny) bodies than most salamanders.p182 If touched, slender salamanders will  on the ground and then run away.

The order Gymnophiona includes the caecilians. These are long, cylindrical, limbless animals that look like snakes or worms. Their skin has circular folds, increasing their similarity to the segments of earthworms. Some are aquatic, but most live underground in burrows they hollow out. Many caecilians give birth to live young. In species which lay eggs, the eggs may undergo metamorphosis before they hatch. Caecilians are found in tropical Africa, Asia and Central and South America. There are 171 different species.

Their skins make a mucus that makes them slippery enough to slip through the earth.  They can make a toxic material in their skins, as many frogs and toads do.

Amphibians are the only vertebrates to go through metamorphosis. This means that their young look different from their adult.p8 Amphibians usually reproduce in early spring to late summer, though some reproduce in winter and fall.p156 Most frogs and toads, such as the common frog (Rana temporalis), gather in large groups to ponds, rivers, swamps and lakes to breed.p10 Male frogs and toads may  to attract a female. When a female frog has chosen a mate, the male frog hops on top of her. They swim together as she lay eggs in the water. Sometimes, males fight to mate with a female.p7 Frogs can lay up to 100 to 60,000 eggs in one . This is called "frogspawn".

It is a fundamental feature of amphibia that their reproduction is, one way or another, tied to water. This is because their eggs, although covered by jelly, cannot survive long in dry conditions.

Most female amphibians lays her eggs in water. Males release sperm to fertilize them. The eggs are laid one by one or in . Batches of eggs can look like a long chain or a ball of foam. They may  their eggs around plants in the water. They do this so their eggs will not  away.p8

Tree frogs usually lay their eggs on a leaf in a rainwater pool. Bullfrogs, such as the male American bullfrog and the male African bullfrog, stay with their tadpoles and protect them from predators. They also move their tadpoles by using their nose to dig a  to another place where there is more water.p9 They do this so their tadpoles do not dry up. Most amphibians leave their eggs to look after themselves. Fish and other animals eat most of their eggs. Male midwife toads carry their eggs on their backs. When they are ready to hatch, the toad goes back to the water and release them.p10

Tadpoles do not have lungs when they hatch and instead have gills. Because gills have a large surface area, tadpoles can get more oxygen by using them. Young tadpoles have their gills . When they get older, their gills are covered over by skin.p6  When they hatch, tadpoles eat constantly. The tadpoles eat what is left of their eggs, this is usually their first food.p8

Frog, toad and newt tadpoles eat plants such as algae and pondweed or filter feed. When they get older, they may start to feed on tiny animals in the water. Salamander tadpoles and surinam horned toad tadpoles are carnivorous throughout their tadpole stage.p9 Surinam horned toad tadpoles are very . They eat other tadpoles if food is nowhere to be found. The eggs of the spadefoot toad hatches in three days. Their tadpoles complete their metamorphosis in six to eight days. This is because spadefoot toads lay their eggs in places where water will dry up soon.p13

Tadpoles of frogs and toads start to grow their back legs first. They then grow front legs a few weeks later. When tadpoles grow their limbs they are called "froglets". This is because they look rather like a smaller version of adult frogs and toads. Tadpoles will also start to grow a backbone after growing their front limbs. After this, their mouths get bigger and their eyes will stick out more. After a tadpole has grown its hands, their tails continue to get shorter until there is nothing left of them.p11

Salamanders and newts can be found living in streams. Salamanders can be found in rotten logs, holes or underground places that are wet such as under leaves.p152 Web-toed salamanders live in habitats where there are a lot of rocks. They like to hide under rocks and stones.p195 The tailed frogs, like to live in cold water habitats.p199 In their habitat, amphibians like to live where there are a lot of places to hide. These include nearby small trees, logs and plants. While underwater they like to hide near aquatic plants and rocks. Tree and dart frogs like to live in forests on trees, plants and on the ground under leaves.

Some amphibia can be found living in the desert or the arctic.p12 The desert froglet lives in the desert. They are only active at night, when temperatures are much cooler. It rarely rains in the desert and because of this, desert frogs will burrow to keep cool. They use their mucus to keep them wet. They will spread it all over their bodies. The mucus will harden to keep the water it produces from escaping. Once the desert frog has done this, it will stay in its cocoon and will not move. They will stay like this for several months to years until a rainstorm. Desert frogs and toads lose water more quickly. The spadefoot toad will spit on the ground. Once they have done this, they will lay on it. Their bodies will take in the water. Their bodies are thin and have a lot of blood vessels, this helps them to be able to take water through their skin. The California newt can survive a fire by spreading its mucous over its body.p12

Arctic frogs such as the wood frog, moor frog and the common frog has to live with freezing temperatures for a long time. They will burrow in places where they can get into a cocoon. Like every living organisms, amphibians must have water to survive. Amphibians however, need freshwater. Some frogs such as burrowing frogs can  water in their bladders. This allows them to stay underground without drying up. The crab-eating frog lives near water that is somewhat salty. They will eat saltwater crabs. Torrent salamanders lives in cold waters. Because of this they have shorter lungs. Short lungs helps them to float easily.

Amphibia are world-wide, though restricted in distribution by their need for moist or watery habitats to reproduce.

Many amphibia have secretions in their skin which makes them toxic. They do not produce toxins themselves. They get toxins from what they eat. They eat insects in their habitat. These insects get the poison from a plant. The toxin has been discovered in beetles. This means that they are likely the cause of poisons found in amphibians. Amphibians do not produce batrachotoxin in captivity, which means that it is not harmful to touch them. The American Indian tribe comechingóns used the toxins of the arrow dart frogs when hunting.

Newts in the genus Taricha has a poison called tetrodotoxin, a neurotoxin. Scientists believe that toxins in newts are caused by bacteria in the genera Pseudoalteromonas, Pseudomonas and Vibrio. Because of this, the newts do not have a lot of predators. However, some species of snakes have develop a resistance. This means that they can eat newts without the toxin hurting them. It is a case of co-evolution.

Amphibians' eyes have lids, glands and ducts. They have good colour vision  Caecilian eyes are small and dark. Most of them are blind. Most amphibians have a good sense of smell, even underwater.

The skeletal system of amphibians are similar to other four-legged animals. They have a spine, rib cage, long bones such as the humerus and femur. They also have short bones such as the phalanges, metacarpals, and metatarsals. Most amphibians have four limbs, except for caecilians. The bones in amphibians are  and do not weigh much.

Amphibia are predators. They mostly eat live invertebrates and animals that do not move too quickly. These include caterpillars, earthworms, crayfish, water beetles, snails and dragon fly larvae.p667 Many amphibians use their sticky tongues to catch their prey. They swallow the animal whole, but may chew it just a bit for it to go down their throats. The Ranidae family and the Ceratophrys genus eat almost anything they can fit into their mouths.p668 These include rodents, birds, ducklings, small fish and small mammals. Most frogs are cannibalistic, and may eat each other if food is nowhere to be found. Some amphibians may even eat their own tadpoles and eggs if there is no food for them.

In captivity, pet frogs will be given crickets, worms, small fish, rodents and fruit flies. Adult amphibians can help  the mosquito population by eating most of their larvae.

Caecilians eat earthworms, termites and beetle larvae, and also small lizards.p31 Caecilians rely on their smell to find food. They like to eat earthworms and will find them by picking up their chemical signals. Salamanders and newts are fed a lot of different types of worms. These include blood worms and earthworms. They can eat small fish such as goldfish, fathead minnows and guppies. Salamanders also eat crickets and pinkies, which are baby rats.p771

The amphibian population have been decreasing from all locations in the world. Scientists have said that the declining of amphibians is one of the most  threats to global biodiversity. A number of causes are believed to be involved. These include habitat destruction, over-exploitation, pollution, introduced species, climate change, destruction of the ozone layer, and diseases like chytridiomycosis. Ultraviolet radiation damages the skin, eyes and eggs of amphibians. However, the declines of amphibian population are still not understood.

The Amphibian Conservation Action Plan (ACAP) have released a global strategy to help the amphibian population. It was developed by over 80 leading experts. The Amphibian Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union (IUCN) are working on another global strategy to help amphibian populations. The Amphibian Ark (AA) is an organization that was created to help the public be aware of the decline in amphibian populations. They have been working with zoos and aquaria around the world. They try to encourage them to create a natural habitat for threatened amphibians. Another project is the Panama Amphibian Rescue and Conservation Project (PARCP) which are trying to spread awareness about chyridiomycosis. The disease is spreading into eastern Panama and threatening all amphibians living there.

On January 21, 2008, Evolutionarily Distinct and Globally Endangered (EDGE) released a statement to the public. It was created by Helen Meredith, who identified nature's most endangered species. Meredith explains that 85% of the top 100 endangered amphibians list are receiving little or no conservation attention.

Bullfrog legs are a source of food for Southern United States and the Midwestern United States. People hunt bullfrogs at night near rivers. The bullfrogs' legs are cooked, while their backs are fried.p9 In China, bullfrogs are sold alive for eating. However, they are later cooked dead with vegetables. In the state of California, people must have a license to catch bullfrogs for food.p256 In schools, bullfrogs are dissected in biology classes. Usually, this is done in grammar school.p85 The dissecting is a method for teaching students the anatomy of a bullfrog.p85 The emperor newt is hunted in China for food. They are also used there for medicine. Burrowing frogs are able to hold water in their bladder, because of this indigenous Australians use them to drink water.p13

Amphibians are also kept as pets.p4 They are kept in aquariums or a terrarium. A terrarium is a tank that is  with plants and soil on one side. On the other side, there is water. Most amphibians would need one place for land and another for water.p8 Each type of amphibian should have its special needs taken care of. Semi-aquatic amphibians need both land and water divided in the tank. Tropical frogs would need mist and high humidity in their terrariums.p7 Water for amphibia needs dechlorination. The chlorine in tap water can kill amphibia. Some amphibians popular exotic pets, and are found in pet stores that sell reptiles.p22

Apartheid was a racist political and social system in South Africa and South West Africa (now Namibia) during the era of white minority rule (1910-1994). Apartheid enforced racial segregation and it existed from 1948 to 1994. The word apartheid means "apartness" in the Afrikaans language.

Racial segregation had existed in what is now South Africa for centuries. In the elections of 1948, the National Party (NP) under Daniel Francois Malan took power, unified the existing pass laws in the Union of South Africa under their new strict apartheid system, and in the next few years, made new pass laws that enforced segregation more rigorously than the previous pass laws. In theory, the goal was to bring independence to the Black majority in their own little countries to be created from South African territory.

Under this system, the people of South Africa were divided into four races, and the different races were forced to live separately from each other. There were laws to keep them segregated. In South Africa, apartheid was dismantled in the early 1990s.

The last head of state who held office during the apartheid era was Frederik Willem de Klerk; who was responsible for holding negotiations with political prisoner Nelson Mandela to bring an end to apartheid. Following these successful negotiations, Nelson Mandela was elected to the Presidency of South Africa after the first non-racial elections were held in April 1994, and became the first black person to hold the position. He was 75 years old.  The pair were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts. South Africa's apartheid system is sometimes compared to the Jim Crow laws. Today, the term apartheid is sometimes used for similar geographic segregation systems in other countries.

Under apartheid, people were divided into four racial groups and segregated by law. The system was used to deny many basic rights to non-White people, mainly Black people, Coloureds and Indians who lived in South Africa. The law allowed White people to be in certain areas. Only Black people had to carry special passes, have permission to travel outside their designated area or work in particular areas reserved for Whites. The government segregated diverse communities and forcibly moved many black people off their land (From 1960 to 1983, the Bantustan policy was enforced to forcibly move South African blacks out of the areas designated for whites). Many other laws were made, for example: interracial marriage was outlawed; Black people, Coloured people or Indians could not own land in White areas or vote.

The United Nations (UN) actively opposed South Africa's apartheid policies in the late 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.  Some anti-apartheid protests in South Africa have resulted in massacres committed by the police, such as in Sharpeville, Vereeniging in 1960 and in Soweto, Johannesburg in 1976. After the Sharpeville massacre in 1960, the UN tried to remove South Africa 14 years later in 1974. France, the United States, and the United Kingdom prevented that from happening. The Soweto uprising in 1976 happened because Black South Africans were forced to study some subjects at school and college in Afrikaans and English, instead of their first languages (Zulu, Xhosa, Sepedi and Sesotho). Many Black people hated Afrikaans because it was the language of the National Party-led government and the language of their Afrikaner oppressors.

Protests against apartheid started one year after apartheid started. As early as 1949, the youth wing of the African National Congress (ANC) suggested fighting against apartheid using many different strategies. Over the next 45 years, hundreds of anti-apartheid actions occurred. They included protests by the Black Consciousness Movement; student protests; labour strikes; and church group activism. In 1991, the Abolition of Racially Based Land Measures Act was passed, repealing laws requiring racial segregation, including the Group Areas Act. In 1990, President Frederik Willem de Klerk started trying to end apartheid. Non-whites were given the right to vote in 1993. South Africa had its first non-racial elections (where non-whites were allowed to be  in 1994. Nelson Mandela and the African National Congress won. Mandela and de Klerk were awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993 for working together to end apartheid.

In 1989, F. W. de Klerk became State President of South Africa. Unlike the previous head of state, P.W. Botha, de Klerk agreed to dismantle apartheid largely because international pressure left him no other choice. In a speech in 1990, de Klerk said the ban on the African National Congress (ANC), the Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), and the South African Communist Party (SACP) was lifted and he then ruled that Nelson Mandela would be released from prison and South West Africa (today Namibia) would be granted independence.

In 1991, the UN created the National Peace Accord. The purpose of the Peace Accord was "to bring an end to political violence" in South Africa. It was agreed on by 27 organisations and governments. After this the Convention for a Democratic South Africa (CODESA) was formed. CODESA worked to find a solution to the violence.

The first non-racial election in which all races could vote, was held on 27 April 1994. Nelson Mandela was elected president, with de Klerk and Thabo Mbeki as deputies. This date is considered the complete end of apartheid. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission was created to help victims speak out and seek justice. It was chaired by Desmond Tutu from 1995 to 1998.

Although Black South Africans, Cape Coloureds and Indian South Africans were granted equal rights by law after a long fought campaign, there is still huge economic inequality between Whites and non-Whites. In 2012, South Africa held its first census in over ten years. It found that the average Black family earned one-sixth (about 17%) of what the average White family earned. "These figures tell us that at the bottom of the rung is the black majority who continue to be confronted by deep poverty unemployment and inequality,” President Jacob Zuma said when the findings were released. Nelson Mandela spent the majority of his life fighting against apartheid laws, and without his activism; many of the changes would never have happened.

The goal of apartheid was to separate the people of South Africa into small independent nations. The black ones were called Bantustans. South Africa said they were independent countries and exchanged ambassadors but other countries did not. D.F. Malan, J.G. Strijdom and Hendrik Verwoerd did not want to spend a lot of money on this project. They also wanted to keep the majority of South Africa's land for white people, especially the richest places, like the gold mines of Johannesburg. They wanted black men to work in these mines for little money but their families had to live far away or face imprisonment. Those imprisonments often served as "a symbol of oppression".

The American Civil War (1861–1865) was a civil war in the United States of America. It was fought when 11 Southern states left the United States and formed the Confederate States of America (also called the Confederacy). The US government and the states that remained loyal to it were called the Union.

The main cause of the war was slavery, which was allowed in all 11 Confederate States. Slavery was illegal in most of the North. The Confederate States tried to leave the Union after Abraham Lincoln, who disliked slavery, was elected US president. The Union believed that it was illegal for the states to break away. There were five states that allowed slavery which stayed in the Union.

The war began on April 12, 1861, when Confederate forces attacked Fort Sumter, a fort in South Carolina that was held by Union soldiers. The war lasted four years and caused much damage in the South. Most battles were in northern states until 1862 and in southern states after 1862.

After four years of fighting, the Union won the war, and soon, slavery was made illegal everywhere in the United States of America.

When the United States of America was founded in 1776, most states allowed slavery. However, over the next 84 years, the Northern states saw that slavery was a bad thing and banned it. The Southern states kept slavery legal. Slaves from Africa grew tobacco, cotton and other cash crops in those states. It was very different in the North, where the Industrial Revolution led to more people working in factories instead of on farms.

The United States became divided into slave and free states. By 1860, those groups were angry at each other. Few people wanted to end slavery in the South and so Americans argued on whether slavery should be allowed to spread to the territories and new states in the west. In the late 1850s, there was fighting in Kansas over whether the territory should allow slavery.

Abraham Lincoln from the Republican Party won the 1860 United States presidential election. He then did not want to ban slavery in the states. Like nearly everyone else, he believed that the US Constitution did not allow the federal government to ban slavery (the amendment to ban slavery was passed later, in 1865). He also thought that banning it suddenly would anger the South.

Instead, Lincoln and his Republican Party thought that slavery should be banned in US territories. They thought that slavery would die out if it could not go to new places.

Lincoln became president on March 4, 1861. In the four months between the election and the day that Lincoln became president, seven Southern states declared their independence from the Union. The outgoing US president, James Buchanan, said that was against the law but he could do nothing to stop them.

The Republican Party treated secession as a rebellion. No country in the world ever recognized the Confederacy as a separate nation. That was because of diplomacy on the part of the Union, anti-slavery feelings in Europe and the northern blockade of southern ports, and of war against the United States.

The first seven states to join the Confederacy were South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. Four others joined after the fighting began: Virginia, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North Carolina. The Confederacy claimed Kentucky and Missouri belonged to them, but they never joined the Confederacy. Kentucky, Missouri, and Maryland were slave states that tried to avoid taking sides. Delaware supported the Union although it was a slave state. Also, the western counties of Virginia chose to remain in the Union and created a new state, West Virginia.

Fighting started when the Confederates shot and threw bombs at Fort Sumter, a Union Army fort in South Carolina. Lincoln then asked the Union states to bring soldiers to fight the Confederates.

The Confederates said that all forts and other federal buildings in the South belonged to them. On April 12, 1861, Confederate forces attacked the fort and forced the Union soldiers in it to surrender. Lincoln then asked every Union state for s to join the Union Army. Four more southern slave states joined the Confederates, rather than supply forces to fight against them.

The US Navy stopped other ships from going in or out of southern ports. That stopped the Confederacy from selling its cotton and other goods and also made it harder for the South to buy weapons and military supplies.

The American Civil War was fought in three important land areas, or "theaters." The Eastern Theater was the land east of the Appalachian Mountains. The Western Theater included everything between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River and along the river. The Trans-Mississippi Theater included  west of the Mississippi River.

Both the United States and the Confederacy had their capital cities in the Eastern Theater. Washington, DC, had been the US capital since 1800. When the South seceded, its first capital was Montgomery, Alabama, but it moved the capital to Richmond, Virginia. Richmond and Washington DC are only about 90 miles (145 km) apart.

One of the first battles of the war was fought in Virginia. The Union tried to march to Richmond, but the Confederates stopped them at the First Battle of Bull Run, on July 21, 1861. The Union Army of the Potomac then tried to capture Richmond in the Peninsula Campaign during the spring of 1862, but Robert E. Lee became leader of the Army of Northern Virginia and defeated the Union Army. He then won the Second Battle of Bull Run in August 1862. Lee tried to win the war by invading Maryland, but he lost the Battle of Antietam and retreated to Virginia. The Eastern Theater was the hardest fight for the Union, as they did not get far in Virginia until 1864. They did much better in other areas.

There was much fighting between ships in the war, but the Union had a stronger and bigger navy. Lincoln put the Confederates under a blockade and so the Union Navy would not let any ships into or out of southern ports. The Confederates used ships called blockade runners to bring things from Europe like weapons. The navies of each side also fought on the rivers. The ships included ironclads, which were protected by iron on their sides, and cottonclads, which used cotton along their sides. During the Battle of Hampton Roads, the Confederate ironclad Virginia fought against the Union ironclad Monitor. It was the first time in world history that two ironclads fought each other.

In the Western Theater, much of the fighting happened along the Mississippi River. Ulysses S. Grant was an important Union general in the West. The Confederates tried to send their soldiers into the state of Kentucky in the summer of 1861. In the early months of 1862, the Union Army made the Confederates retreat from Kentucky and from western Tennessee. They tried to recapture western Tennessee by attacking Grant's army at the Battle of Shiloh, but Grant won the battle. The Confederates then tried to send their soldiers into eastern Kentucky in the fall of 1862 but lost the Battle of Perryville and then left Kentucky. Over the next year, the Union took control of the rest of Tennessee.

The North won control of almost all of the Mississippi River by capturing the cities along the river in the fall of 1862 and the spring of 1863. However, the Confederacy still held Vicksburg, an important city and fort. If they held, the Confederates could move soldiers and supplies from one side of the river to the other. Grant started the Siege of Vicksburg during the month of May 1863. The siege continued until July 4, 1863, when the Confederates there surrendered to Grant. That was one of the turning points in the war by dividing the Confederacy into two parts.

There were also battles west of the Mississippi River Valley in the Trans-Mississippi Theater. For example, two important battles were the Battle of Wilson's Creek and the Battle of Pea Ridge. The Confederates tried to invade New Mexico in February and March 1862 but they were defeated at the Battle of Glorieta Pass. After the Union captured Vicksburg, the area became separated from the rest of the Confederate States. Other battles happened in the area after the capture of Vicksburg.

During the Siege of Vicksburg in the west, another turning point came in the east. After winning some battles, Lee decided to invade the North again. Lee and his Army of Northern Virginia went into Pennsylvania. The Confederate Army met the Union Army near Gettysburg, Pennsylvania and fought the Battle of Gettysburg, which lasted from July 1 to 3, 1863. More soldiers died at Gettysburg than in any other Civil War battle, which the Union won. Lee and his troops were pushed back into the South and could no longer invade the North.

From Vicksburg, Grant led the army to finish taking control of Tennessee in the Chattanooga campaign. Lincoln then decided that Grant was his best general and put Grant in control of all Union armies. Abraham Lincoln also made William Tecumseh Sherman the general in charge leading the Union troops from Tennessee to Georgia. Grant led many attacks on Lee's army in Virginia. The battles were made up the Overland Campaign.

The Union had more success when Sherman marched into Georgia in May 1864, into the middle of the Confederate States. In September, he captured Atlanta, an important city. Sherman then led a "march to the sea" and captured Savannah. He then marched north through South Carolina and North Carolina. Confederate General Joseph E. Johnston attacked Sherman at the Battle of Bentonville. Sherman won the battle. Even in the 20th century, Southerners remember Sherman's march as destroying many homes, farms, and railroads, but his soldiers are blamed for things that they could not have done since they were too far away.

By late 1864, Lee's army was struggling, as they had less soldiers and supplies than Grant's army. Helped by Philip Sheridan, Grant's army slowly started to push into Virginia. At the start of April 1865, they won several battles against Lee's army and captured Richmond. Lee decided that he had too few soldiers to keep on fighting. He surrendered to Grant on April 9, 1865 near Appomattox Court House. Later, many other Confederate armies surrendered as well. The last Confederate general to surrender was Brigadier General Stand Watie, who surrendered on June 23, 1865, in Oklahoma.

After the war ended, Lincoln pardoned all of the Confederate soldiers and so they could not be arrested or punished for fighting against the Union. The South would be allowed to rejoin the United States but only later. Some Confederates did not want to return to the United States and moved to places like Mexico or Brazil.

Historians have had different ideas about whether the Confederacy could have won the war. Most of them, such as James McPherson, say that it would have been difficult but possible. The Union had far more people, money and industry. By most estimates, the Union had over 2 million soldiers while the Confederacy had 1 million.

One advantage the Confederacy had was that they only needed to defend their land, whereas the Union could only win if they took full control of the Confederate states. Furthermore, the Union could only fight the war if their people wanted them to keep fighting. Lincoln had opponents in the North (the Copperheads) who wanted the war to end. If the Confederacy had defended itself for long enough, it may have led to more people in the Union turning against the war and supporting the Copperheads. However, Lincoln held on to his support and won the 1864 election.

The Union Navy blocked ships from going into the Confederate ports. Although some ships managed to get past, most could not. The Confederacy had big money problems because they could not sell cotton and other goods to other countries. The Confederacy collected less taxes than the Union, so they printed money to pay for the war. This caused inflation (rising prices).

Another factor was that the Confederacy could not get help from outside. They had hoped that Britain and France would support the Confederacy because they wanted to buy their cotton. However, Britain and France did not give them help. There were three reasons for this. Firstly, they thought that slavery was wrong. Secondly, they did not want to become enemies of the United States. Thirdly, they could get cotton from elsewhere.

Most historians also think that Abraham Lincoln was a better leader than Jefferson Davis. Don E. Fehrenbacher says that Lincoln's skills helped keep the Border States and ordinary people on his side. Lincoln left his generals alone if they did a good job and fired them if they did not. Davis lacked a clear plan, tried to do too many tasks at once and often chose people to do jobs just because they were his friends. He annoyed his generals and other Confederate politicians. William Cooper says that better leadership helped the Union, but they were already more likely to win.

Many soldiers on both sides died during the war. Most of the war was fought in the South. Many railroads, farms, houses and other things were destroyed, and most people living there became very poor.

After the war, some of the Union Army's leaders went into politics. Generals like Grant, Hayes, Garfield, Harrison, and McKinley became US presidents. Other veterans were elected to other offices.

The period after the war, called Reconstruction, lasted from the end of the war to 1877. The Union Army stayed in some Southern states and made them occupied territory.

During Reconstruction, black Americans built schools and other social infrastructure. Some of the schools became the historically black colleges that still exist. After southern states rejoined the Union, most of them made laws that limited what black people could do.

The Southern states were allowed to ask to rejoin the union. After they were accepted, they could send senators and representatives to the US Congress again and make their own state laws.

The Amnesty Act of 1872 restored the rights to vote and to hold political office for most former members of the Confederacy. Some of them also became politicians.

Three important amendments were added on to the US Constitution. The amendments were suggested by the US government. Although not every American supported them, they got enough support to pass.

The Thirteenth Amendment says that slavery is not allowed anywhere in the United States. This completed the work of the Emancipation Proclamation.

The Fourteenth Amendment makes it clear that all people born in the United States are citizens, and all citizens have equal rights.

The Fifteenth Amendment says that people in the United States cannot be kept from voting because of their race.

The Andes are a mountain range along the western coast of South America.

They stretch over 7,000 km / 4,400 miles from the south of Argentina and Chile to the north of Colombia. They are also found in Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador.

The Amazon river system has its sources in the eastern flanks of the Andes.

The Andes are the longest exposed mountain range of the world, and the second-highest after the Himalayas. The Andes mountain range is the highest mountain range outside Asia.

Aconcagua, the highest peak, rises to 6,962 m (22,841 ft) above sea level. The top of Mount Chimborazo in the Ecuadorean Andes is the point on the Earth's surface most distant from its center. Mount Chimborazo is an inactive volcano in Ecuador, which last erupted over a thousand years ago.

The northern part has two parallel ranges. They are the Cordillera Occidental (western) and the Cordillera Oriental (eastern). The term cordillera comes from the Spanish word meaning 'rope'.

In Colombia, north to the border with Ecuador, the Andes split in three parallel ranges, western, central and eastern.

In the north the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta (Snowy Mountain Range of Saint Martha) is an isolated mountain range apart from the Andes chain that runs through Colombia. Reaching an altitude of 5,700 metres above sea level just 42 km from the Caribbean coast, the Sierra Nevada is the world's highest coastal range.

The western range of the eastern Cordillia Oriental is the only one which reaches Colombia .

The Andes range is about  wide throughout its length, except in Bolivia where it is  wide. The islands of the Dutch Caribbean Aruba, Bonaire, and Curaçao, which lie in the Caribbean Sea off the coast of Venezuela,  the submerged tops of the northern edge of the Andes range.

The Andes are a Mesozoic–Tertiary orogenic belt of mountains along the Pacific Ring of Fire.

The Andes are the result of plate tectonics processes, caused by the subduction of oceanic crust beneath the South American continental plate. South America, like North America, has been moving west since the Cretaceous period. Thus the subduction of the Nazca Plate beneath the South American Plate formed the Andes. This was caused by the westward movement of South America.

The formation of the modern Andes began with the events of the Triassic and Jurassic when Pangea begun to break up and several rifts developed. It was during the Cretaceous period that the Andes began to take their present form, by the uplifting, faulting and folding of sedimentary and metamorphic rock of the ancient cratons to the east. The rise of the Andes has not been constant and different regions have had different degrees of tectonic stress, uplift, and weathering.

The climate in the Andes differs depending on which area, the , and how close it is to the sea. The southern section is rainy and cool. The central Andes are dry. The northern Andes are normally rainy and warm, with an average temperature of  in Colombia. The climate is known to change very much in rather short distances. Rainforests exist just miles away from the snow covered peak Cotopaxi. The mountains have a large effect on the temperatures of nearby areas. The snow line depends on the location. It is at between 4,500 and 4,800 m (14,800–15,800 ft) in the tropical Ecuadorian, Colombian, Venezuelan, and northern Peruvian Andes, going up to 4,800–5,200 m (15,800–17,060 ft) in the drier mountains of southern Peru south to northern Chile south to about 30°S, then going down to  on Aconcagua at 32°S,  at 40°S,  at 50°S, and only  in Tierra del Fuego at 55°S; from 50°S, many of the bigger glaciers go down to sea level.

The Andes of Chile and Argentina can be put in two climatic and  zones; the Dry Andes and the Wet Andes.

Rainforests used to hold much of the northern Andes but are now reduced, especially in the Chocó and inter-Andean valleys of Colombia. Farming, deforestation, illegal crops, and population growth has done this.

A direct  of the humid Andean slopes are the mostly dry Andean slopes in most of western Peru, Chile and Argentina. That area, and many Interandean Valles, normally have deciduous woodland, shrub and xeric (dry) vegetation, up to the mostly lifeless Atacama Desert.

About 30,000 species of vascular plants live in the Andes. About half of those are endemic to the region: it is a hotspot. The small tree Cinchona pubescens is a source of quinine used to treat malaria. It is found widely in the Andes as far south as Bolivia. Other important crops that came from the Andes are tobacco and potatoes.

The high-altitude Polylepis forests and woodlands are found in the Andes of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia and Chile. These trees are called Queñua, Yagual and other names. They grow at altitudes of  above sea level. It is still unclear if the patchy  of these forests and woodlands is natural, or the result of clearing which began during the Incan time. Regardless, in modern times the clearance has had a faster pace, and the trees are now endangered.  Some think as little as 10% of the original woodland is still here.

The Andes has a lot of wildlife. With almost 1,000 species, of which about 2/3 are  to the region, the Andes is the most  region in the world for amphibians.

Animal  in the Andes is high, with almost 600 species of mammals (13% endemic), more than 1,700 species of birds (1/3 endemic), more than 600 species of reptiles (45% endemic), and almost 400 species of fish (1/3 endemic).

The Vicuña and Guanaco can be found living in the Altiplano, while the closely related  Llama and Alpaca are commonly kept by locals as pack animals and for their meat and wool. The nocturnal chinchillas, two threatened members of the rodent order, live in the Andes' alpine regions. The Andean Condor, the largest bird of its kind in the Western Hemisphere, lives throughout much of the Andes but mostly in very low numbers. Other animals found in the mostly open habitats of the high Andes are the huemul, cougar, and foxes in the genus Pseudalopex. And for birds, some species of tinamous (they are members of the genus Nothoprocta), are the Andean Goose, Giant Coot, flamingos (mainly associated with hypersaline lakes),  Lesser Rhea, Andean Flicker, Diademed Sandpiper-plover, miners, sierra-finches and diuca-finches.

Sir Alfred Joseph Hitchcock  (13 August 1899 – 29 April 1980) was a British movie director who later became an American citizen, but still kept his British citizenship. He mostly made mystery and suspense movies. Despite having a successful career, Hitchcock never won an Academy Award.

Hitchcock started his career in England, starting with silent movies in the 1920s. In the 1930s, he made some successful movies like The Man Who Knew Too Much (1934), The 39 Steps (1935), and The Lady Vanishes (1938). He then moved to the United States, to work in Hollywood. His first American movie was Rebecca (1940), which won an Academy Award.

Some of his best known movies from the 1940s are Spellbound (1945) and Notorious (1946), which were inspired by psychoanalysis. His first movie in color was the experimental Rope (1948). Strangers on a Train (1951) was based on a novel by Patricia Highsmith. In the 1950s, he made three popular movies with Grace Kelly: Dial M for Murder (1954), Rear Window (1954), and To Catch a Thief (1955). In 1956, he made a new version of The Man Who Knew Too Much, starring James Stewart and Doris Day. He returned to black-and-white, briefly, with The Wrong Man (1957). Then came Vertigo (1958), which some consider his best suspense movie. It was followed by three more successful movies: North by Northwest (1959), Psycho (1960), and The Birds (1963). After that, he only made 5 more movies: Marnie (1964), Torn Curtain (1966), Topaz (1969), Frenzy (1972), and Family Plot (1976).  In 1971, he became the very first winner of the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award.  This is an award for lifetime achievement.

In 1945 Hitchcock made a documentary about the Holocaust. It will be shown on British television in 2015.

Hitchcock appeared very quickly in small roles in most of his movies.

Hithcock was born in Leytonstone, Essex. He was a Roman Catholic. He was married to Alma Reville, who helped write some of his movies. They had a daughter, Patricia. He died in Bel Air, Los Angeles.

Alfred Hitchcock, a famous filmmaker, used several unique elements in his movies. These included the MacGuffin, suspense, cameos, music, blonde leading ladies, close-ups, macabre themes, twist endings, specific locations, and unreliable narrators. These elements contributed to his enduring legacy in the world of cinema.

Arabic (اَلْعَرَبِيَّةُ, al-ʿarabiyyah) is a Central Semitic language that first appeared in the mid-ninth century BCE in Northern Arabia and Sahara southern Levant. It is related to other Semitic languages like Hebrew and Aramaic. Unlike the latter two, where the former derives from the other, however, Arabic is itself a root language, like Latin. Unlike Latin, it is still widely used and spoken today. Around 292 million people speak it as their first language. Many more people can also understand it as a second language in the Maghreb. The Arabic language is written from right to left in a consonant alphabet, which is also called an abjad. Since it is so widely spoken throughout the world, the language is one of the six official languages of the United Nations. The other official languages of the UN are: English, French, Spanish, Russian and Chinese.

Many countries speak Arabic as an official language, but not all of them speak it the same way. The language has many dialects, or varieties, such as Modern Standard Arabic, Egyptian Arabic, Gulf Arabic, Maghrebi Arabic , Levantine Arabic and many others. Some of the dialects are spoken so differently from one another that some speakers have a hard time understanding the other. Many dialectic words however are nonetheless still rooted in the original, or classical language.

Most of the countries that use Arabic as their official language are in the Middle East. They are part of the Arab world, the largest religion in the region is Islam. The Arabic language is considered to be the language of Islam as the Quran was revealed in the Arabic language and it was also the native language of and spoken by Muhammad, the religion's prophet.

Arabic is very important in Islam because Muslims believe that Allah (God) used it to talk to Muhammad through the Archangel Gabriel (Jibril), giving him the Quran in the language. Many but not all Arabic-speakers are Muslims. The miracle of the Quran is believed to be in its language.

Arabic is also becoming a popular language to learn in the Western world even though its grammar is sometimes very hard to learn for native speakers of Indo-European languages. Many other languages have borrowed words from Arabic because of its importance in history. Some English words that can be traced to Arabic are sugar, cotton, magazine, algebra, alcohol and emir.

The Arabic alphabet is a consonant alphabet with 28 letters, as listed below:

Archimedes of Syracuse () was a Greek scientist. He was an inventor, an astronomer, and a mathematician. He was born in the town of Syracuse in Sicily.

His father was Phidias, an astronomer, and he may have been in the family of a king of Syracuse. Syracuse was a rich Greek city, on the seashore in Sicily. When Archimedes was about ten years old, he left Syracuse to study in Alexandria, Egypt. He was in the school of Euclid, a famous mathematician. Not much is known about the personal life of Archimedes, for example, whether he was married or if he had children.

When the Romans invaded Syracuse, they captured Archimedes so they could learn all of the things he knew. About two years after he was drawing a mathematical diagram in the sand and enraged a soldier by refusing to go to meet the Roman general until he had finished working on the problem. The Roman killed him. His last words are supposed to have been "Do not disturb my circles!"

On the Sphere and Cylinder is a work that was published by Archimedes in two volumes in about 225 BC. On the sphere, he showed that the surface area is four times the area of its great circle. In modern terms, this means that the surface area is equal to:

The volume of the contained ball is two-thirds the volume of a "circumscribed" cylinder. meaning that the volume is

A sculpted sphere and cylinder were placed on the tomb of Archimedes at his request.

Archimedes is also well known for being the first person to understand statics, which is a part of applied mathematics. It has to do with loads that do not move, for example in buildings or bridges. He also understood and wrote about what happens when things  in liquids, which is called buoyancy.

Archimedes' principle: the weight of water displaced by an object equals the amount of buoyancy it gets. It has practical uses. It can be used to measure the density of an object, and hence whether or not it is made of gold.

The story of the golden crown does not appear in the surviving works of Archimedes. Archimedes may have got a solution known in hydrostatics as Archimedes' principle, which he describes in his treatise On Floating Bodies. This principle states that a body immersed in a fluid experiences a buoyant force equal to the weight of the fluid it displaces. Using this principle, it would have been possible to compare the density of the golden crown to that of solid gold by balancing the crown on a scale with a gold reference sample, then immersing the apparatus in water. The difference in density between the two samples would cause the scale to tip accordingly. Galileo considered it "probable that this method is the same that Archimedes followed, since, besides being very accurate, it is based on demonstrations found by Archimedes himself".

Archimedes is also famous as an inventor because he made new tools and machines. For example, he made a machine to lift water that could be used by farmers to bring water to their crops. This is called Archimedes' screw.

Archimedes probably also invented a machine to measure distance, an odometer. A cart was built with wheels that turned four hundred times in one mile. A pin on the wheel would hit a 400-tooth gear, so it turned once for every mile. This gear would then make a small stone fall into a cup. At the end of a journey one could count the number of stones in the cup to find the distance.

Archimedes also made a system which one person could pull a large ship with just one rope. This was called the compound pulley. This is an important machine which is even today helps people in everyday life, although the versions we now use are much more complicated. They still work by the same principle, through.

Archimedes also invented or made many machines used in war, for example he made better catapults. This was during the Punic Wars, which were between Rome in what is now Italy and the city of Carthage in what is now North Africa. For many years he helped stop the Roman army from attacking Syracuse, his city. One war machine was called the "claw of Archimedes", or the "iron hand". It was used to defend the city from attacks by ships. Ancient writers said that it was a kind of crane with a hook that lifted ships out of the water and caused their .

Another story about Archimedes is that he burned Roman ships from far away using many mirrors and the light from the sun. This is perhaps possible, but it is perhaps more likely that this was done with flaming missiles from a catapult.

Archimedes is thought to be so important as a mathematician that scientists have honoured him:

The Amazon River (also called Rio Amazonas in Portuguese and Spanish) is the largest river in the world by the amount or volume of water it carries. It flows through the tropical forests of South America, mainly in Brazil. Its headwaters are in the Andes Mountains in Peru, on the western edge of South America and flows eastward into the Atlantic Ocean near the equator.

The Amazon River moves more water than the next eight largest rivers of the world combined and has the largest drainage basin in the world.  It accounts for about one fifth of the world's total river flow.  During the wet season, parts of the Amazon exceed  in width.  Because of its size, it is sometimes called The  Sea, but it is not the world's longest river system.  The world's longest river is the Nile River, with the Amazon being second-longest.

All the main tributaries to the Amazon River have their own names. They start in the mountains (Andes) as clear water with high oxygen content, and connect with the other rivers as they all flow towards the mouth of the Amazon.

The water of the Amazon ends up full of mud. This is especially true of its  Rio Negro tributary). In the nutritious mud live a huge number of insects, small crustacea, parasites. On these small fry live predators, birds, fish and life generally. The mud is what causes this huge array of life. The mud has nutrients, and on this the flies and fish all the other animals depend.

It is one of the longest rivers in the world. There have been different studies that have tried to measure its exact length. As the studies have come up with different numbers, it is therefore difficult to give an exact number.  The length also changes in the rainy season. Several studies from Brazil, Spain and Chile say it is the longest river in the world, longer than the Nile. The Nile has a length of . The Amazon may have a length of . The Spanish daily newspaper El País gives its length at .   In 2007, scientists from Peru and Brazil calculated a length of .

A study done in 1969 says that the Amazon has a length of . This was measured from a part of the River Apurimac. Until the 1970s, it was thought that the Marañón River was the source of the Amazon. In 2001, an  found that Nevado Mismi was in fact the source of the Amazon. Another document of the Geographic society of Lima gives the length of the Amazon at over .

The source of the Amazon is in the Andes Mountains of western South America. It flows east from there to the Atlantic Ocean. Most of the huge river and its many tributaries are in the country of Brazil. There are many places on the Amazon where a person on one side of the river cannot see the other side. The Brazilians call the Amazon the "River Sea." The Amazon is navigable from the ocean to Peru. Ocean ships can travel on the Amazon all the way across Brazil, and most of South America, to the city of Iquitos in Peru.

One characteristic of the Amazon river is the Brazos Casiquiare, a water connection to the Orinoco river into Venezuela, that connects the two basins.

The estuary of the Amazon is about  wide. The width of the mouth of the river is usually measured from Cabo do Norte to Punto Patijoca. Generally, the outlet of the Para River is included. It is  wide, and forms the estuary of the  Tocantins. The estuary also includes  the island of Marajó, which lies in the mouth of the Amazon. This means that the Amazon is wider at its mouth than the entire length of the Thames river in England.

Along the coastline, near Cabo do Norte,  there are many islands partially covered with water. There are also sandbanks. The tides of the Atlantic generate a wave that reaches into the Amazon river. This wave goes along the coast for about . The phenomenon of this wave generated by the tides is called a tidal bore. Locally it is known as pororoca. The pororoca occurs where the water is less than  deep. It starts with a loud noise, and advances at a speed of   . The bore is the reason the Amazon does not have a delta. The ocean rapidly carries away the large amount  of silt brought by the Amazon. This makes it impossible for a delta to grow past the shoreline. It also has a very large tide, that can reach  . The place has become popular for river surfing.

"Uses" suggests that the wonders of the Earth are there for our taking. They are not. It is up to us what we do, and the Amazon has already been greatly damaged by greed and corruption. Logging its trees and changing the ecosystem to farmland is already far advanced.

There are no bridges across the entire width of the river. This is not because the river would be too wide to bridge; for most of its length, engineers could build a bridge across the river easily. The main reason is because the river flows through the Amazon Rainforest, where there are very few roads and cities. Most of the time, the crossing can be done by a ferry, so there is no need to build a bridge. The Manaus Iranduba Bridge linking the cities of Manaus and Iranduba spans the Rio Negro (a tributary of the Amazon).

The river is the main route of traffic in the region. Most cities are on the banks of the river. The biggest city on the river is Manaus, which is also the capital of the Brazilian State of Amazonas. Many native people live in the Amazon, such as the Urarina who live in Peru.

Big ocean boats can get up the river until Manaus, which is almost 1500 kilometers (900 miles) from its mouth. Smaller ocean ships of 3,000 tons  and 7.9 m (26 ft) draft can reach as far as Iquitos in Peru, 3,700 km (2,300 miles) from the sea. Smaller riverboats can reach 780 km (486 mi) higher as far as Actual Point. Beyond that, small boats frequently go up to the Pogo Ode Escherichia's, just above Actual Point.

Alzheimer's Disease (AD)  is a brain disease that slowly destroys brain cells. As of now, there is no cure for Alzheimer's disease. With time, the different symptoms of  the disease become more marked. Many people die because of Alzheimer's disease. The disease affects different parts of the brain but has its worst effects on the areas of the brain that control memory, language, and thinking skills. Alzheimer's Disease is the most common form of senile dementia accounting for up to 70% of cases.

The clinical symptoms of AD usually occur after age 65, but changes in the brain which do not cause symptoms and are caused by Alzheimer's, may begin years or in some cases decades before. Although the symptoms of AD begin in older people it is not a normal part of aging.

At this time there is no cure for Alzheimer's, but there are treatments that can help some patients with the signs and symptoms so they do not affect them as badly. There are also treatments which slow down the disease so the damage to the brain does not happen as quickly. There are also certain personal habits that people can learn which may help to delay the onset of the disease.

While it is not yet known exactly what causes Alzheimer's disease, there are a number of risk factors which may make a person more likely to get it. Some of these risk factors are genetic; changes to four different genes have been found which increase the risk.

The current lifetime risk for a 65-year-old person to get Alzheimer's disease is estimated to be at 10.5%. It is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States causing about 83,500 deaths a year. In 2007, there were over 26.6 million people throughout the world who were affected by AD.

Alzheimer's disease was named after Alois Alzheimer, a German psychiatrist and neuropathologist who first described the disease after studying the case of a middle-aged woman, Auguste Deter, who was a patient at a hospital in Frankfurt, Germany in 1906. The disease was named Alzheimer's disease in 1910 by Dr. Emil Kraepilin a co-worker of Alzheimer.

Two of the main features found in the brains of people with of Alzheimer's disease, are neurobrillary tangles ('tangles' for short), which are made up of a protein called tau, and senile plaques (which are made mostly from another protein called beta-amyloid, they are also sometimes called beta-amyloid bundles or 'bundles' for short). The tau proteins that form the tangles previously held together a structure inside the neurons called a microtubule which is an important part of the neuron; it forms part of the cytoskeleton (cell skeleton) which is what maintains a cell's shape, and microtubules plays a part in cell communication.

Both tangles and plaques may be caused by other diseases, such as Herpes simplex virus Type 1 which is being investigated as a possible cause or contributor in developing Alzheimer's. It is not known for sure if tangles and plaques are part of what causes Alzheimer's, or if they are the results.

Microtubules are made of a protein called tubulin. The tubulin is polymerized, which is when molecules form the same shapes over and over again that are linked together in groups, and these groups are linked together. They can form long chains or other shapes; in this case the polymerized tubulin forms microtubules. The microtubules are rigid tubes like microscopic straws which are hollow inside. Microtubules help keep the shape of the neuron, and are inolved in passing signals through the neuron.

Tau is a protein that is found mostly in the neurons of the central nervous system. They help hold together the microtubules within the neurons.  and when changes happen in the way the tau proteins are supposed to work the microtubules break apart. The tau proteins which are no longer holding the microtubules together form strands called fibrils, which then clump together inside the neuron to make what are called neurofibrillary tangles . These clumps, also known as 'tau tangles', are all that remain after a neuron has died.

Braak Staging of Alzheimer's disease-related neurofibrillary changes.This is currently used only for research purposes

Hippocampal formation and parts of the limbic system and the amygdala

Beginning Alzheimer's diseaseCognitive impairments: memory problems, spatial cognition

Beta-amyloid(Aβ) (also called 'amyloid beta') plaques start with a protein called amyloid precursor protein (APP). APP is one of the proteins that make up a cell's membrane or outer covering, that protects the cell. In this case a neuron.. As it is made inside the cell, APP sticks out through the membrane of the cell.

In different parts of the of cell including the outermost part of the cell membrane, chemicals called enzymes snip the APP into small pieces.  These enzymes that do the snipping are alpha-secretase, beta-secretase, and gamma-secretase.  Depending on which enzyme is doing the snipping and what parts of the APP are snipped, two different things can happen. One that is helpful and one that causes the formation of beta-amyloid plaques.

The plaques are formed when beta-secretase snips the APP molecule at one end of the beta-amyloid peptide, releasing sAPPβ from the cell. Gamma-secretase then cuts the pieces of APP that is left and, still sticking out of the neuron’s membrane, at the other end of the beta-amyloid peptide. After this snipping the beta-amyloid peptide is released into the space outside the neuron and begins to stick to other beta-amyloid peptides. These pieces stick together to form oligomers. Different oligomers of various sizes are now floating around in the spaces between the neurons, which may be responsible for reacting with receptors on neighboring cells and synapses, affecting their ability to function.

Some of these oligomers are cleared from the brain. Those that are not cleared out clump together with more pieces of beta-amyloid. As more pieces clump togther the oligomers get bigger larger, and the next size up are called protofibrils and the next size after that are called fibrils. After a while, these fibrils clump together with other protein molecules, neurons and non-nerve cells floating around in the space between the cells and form what are called plaques.

Deposits of beta-amyloid also form in the walls (in the tunica media, the middle layer, and  tunica adventitia or tunica externa, the outer layer) of small and mid-sized arteries (and sometimes veins) in the cerebral cortex and the leptomeninges (the leptomeninges are the two inner layers - pia mater and arachnoid - of the meninges, a protective 3-layer membrane covering the brain.)

CAA is found in 30% of people over the age of 60 years who do not have any dementia but is found in 90%-96% of people with Alzheimer disease and is severe in one third to two thirds of these cases.

The first area of the brain to be affected by Alzheimer's is the "transentorhinal region" which is part of the medial temporal lobe located deep within the brain.  Neurons start dying in this area first. It then spreads into the adjacent entorhinal cortex (EC) which acts as a central hub, for a widespread network that handles signals for memory and movement(like a main train station with train tracks going to different areas).

The EC is the main area for communication between the hippocampus, and the neocortex - which is the outer portion of the brain responsible for higher functioning such as how the brain perceives information from the five senses; (smell, sight, taste, touch and hearing; Ex. seeing a person's face and recognizing them,) generating motor commands (Ex, moving and arm or leg, walking, running) spatial reasoning, conscious thought and language.

The disease then spreads into the hippocampus which is part of the limbic system. The hippocampus is the part of the brain that is involved in forming new memories, organizing them, and storing them for later recall. It is also where emotions and senses, such as smell and sound are attached to specific memories. Example 1.: A memory might make you happy or sad. Example 2.: A smell might bring up a certain memory.

The hippocampus then sends memories to the different parts of the cerebral hemisphere where they are placed in long-term storage and it helps retrieve them when necessary. Example: An adult trying to remember the name of a classmate from kindergarten.

In addition to handling memory the hippocampus is also involved in emotional responses, navigation (getting around) and spatial orientation (knowing your sense of place as you move around Example: Knowing your way around your bedroom even with the lights off).

There are actually two parts of the hippocampus which is shaped like a horseshoe with one in the left part of the brain and the other in the right part of the brain.

This is a short example of the test. The test is used to measure different cognitive functions such as selective attention.

Naming the colors of the first set of words is easier and quicker than the second, because in the first set, the colors match the words, in the second set they do not. So a person has to pay more attention.

People having problems with attention as may happen in early-stage Alzheimer's tend to do poorly on this test.

With current research using advances in neuroimaging such as FDG-PET and PIB-PET scans, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assays, it is now possible to detect the beginning processes of Alzheimer's disease that occur before symptoms begin. The research suggests that clinically normal older people (no symptoms at all) have biomarker evidence of amyloid beta (Aβ) build-up in the brain. This amyloid beta (Aβ) is linked to changes in the structure of the brain and how it works that is the similar to what is seen in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) - which may lead to Alzheimer's - and people with Alzheimer's.

These small preclinical changes (no symptoms) in the brain may occur many years, to even a few decades before a person is diagnosed with Alzheimer's. With a stage where there is some memory loss, or mild cognitive impairment. These changes put a person at risk of developing the clinical symptoms of full-blown  Alzheimer's but not everyone who has these changes will get the disease. Even though there is no cure for Alzheimer's, there are new treatments which are being developed which would work better in the very first stages of the disease.

At this time exactly what makes up the preclinical phase of Alzheimer's is still being researched, such as why some people with go on to develop Alzheimer's and others do not. So the term preclinical phase is being used for research only. There is a worldwide effort in various countries doing research in this area known as the World Wide Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (WW-ADNI) which is the umbrella organization for neuroimaging studies being carried out through the North American ADNI, European ADNI (E-ADNI), Japan ADNI, Australian ADNI (AIBL), Taiwan ADNI, Korea ADNI, China ADNI and Argentina ADNI.

"Misdiagnosis in very early stages of Alzheimer's is a significant problem, as there are more than 100 conditions that can mimic the disease. In people with mild memory complaints, our accuracy is barely better than chance," according to study researcher P. Murali Doraiswamy, MBBS, professor of psychiatry and medicine at Duke Medicine, "Given that the definitive gold standard for diagnosing Alzheimer's is autopsy, we need a better way to look into the brain."

In 1901, a 51-year-old woman named Auguste Deter, was committed to the City Asylum for the Insane and Epileptic, (Städtischen Anstalt für Irre und Epileptische) in Frankfurt am Main, Germany which had the nickname  "Irrenschloss" (Castle of the Insane). She was married and had a normal life until eight months prior to her commitment, when she started having psychological and neurological problems, such as problems with memory and language, paranoia, becoming disorientated and having hallucinations.

She was studied by a doctor on staff named Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915).  Alzheimer became interested in her case because of her age; while the effects of senile dementia were known at the time, they usually did not start until a person was in their early to mid-sixties. Her case was also notable because of the rapid onset of dementia, only eight months, from the first reported symptoms, until she was committed.

While conducting one of his examinations of Ms. Deter, he asked her to perform a series of simple writing tasks. Unable to do what was asked such as write her name, she said "I have lost myself, so to speak" ("Ich habe mich sozusagen selbst verloren").

Alzheimer left the hospital in Frankfurt in 1902 to begin working with Emil Kraepelin at the Psychiatric University Hospital in Heidelberg-Bergheim, and in 1903 both he and Kraepelin began working at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität in Munich.

When Ms. Deter died of septicemia on 8 April 1906, Alzheimer was informed and her brain was sent to Munich for him to study. Studying samples of her brain under a microscope he noticed neurofibriallry tangles and bundles made up of beta-amyloid plaque, which are two of the main features of the disease.  On 3 November 1906, Alzheimer presented the results of his findings in Auguste's case at the Conference of South-West German Psychiatrists in Tübingen, and he published his findings in the case in 1907.

In 1910, Emil Kraepelin named the disease 'Alzheimer's disease'. Alzheimer's disease usually beigins affecting people between ages 60–65, in Ms. Deter's case - who was 55-years-old when she died - she had a form of what is now known as Early-onset Alzhiemer's disease.

Anyone can get Alzheimer's disease, rich people or poor famous people and unfamous people. Some of the famous people who have gotten Alzheimer's disease are former United States President Ronald Reagan and Irish writer Iris Murdoch, both of whom were the subjects of scientific articles examining how their cognitive capacities got worse with the disease.

Other cases include the retired footballer Ferenc Puskás, the former Prime Ministers Harold Wilson (United Kingdom) and Adolfo Suárez (Spain), the actress Rita Hayworth, the Nobel Prize-winner Raymond Davis, Jr., the actors Charlton Heston and Gene Wilder, the novelist Terry Pratchett, politician and activist Sargent Shriver, the Blues musician B.B. King, director Jacques Rivette, Indian politician George Fernandes,

and the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physics recipient Charles K. Kao. In 2012, Nobel Prize writer Gabriel García Márquez was diagnosed with the disease. Former Finnish President Mauno Koivisto died of the disease in May 2017. Country singer Glen Campbell died of the disease in August 2017.

Amsterdam is the capital and largest city in the European country of the Netherlands. Amsterdam is famous for its canals. Unlike in capitals of most other countries, the national government, parliament, government ministries, supreme court, royal family and embassies are not in Amsterdam, but in The Hague. The only diplomatic offices present in Amsterdam are consulates.

The city hosts two universities (the University of Amsterdam and the Free University Amsterdam) and an international airport "Schiphol Airport". About 2.2 million people live in the metropolitan area. The city of Amsterdam is the world's most multi-cultural city. It has people living there from 175 different countries. Like other big cities in the Netherlands and elsewhere in the world, Amsterdam is unfortunately subjected to many criminal activities.

The former city of Weesp has been part of Amsterdam since 24 March 2022. Because of this Amsterdam has about 905,000 people.

A dam was built in 13th century in the river Amstel (that's why the city is called Amsterdam). The old harbor of the city, Damrak, is now one of the busiest streets in the city. The city was for the first time mentioned in 1275 by count Floris V, count of Holland and Zeeland who gave the people of Amsterdam some more freedom. The city got its city rights probably in 1306; at least soon after the year 1300. The city became a major trading port pretty soon, with a successful trading route to the Baltic Sea. The city grew fast in the 15th century. Because the city basically lies in swamp, the builders of the city had to dig canals to use the digging-ground for getting the living-ground higher. Homes were built on wooden poles, and the canals served as a pretty effective primitive sewer. Amsterdam sits at two meters below sea level and is built on soft peat and clay, in order to stay above water.

The city was one of the first cities in Western Europe to be fairly democratic: Wealthy citizens chose the leaders of the city. Amsterdam declared war on the Spanish in 1578, during the Eighty Years' War. When the city of Antwerp fell to the Spanish in 1585, many people of Antwerp fled to Amsterdam. Antwerp was also a major trading city, and when its people moved to Amsterdam, they took their trading-networks with them. That's why Amsterdam became an even more important trading city after that. This launched the Dutch Golden Age. The number of people living in Amsterdam during the War rose from less than 30,000 in 1570 to over 100,000 in 1622. That number would even rise to 200,000 near the end of the 17th century, making the city a very large city for its time (only London and Paris also had that many people). In the 18th century, the number of people living in Amsterdam fell back to 140,000, ending the Golden Age.

The 19th century was the time for the first trains and trams in Amsterdam. The first train ran from Amsterdam to Haarlem in 1839. The number of people was rising, with about 250,000 living in Amsterdam in 1850, and more than 500,000 in 1900. Amsterdam was a heavy industrialised city by then. Before the Second World War, there were about 140,000 Jews living in Amsterdam. Most of those people did not survive the war. After the war, Amsterdam became a centre of tolerance and culture; to be different is not abnormal in Amsterdam. It is expected that Amsterdam will grow 12.6% until 2025. It will then hold almost 900,000 people, and the metropolitan area will hold almost 2.5 million people by then.

An arch is an opening in a building that is curved on top to distribute the weight. The curved part can be round, like part of a circle, or pointed, like two parts of circles next to each other. Arches are often used where buildings are made of many small stones or bricks. The stone at the very top of the arch, called the keystone, keeps the rest of the arch stones from falling down. Arches can go over doorways and windows. Many bridges are arch bridges including ones made of steel. A series of arches is an arcade.

Arches can be found in nature. These natural arches form through the erosion of cliffs.

Arches  can have many forms, but they can be sorted into three categories: circular, pointed and parabolic.

Ancient Greek civilization, also commonly called Ancient Greece, was a large area, mostly along the northeast shore of the Mediterranean Sea, where people spoke the Greek language. The area was much larger than today's country of Greece.

Greek civilization thrived, especially during the  period, between the 8th and the 6th centuries BC. It continued until 146 BC and ended with the Roman conquest of Greece at the Battle of Corinth.

Most of the time, the Greeks did not have one government or ruler although they had a common language and culture.  There were many city-states, each with its own constitution. Athens, Sparta and Corinth were especially powerful city-states. Some had kings, and others like Athens had a form of democracy.

As time went on, the most powerful city-states collected others into groups known as "leagues". That applied to many of the Greek colonies in Asia Minor, most of which had close ties to one of the three largest cities.

In the middle of the period, Classical Greece flourished during the 5th to 4th centuries BC. Athenian leadership repelled the threat of a Persian invasion during the Greco-Persian Wars. The Athenian Golden Age ended with the defeat of Athens at the hands of Sparta during the Peloponnesian War in 404 BC.

In the last period, Greece was unified by the conquests of Alexander the Great. The city-states continued under the overall influence of Macedonia during the Hellenistic period.

Greek culture had some influence on the Roman Empire, the main power of the ancient world. That made classical Greece part of the foundation of Western civilization. Greek also became the language of the Byzantine Empire.

Minoan civilization (c. 2000-c. 1450 BC) was a civilization named after King Minos that flourished on Crete.

Mycenaean culture (c.1600–c.1100 BC) was an early Greek culture during the Bronze Age on the Greek mainland and on Crete.

The Bronze Age collapse, or the Greek Dark Ages happened around c.1100–c.750 BC.

During the archaic period (c.750–c.500 BC), artists made larger free-standing sculptures in stiff poses with the dreamlike "archaic smile". The period ended with the overthrow of the last tyrant of Athens in 510 BC.

The classical period (c.500–323 BC) had a distinctive artistic style; an example is the Parthenon.

Politically, the classical period was dominated by Athens, which led the Delian League during the 5th century. It was displaced by Spartan hegemony during the early 4th century. Finally, there was the League of Corinth, which was led by Macedonia.

During the Hellenistic period (323–146 BC), Greek power and culture (like Hellenistic art) expanded into the Near East and the Middle East. The period begins with the death of Alexander the Great and ends with the Roman conquest.

Roman Greece was started by the Roman victory at the Battle of Corinth in 146 BC and the establishment of Byzantium by Constantine as the capital of the Roman Empire in 330 AD.

The final phase of antiquity was Christianization, a period from the later 4th to the early 6th centuries. It ended by the closure of the later version of Plato's Academy by Justinian I in 529 AD.

In the 8th century B.C., the Greeks learned how to read and write a second time. They had lost literacy at the end of the Mycenaean culture, as the Mediterranean world fell into the Dark Ages. The Greek Dark Ages (~1100 BC–750 BC), also called the Late Bronze Age collapse, is a period in the history of Ancient Greece and Anatolia for which there are no written records and few archaeological remains.

The Greeks learned about the alphabet from another ancient people, the Phoenicians, and made some adjustments to it. In particular, the Greeks introduced regular letters for vowels, which were more important in their language than in Phoenician . The Greek alphabet was, in turn, modified by the Etruscans and then the Romans. Much of the world now uses the Roman alphabet.

Ancient Greece had one language and culture, but it was not unified until 337 BC, when Macedonia defeated Athens and Thebes. That marked the end of the classical period and the start of the Hellenistic period. Even then, the conquered cities were merely joined to Philip II of Macedon's Corinthian League. They were not occupied and continued to rule themselves.

Ancient Greece consisted of several hundred more-or-less independent city-states. That was different from other societies, which were either tribal or kingdoms that ruled over relatively large territories.

The geography of Greece, which is divided and subdivided by hills, mountains, and rivers, certainly contributed to the nature of ancient Greece. On the one hand, the ancient Greeks had no doubt that they were "one people" since they had the same religion, basic culture, and language. However, each city-state, or polis, was independent; unification was something rarely discussed by the ancient Greeks. Even during the second Persian invasion of Greece, when a group of city-states allied themselves to defend Greece, most city-states remained neutral. After the Persian defeat, the allies quickly returned to infighting.

The major features of the Ancient Greek political system were:

Later, during the classical period, the leagues were fewer and larger and dominated by one city (particularly Athens, Sparta and Thebes). Often cities would be forced to join under threat of war or as part of a peace treaty. After Philip II of Macedon had conquered the heartlands of ancient Greece, he did not try to annex the territory or unify it into a new province. However, he forced most of the cities to join his own Corinthian League.

Some city-states were democratic, some were aristocratic, and some were monarchies. Some had many revolutions in which one kind of government replaced another. One famous Greek kingdom is Macedon, which became briefly the largest empire that the world had seen at the time by conquering the Achaemenid Empire (including ancient Egypt) and reaching India. Other famous kingdoms are Epirus and Thessaly.

Monarchies in ancient Greece were not absolute because there was usually a council of older citizens (the Senate or, in Macedonia, the Congress) who gave advice to the King. Those men were not elected or chosen in a lottery, unlike in the democratic city-states.

Citizens who could participate in government in ancient Greece were usually men who were free-born in that city. Women, slaves and (usually) residents born elsewhere did not have the right to vote. The details differed by city-state.

For example, in Athens, the residents of Athens were of three groups: citizens, metics (residents born elsewhere) and slaves. Citizens were residents whose ancestors had been Athenians for three generations. Male citizens had the rights of free men and could be chosen to fulfill any official state position. "Of the estimated 150,000 residents of the city-state of Attica, only about one fifth held the privilege of citizenship". Women who were citizens in Athens could not participate in political offices unlike in Sparta.

The number of Greeks grew to the point that soon not enough food could be grown for all people. When that happened, a city-state would send people off to start a new one, known as a colony.

Because the terrain was rough, most travel was by sea. For that reason, many new cities were established along the coastline. The first new cities were started in Anatolia (Asia Minor) and later along the Black Sea, in Cyprus, in southern Italy, in Sicily, and around what is now Benghazi, Libya. They even started a city, Naucratis, on Nile, in Egypt. Today's Syracuse, Naples, Marseille, and Istanbul started as the Greek cities Syracusa, Neapolis, Massilia and Byzantium.

By the 6th century BC, some city-states became much more important than the others: Corinth, Thebes, Sparta, and Athens.

The Spartans were very well-disciplined soldiers. They defeated the people who lived near them, who had to farm the land for the Spartans. These helots had to give the Spartans part of the food that they grew. That made the Spartans not have to work. Instead, they learned how to be better soldiers. There were not many Spartans, but there were many helots. Spartan military strength controlled the helots. The Spartans had two hereditary kings who led them in war. At home, they were also ruled by a group of old men, called the Gerousia (Senate).

Athens became a democracy in 510 BC. The men came to a place in the centre of the city and decided what to do. It was the first place in the world in which the people decided what their country should do. They would talk and then vote on what to do at the Boule (Council). However, the women and the slaves did not vote. The slaves were owned by their masters and could be sold to someone else. The Athenian slaves were less free than the Spartan helots. Every year, Athenian citizens elected eight strategoi (generals), who led them in war.

In 499 BC, the Greek city-states in Anatolia rebelled because did not want Persia to rule them anymore. Athens sent 20 ships to fight the Persians on the sea. The Greeks in Anatolia were defeated. Persian King Darius I decided to punish Athens and sent soldiers and ships to fight Athens.

Athens asked for troops from Sparta, which was unable to help because it was then celebrating a religious festival. Athens sent its own soldiers against the Persian soldiers and, at the Battle of Marathon (490 BC), defeated the Persians. Troops from Sparta then came.

At the Battle of Thermopylae, the Spartans were led by Leonidas and resisted the huge Persian army. After a couple of days, a traitor, Ephialtes, led the Persians around the pass behind the Greek army. Realising that defeat was inevitable, Leonidas released many of his men. Those who stayed knew that it would be a fight to the death. Leonides kept elite hoplites (foot soldiers) who had living sons at home. Some Thespians and Thebans who volunteered to stay.

On the third day, Leonidas led his 300 Spartan hoplites and their allies against Xerxes I and his mighty army. The Spartan-led forces fought the Persian force to their deaths to block the pass long enough to keep Xerxes and his army occupied while the rest of the Greek army escaped.

After Thermopylae, many Greeks wanted to go south to the Peloponnese. Because the Isthmus of Corinth, the way into the Peloponnese, is very narrow, many of them wanted to fight the Persians there.

Athens is north of Corinth and had a navy. The Athenian leader Themistocles wanted to fight the Persians by the island of Salamis. Xerxes decided to send his fleet against the Greek fleet before the Greek ships could go to the Peloponnese. The Greek fleet defeated the Persians at the Battle of Salamis. Xerxes then went home with many of his soldiers, but a Persian army stayed in Greece. It was defeated at the Battle of Plataea in 479 BC.

After the Persians' defeat at Platea, the Spartans did very little. However, Persia was still dangerous. Athens asked the Greek city-states on the islands in the Aegean and in Anatolia to join it. They agreed because they were afraid of Persia and formed the Delian League, led by Athens. Many of the city-states of the Delian League had to pay Athens tribute money. Athens used it to build many ships and the Parthenon. During the Peloponnesian War, Sparta was still strong on land, but Athens was stronger on the sea. Several times, there was war between Athens and Sparta. Athens then decided to send many ships to Sicily to Syracuse. Sparta sent help to Syracuse, and Athens was defeated. None of the Athenian ships came back.

Sparta now wanted to build ships to fight Athens. It took a long time for Sparta to defeat Athens, but at the Battle of Aegospotami, the Spartans destroyed most of Athens's ships. The Athenians used advanced ships, called triremes, which had their combat systems and were propelled by oarsmen. On the front of the trireme was a large bronze battering ram. The oarsmen would row the trireme at an enemy boat and ram a hole into its hull. That was the most effective way for the trireme to destroy other boats. The hoplites on the trireme would board the enemy ship and capture it. However, the Athenian fleet of triremes was destroyed in a battle in 405 BC. Athens surrendered the following year, and the war was over. Athens never recovered its previous domination.

Men, when they were not working, fighting, or discussing politics, could at festive times go to watch dramas, comedies, or tragedies. Ancient Greek theatre often involved politics and the gods of Greek mythology. Women were not allowed to perform in the theatre and so male actors played female roles.

Women did domestic work like  spinning, weaving, cleaning, and cooking. They were not involved in public life or politics. Those from rich families, however, had slaves to carry out domestic work for them.

The ecumene (US) or oecumene (UK) is an ancient Greek term for the known world. In antiquity, it was the parts of the world known to Greek geographers, which was basically the Mediterranean world: Europe, Asia and Africa (north of the Atlas Mountains and Egypt). The Greeks were well aware of the Persian Empire, and Alexander the Great's army got as far as parts of what is now Pakistan.

Under the Roman Empire, the term came to mean civilisation itself, which was wider than the Greeks had supposed.

The famous Olympic Games were held at Olympia every four years. They were for men only, and women were not allowed to attend even as spectators. The sports included running, javelin throwing, discus throwing, and wrestling. The games were unusual because their athletes could come from any Greek city-state.

Another competition, the Heraean Games, was held for women, also at Olympus, but at a different time from the men's event.

The rules for girls in Sparta were different from those in other city-states. Girls were trained in the same events as boys because Spartans believed that strong women would produce strong babies, who would become future warriors. Their girl athletes were unmarried and competed while they were nude or wore short dresses. Boys were allowed to watch the athletes in the hope of creating marriages and offspring.

Later, during the classical period, girls could compete in the same festivals as males.

Andy Warhol (Andrew Warhol, Jr.; August 6, 1928   February 22, 1987) was one of the most famous American artists of the latter half of the 20th century. Many people think that Warhol is the "bellwether of the art market".

Warhol was born Andrew Warhola, Jr. in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania on August 6, 1928. He graduated from the Carnegie Institute of Technology before moving to New York City. His first big break was in August 1949 when he was asked to illustrate an article in Glamour Magazine. He dropped the 'a' from the end of his name when the credits read "Drawings by Andrew Warhol". Warhol was also famous for painting Campbells' and Watties' soup cans. He painted about 300 different paintings. He originally worked as a commercial artist. He designed things like advertisements and window displays for stores. He soon became famous as an artist in the Pop Art movement, in which everyday objects and media images were used. One of his most famous paintings is his colourful portrait of American movie star, Marilyn Monroe. After she died, he was deeply moved and wanted to create some sort of memorial.

In 1968, Warhol was shot by Valerie Solanas. He was known for his The Factory studio in New York City where most of his work was created.

In 1987, Warhol was in a hospital in New York City after an operation on his gallbladder. He died in his sleep from a sudden post-operative cardiac arrhythmia, aged 58. His family sued the hospital for inadequate care, saying that the arrhythmia was caused by improper care and water poisoning.

Ancient Egypt was a society that began around 3150 BC and lasted until 30 BC, when it was invaded by the Romans.

Egypt grew along the Nile River and was at its most powerful in the 2nd millennium BC. Its land stretched from the Nile Delta to Nubia, a kingdom located mostly in present-day Sudan.

With the water from the Nile, crops were generally good. They were grown after the water from the Nile floods went down.

The Egyptians created a way of writing using hieroglyphics. They also built huge temples and tombs, traded with other areas, and had a powerful army.

Their religion had many gods, and its priests were powerful and rich. The Egyptian rulers, called pharaohs, were thought to be close to the gods.

People have lived along the Nile for a very long time, according to archaeologists, who study objects left by ancient people. The fertile flood plains of the Nile allowed people to begin farming. By the 10th millennium BC, the people in Egypt had begun growing cereal grains like wheat and barley.

Because they were farming, people stayed in one place, instead of living a nomadic lifestyle like their ancestors. Because they were settled, society became more complex. That was an important step in the history of human civilization.

This period in Egyptian history is called "predynastic," as it happened before the large dynastic kingdoms were formed.

By about 5500 BC, small tribes living in the Nile Valley had developed into a series of cultures. Each had begun farming crops and animals. Each had its own types of pottery and personal items such as combs, bracelets, and beads. In Upper Egypt, the southern part of the country, the Badarian was one of the earliest cultures. It is known for its high-quality pottery, stone tools, and its use of copper. It was followed by the Amratian and the Gerzian cultures.

During some of the Intermediate periods, the traditional system broke down, and the country was divided or invaded by foreign rulers. During some periods, the Egyptian government was challenged and sometimes overthrown. Still, Egypt's culture and climate were relatively stable compared to those of other parts of the Middle East.

Ancient Egypt was divided into many different districts, called sepats. The first divisions were created during the Predynastic Period, but they became small city-states that ruled themselves.

When the first pharaoh came to power, the sepats remained and were much like the counties in many countries today. They stayed basically the same for a long time. There were 42 of them, and each was ruled by a governor, chosen by the pharaoh. In later years. the districts were called nomes, and the governor was called a nomarch.

Ancient Egypt had many different taxes, but there was no real money and so people paid each other with goods or work. The person who watched the tax collection was a scribe, and all of the tax collectors in Egypt had to state every day how many taxes they had collected.

People paid different taxes based on the work that they did; for example, craftsmen paid in goods, and hunters and fishermen paid with food. Every household in the country paid a labour tax every year by helping with work for the country like mining or working on canals. Many rich Egyptians paid poorer people to do the work for them.

This language has been found on pottery carvings. "Archaic" means very old.

This language was used during the Old Kingdom and the First Intermediate Period. It has been found in pyramids and Egyptian tombs. It was the first version of the language to use the plural, which shows that people were discussing more than one object at a time.

This language is called Classic Egyptian. It has been found all over objects and tombs in Egypt, including Egyptian coffins. Books on science and society were written during this time, and many of the things that are known about religion of the time are written in Classic Egyptian. Even after people stopped speaking this kind of Egyptian, writers still used it when they wrote books.

This is the language of the New Kingdom, which was the best time in Egypt's history. Much knowledge was shared during this time, and so many very old books were found that were written in Late Egyptian. Many people believe that this version of the language was much like what the Egyptians spoke.

Egypt had writing called hieroglyphics, which is one of the two oldest written languages in history. (The other is Sumerian cuneiform.) Hieroglyphic writing dates to c. 3200 BC and has around 500 symbols. A hieroglyph represents a word, a sound, or a symbol to show what the sign means. The same symbol can serve different purposes in different contexts.

Hieroglyphs on stone monuments and in tombs were for public purposes. It was art and often propaganda.

Priests used this script for everyday writing on papyrus, wood, or cloth. It was a cursive form of writing, called hieratic, which was quicker and easier to write.

Formal hieroglyphs may be read in rows or columns in either direction but are typically written from right to left. Hieratic was always written from right to left, usually in horizontal rows.

This was the script that ordinary people used and became the main writing style in ancient Egypt. This form of writing and formal hieroglyphs accompanies the Greek text on the Rosetta Stone.

The Coptic script is a modified Greek alphabet. The Coptic language is the last stage of the Egyptian language. (Today, Egyptians speak a dialect of Arabic.)

Some ancient Egyptian literature has survived to the present day. There are teaching texts such as the Maxims of Ptahhotep, the Instructions of Amenemope, and the Ebers papyrus. The Ebers papyrus is one of the earliest medical texts ever found.

Religion was very important to Ancient Egyptians. The centre of any Egyptian town was the temple, a building that was used for everything from the town hall to a university, in addition to its religious services.

Because they were so religious, Egyptians created much art depicting many different kinds of divine (holy) creatures, including the pharaoh, who was thought to be a god.

The afterlife was also very important to Egyptians, who are known for mummifying their dead. The mummies are important to scientists today because they provide information about how the Egyptians lived.

All of the gods were important, but some were more important than others.

Isis was the goddess of the sky. Another major god was Ra, who was the god of the sun. The less well-known god of the Nile and crocodiles was named Sobek, which is a rather unusual name.

Bastet was the goddess of cats and so the Ancient Egyptians mummified cats in her honour. She was also the goddess of protection, joy, and families.

The rich fertile soil came from annual floodings of the Nile River. The ancient Egyptians produced plenty of food, which allowed the population to devote more time and resources to cultural, technological, and artistic pursuits. Ancient Egyptian taxes were assessed based on the amount of land a person owned.

Most animals were kept as food. Some animals were kept as pets. All kinds of animals were important to Egypt. Ancient Egyptians understood the animals that they kept: goats, pigs, ducks, cows, and geese.

Farming in Egypt depended on the cycle of the Nile. The Egyptians recognized three seasons: Akhet (flooding), Peret (planting), and Shemu (harvesting). The flooding season lasted from June to September. The flooding on the river's banks left a layer of mineral-rich silt ideal for growing crops.

After the floodwaters had receded, the growing season lasted from October to February. Farmers plowed and planted seeds in the fields, which were irrigated with ditches and canals. Egypt receives little rainfall and so farmers relied on the Nile to water their crops.p514

From March to May, farmers used sickles to harvest their crops, which were then threshed with a flail to separate the straw from the grain. Winnowing removed the chaff from the grain, which was then ground into flour, brewed to make beer, or stored for later use.p506

Flax plants were grown for the fibres of their stems. The fibres were split along their length and spun into thread, which was used to weave sheets of linen and to make clothing.

Papyrus grew on the banks of the Nile River and was used to make paper.

Vegetables and fruits were grown in garden plots close to homes and on higher ground. They had to be watered by hand. Vegetables included leeks, garlic, melons, squashes, pulses, lettuce, and other crops. In addition, grapes were made into wine.p577; 630

Ancient Egyptians had some advanced medical knowledge for their time. They performed surgery, set broken bones, and even used medicines like honey, breast milk, and gazelle's milk. These had medicinal benefits, but people also thought they kept evil spirits and demons away.

The Edwin Smith papyrus is the world's oldest surviving surgical document, written around 1600 BC. The text provides detailed descriptions of anatomy and the examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of 48 types of medical problems.

Ancient Egyptian pyramids are shaped stone masonry structures. They are the best-known pyramid structures and are some of the largest ever buildings. Over 130 pyramids have been discovered in Egypt. Most were built on the western side of the Nile in desert areas. Egyptian pyramids are often contain chambers and passages and were built as the burial places of the Egyptian kings before the start of the Old Kingdom until the end of the Middle Kingdom. Because the Egyptians kept written records, we know about the building of some pyramids.

The Great Pyramid, at Giza, is the largest and most famous pyramid and was built for Pharaoh Khufu. It is over 140 metres tall and took 20 years to build. It is listed as one of the Seven Wonders of the World.

The step pyramid at Saqqara is the earliest pyramid that is still standing today. Built in 2630 BC, it was a burial place of the Pharaoh Djoser. Its architect was Imhotep.

Engineering was an important activity in Egypt. Engineers measured and surveyed the distance between two points. They designed and made the pyramids, which are nearly perfect geometrically. They also make cement and developed large irrigation networks.

Science was also important. Mathematics was used, and the golden ratio was used in the construction of the pyramids.

Another ability of the Egyptians was glassmaking. Archaeologists have found many pieces of beads, jars, figures, and ornaments in tombs across the nation. In 2005, the remains of an ancient glassmaking factory was found.

Alexander the Great was Alexander III of Macedonia  20/21 July 356 BC – 10/11 June 323 BC). He was king of the  ancient kingdom of Macedonia from 336 BC until his death in 323 BC.

By the age of thirty, he had created one of the largest empires in history, stretching from Greece to northwestern India. He was one of the greatest military leaders of all time. He was born in 356 BC in Pella, the ancient capital of Macedonia.

Alexander was the son of Philip II, King of Macedonia, and Olympias, the princess of neighboring Epirus. Alexander spent his childhood watching his father turn Macedonia into a great military power, and watching him win victory on the battlefields in the Balkans.

Alexander spoke Macedonian. He spread the Macedonian culture throughout Asia.

When Alexander the Great was returning from his battles in the Indian subcontinent, he brought with him an Indian philosopher named Kalanos. While in Persia he requested to be burnt alive as he could no longer stand the journey, his camp accepted this. While dying he proclaimed "I will see you again in Babylon" At first nobody knew what this meant, until Alexander the Great died a year later in Babylon

When he was 13, Philip hired the Macedonian philosopher Aristotle to be Alexander’s personal tutor. During the next three years, Aristotle gave Alexander a training in rhetoric and literature, and stimulated his interest in science, medicine, and philosophy. All of these are important for a ruler, which Alexander later became.

In 340 BC, Philip assembled a large army and invaded Thrace. He left 16 year old Alexander with the power to rule Greece in his absence as regent. But as the Greek army advanced deep into Thrace, the Thracian tribe of Maedi bordering north-eastern Macedonia rebelled and posed a danger to the country. Alexander assembled an army, led it against the rebels, and with swift action defeated the Maedi, captured their stronghold, and renamed it Alexandroupolis.

Alexander became king of Macedonia in 336 BC after his father was assassinated. He became strategos (general or supreme commander). He used this authority to launch his father's military expansion plans. In 334 BC, he invaded Persian-ruled Asia Minor. He began series of campaigns that lasted ten years. Alexander broke the power of Persia in a series of decisive battles, most notably the battles of Issus and Gaugamela. He overthrew the Persian King Darius III and conquered the entire Persian Empire. He married the king's daughter to symbolize the unity of his new empire. At that point, Alexander's empire stretched from the Adriatic Sea to the Indus River.

He invaded the India in 326 BC, and defeated King Porus, who ruled a region in the Punjab. Afterwards they became allies. India at that time was divided into many kingdoms. The army refused to cross the Indus and fight the kings on the other side, so Alexander led them out.

Alexander died in Babylon in 323 BC, of unknown causes. Poison, murder, or a fever after a battle have all been suggested. At his death, he was planning a series of campaigns that would have begun with an invasion of Arabia. In the years following his death, a series of civil wars tore his empire apart. Several states were then ruled by the Diadochi, Alexander's surviving generals and heirs. They fought and conquered each other. The largest surviving piece was the Seleucid Empire.

Alexander's legacy includes the cultural diffusion of Greek ideas and language.  He started some twenty cities that were named after him, most notably Alexandria in Egypt. Alexander's settlement of Macedonian colonists resulted in a new Hellenistic civilization. Signs of this can be seen in the Byzantine Empire in the mid-15th century AD. There were Greek speakers in central and far eastern Anatolia until the 1920s.

Alexander died when he was only 32 years old. He was never defeated in battle. The cause of his death is not known.

In the Hebrew Bible, the Macedon king mentioned in Daniel 8:5–8 and 21–22 (who will conquer the Medes and Persians but then die at the height of his power and have his kingdom broken into four kingdoms) is often taken as a reference to Alexander. Alexander is also mentioned in the first Book of the Maccabees. In the Qur'an, Alexander is known by the Arabic epithet "Dhu al-Qarnayn" (The Two-Horned One).

Anime (アニメ) is Japanese for 'animation'. In Japan, anime is the word used for all animation. Outside of Japan, the term anime refers to Japanese animation, which this article is about.

Some anime is drawn by hand, but anime can also be made with CGI computer animation. There are many types of anime; you can find anime about sports, magic, or romance. These are just some examples. Anime are shown on television, on DVD, VHS, and the Internet, and are used in video games. Also, some animes are just movies, but they have anime characters and animation instead of real people and places. Anime is often based on Japanese comics that are called manga and graphic novels. Sometimes live action (not animation) movies and television series are based on anime.

Over the years, anime has evolved both in terms of artistic techniques and storytelling. From traditional hand-drawn animation to the advent of computer-generated imagery (CGI), anime has embraced technological advancements to enhance its visual appeal. This evolution has broadened the scope of storytelling and allowed for more immersive and visually stunning experiences.

The history of anime begins around 1900, when Japanese filmmakers tried out ways of animation at the same time as the United States, Russia, Germany and France.

The filmmakers in Japan did not have a lot of money to make their movies and not a lot of places where they could film their movies. The people that the filmmakers could use as actors in their movies was also a problem for making Japanese movies. Japanese people look different from people in other places in the world (e.g. if the movie's theme were about Vikings, Ancient Rome or the Black Death pandemic in Medieval Europe), and it was hard for filmmakers to make a movie about places other than Japan with Japanese actors. Movie makers liked animation because then they could have animator draw other places and people that could not be filmed in a normal movie, and the animators could be very creative with the cartoons they made.

During the 1970s, more and more people started to like manga. At the same time, manga were used as the starting point to make anime with the same characters and stories. Animators would take the drawings done by a manga artist and the stories the manga artist wrote, and turn them into the stories and characters of a similar anime. At that time Osamu Tezuka became very popular. Now he is called a "legend" and the "god of manga". Tezuka and other pioneers of anime made a lot of types of stories and styles that are common to anime today. The giant robot genre (known as "mecha" outside Japan) began with manga and anime from Tezuka's ideas. Robot anime like Gundam and Macross became s in the 1980s. Today, the robot genre is still very popular in Japan and worldwide. In the 1980s, anime became very popular in Japan, and saw an increase in production. (Manga is much more popular than anime in Japan.) There are a lot of different kinds of anime that many different kinds of people like besides Mecha, and there are types of anime based on the age of the people (e.g. seinen or shōnen) who might like it or the subject of the anime.

Very popular stories in anime and manga are often translated into other languages, and the words used in the anime or manga will be put into another language where they mean the same thing. That way, people who live outside of Japan and who do not understand Japanese (the language used for dialogue in anime and manga in Japan) can also understand the stories. If a manga or anime is not translated by a company in another country, sometimes people in that country will translate the story to share with other people for free before a company translates it for the general public. This is good because it allows more people to watch anime, but some companies think it is stealing.

In the late 1980s, lots of people in countries other than Japan started to like anime too. In the United States, giant robot anime became popular. In Europe, anime for children became popular. Today, many different kinds of anime are popular all around the world. Anime helped spread in popularity thanks to the internet.

Anime Expo is a convention all about anime. It has mostly cosplay but attendees can also meet anime creators and voice actors.

An antibiotic (or antibacterial) is a chemical compound is made to kill bacteria or slow their growth. They are used as medicines to treat and cure disease caused by bacteria. The first antibiotic discovered was Penicillin, a natural antibiotic produced by a fungus. Production of antibiotics first began in 1939, and in the modern day, they are made by chemical synthesis. Antibiotics can not be used to treat any virus.

Maclyn McCarty explained what it was like before antibiotics:

Antibiotics can be the most effective way of treating bacterial infections. A clue to this might been found in Pasteur's work. He had a culture of anthrax germs that were left exposed to air. They developed colonies of many fungi, but the anthrax bacilli disappeared. Medical science was not, at the time, ready to see the implication of this.

It was 1928 that the study of antibiotics started,a small chance beginning. Alexander Fleming, a London bacteriologist, was culturing staphylococcus. In one Petri dish a mould appeared and spread On the nutrient gelatin of the dish each patch of mould was surrounded by clear ring, free of bacteria. Moreover, the extracted substance was able to clear up infected wounds.

The term antibiotic was first used in 1942 by Selman Waksman and his collaborators in journal articles to describe any substance produced by a microorganism that is  to the growth of other microorganisms in high dilution. This definition cut out substances which kill bacteria, but are not produced by microorganisms, such as gastric juice and hydrogen peroxide. It also excluded synthetic antibacterial compounds such as the sulfonamides. With advances in medicinal chemistry, most of today's antibacterials chemically are modifications of various natural compounds.

Certain bacteria are only affected by specific types of antibiotics. Antibiotics fight infection caused by bacteria. Patients might need different types or different amounts of antibiotics depending on what bacteria is causing their health problems. Because of this, antibiotics should always be used under the supervision of a medical doctor (or other certified medical practitioner). The doctor can also watch for side effects and change the patient's treatment when necessary. Antibiotics are very useful when your body is infected by a bacteria. Antibiotics don't kill virus, so it is useless against a viral infection. A doctor must determine if a patient's infection is of viral or bacterial origin before taking antibiotics, this is another reason why a medical doctor should prescribe antibiotics instead of relying on self-medication.

Teixobactin is the first new antibiotic discovered in forty years. It is active against gram-positive bacteria, including Staphylococcus aureus. It appears to be one of a new class of antibiotics.

Today, people worry that bacteria will not be affected by antibiotics. Bacteria do evolve, and already many strains of bacteria resist regular antibiotics. When exposed to antibiotics, most bacteria die quickly, but some may have mutations which make them slightly less susceptible. These bacteria then multiply and make a large colony which is less affected by the antibiotic.

Part of this problem is caused by the over-use and misuse of antibiotics. If someone is sick with a virus, antibiotics will not affect the virus. Some doctors will still prescribe an antibiotic so the patient feels as though they are being treated for their illness. The other problem is that many people do not use antibiotics correctly. People often stop taking the medicine when they start feeling better. But antibiotics don't kill all of the bad bacteria at once. Bacteria which are more resistant do not die right away. When someone stops taking the antibiotic too quickly, these resistant bacteria can reproduce and survive. Then the antibiotic does not work so well because the bacteria are less affected by it.

Resistance, as discussed in "WHO AWaRe classification for antibiotic stewardship: tackling antimicrobial resistance – a descriptive study from an English NHS Foundation Trust prior to and during the COVID-19 pandemic," illustrates the critical challenge of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). This study demonstrates the pivotal function of the WHO’s AWaRe classification in directing antibiotic use to combat AMR. It stresses the necessity of comprehensive antimicrobial stewardship before and during health crises to maintain antibiotic effectiveness against emerging pathogens.

The Alps (, , , , , , ) is the greatest mountain range of Europe. It reaches from Austria and Slovenia in the east; through Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Germany; to France in the west. The original meaning of the word was 'white'.

The highest mountain in the Alps is Mont Blanc, at , on the Italian–French border.

The Alps stretch from Austria and Slovenia in the east, through Italy, Switzerland, Liechtenstein and Germany to France in the west.

The mountains are divided into the Western Alps and the Eastern Alps. The division is along the line between Lake Constance and Lake Como, following the Rhine (on the north side, in Switzerland) and the river Mera in the South (in Italy). The Western Alps are higher, but their central chain is shorter and curved; they are located in Italy, France and Switzerland.

The Eastern Alps (main ridge system elongated and broad) belong to Austria, Germany, Italy, Liechtenstein, Slovenia and Switzerland.

The highest peaks of the Western Alps are Mont Blanc, 4,808 metres (15,774 ft), Mont Blanc de Courmayeur 4,748 metres (15,577 ft), the Dufourspitze 4,634 metres (15,203 ft) and the other summits of the Monte Rosa group, and the Dom, 4,545 metres (14,911 ft). The highest peak in the Eastern Alps is Piz Bernina, 4,049 metres (13,284 ft). Perhaps the most famous location for tourist to the Alps are the Swiss Alps.

The main chain of the Alps follows the watershed from the Mediterranean Sea to the Wienerwald, Austria, defining partially the northern border of Italy. It then passes over many of the highest and most  peaks in the Alps. From the Colle di Cadibona to Col de Tende it runs to the west before turning to the northwest and then, to the north, near the Colle della Maddalena. Upon reaching the Swiss border, the line of the main chain goes about northeast, a heading it follows until its end near Vienna.

The Union Internationale des Associations d'Alpinisme (UIAA) has  a list of 82 "official" Alpine 4,000-meter (13,123 ft) peaks. The list has many sub-peaks with little prominence, but good for mountaineering. Here are the twelve four-thousanders with at least 1 km prominence.

Karl Blodig was the first person to climb all the main four-thousand meter peaks, round 1900.

The Alpine Club is the oldest organization of mountaineers of the world. It's an organization from Great Britain, formed in 1857.

The reason mountains form is usually the moving together of continental plates of the Earth's crust. The Alps rose as a result of the slow but gigantic pressure of the African plate as it moved north against the stable Eurasian landmass. In particular, Italy (which had been a separate island) got pushed into Europe.

This all took place in the Tertiary period, mostly in the Miocene and Pliocene. That's about 35 to 5 million years ago.

The Alps are just a part of a larger orogenic belt of mountain chains, called the Alpide belt. It reaches through southern Europe and Asia from the Atlantic Ocean most of the way to the Himalayas.

A gap in these mountain chains in central Europe  the Alps from the Carpathians off to the east.  is the cause of the gaps in between.

A great and ancient ocean was once between Africa and Europe, the Tethys Ocean. Now sediments of the Tethys Ocean basin and its Mesozoic and early Cenozoic strata sit high above sea level. Even metamorphic basement rocks are found high on Mont Blanc, the Matterhorn, and other high peaks in the Pennine Alps and Hohe Tauern.

The Alps do not make an impassable block; the common passes have been traveled by since the ancient history for war and commerce, and later by pilgrims, students and tourists.

Mountain passes give paths between mountains, for road, train or foot traffic.  Some are famous, being used for thousands of years.

The Alps are popular both in summer and in winter. The Alps as a place for sightseeing and sports. Winter sports (Alpine and Nordic skiing, snowboarding, tobogganing, snowshoeing, ski tours) can be learned in most regions from December to April. In summer, the Alps are popular with hikers, mountain bikers, paragliders, and mountaineers. There are also alpine lakes which attract swimmers, sailors and surfers. The lower places and bigger towns of the Alps are well served by motorways and main roads, but higher passes and by-roads can be bad even in the summer. Many passes are closed in winter. Many airports around the Alps (and some within), as well as long-distance rail links from all bordering countries, afford large numbers of travelers easy access from abroad. The Alps normally has more than 100 million visitors a year.

The Alps is split into five climate zones, each with a different kind of environment. The climate, plant life and animal life vary on different sections or zones of the mountain.

The Alps is a classic example of what happens when a temperate area at lower altitude gives way to higher land. A rise from sea level into the upper regions causes the temperature to decrease. The effect of mountain chains on winds is to carry warm air belonging to the lower region into an upper zone, where it expands and loses heat, and drops snow or rain.

The typical trees—oak, beech, ash and sycamore maple have a natural height limit: the 'tree line'. Their upper limit matches the change in climate which comes with increasing height. The change from a temperate to a colder climate is also shown true by a change in the wild flowering plant life. This limit normally lies about  above the sea on the north side of the Alps. On the southern slopes, it often reaches to , sometimes even to .

The Alps do not always have the typical trees. People have felled them in many places. Except for the beech forests of the Austrian Alps, forests of the typical deciduous trees are hardly found. Where such woods were, Scots pine and Norway spruce now grow. These trees are less  to the attacks of goats who eat the saplings of deciduous trees.

Above the tree line, there is often a band of  pine trees (Pinus mugo), which is taking place of dwarf shrubs. These shrubs are Rhododendron ferrugineum (on acid soils) or Rhododendron hirsutum (on non-acid soils).

Above this is the alpine meadow. Above the alpine meadow is where plant life becomes less and less common. At these great heights, the plants are likely to make separate groups. In the Alps, many species of flowering plants have been recorded above . These are like Ranunculus glacialis, Androsace alpina and Saxifraga biflora.

The Arab League is an organization made up of countries in the Arab world in Northern Africa and Southwest Asia. Most, though not all of these countries use Arabic as their official language. The purpose is to find ways for the countries to have unity and to work together to solve their problems.

The Arab League a regional organisation, finds its roots in two distinctive influences: Arab nationalism (or Arab nationalist movement), and British government” support.

Arab Nationalism represents a movement that seeks the unity of Arab territories in the Arab world, and expresses a rejection of the Ottoman Empire domination.  This domination limited the sovereignty of these countries in the region.  However, in the beginning of the twentieth century, the control of the Ottoman Empire was facing the rising power control of colonial powers.  France and Great Britain, by the Skyes-Picot agreement, enforced their domination over their mandates from the League of Nations (Syria and Lebanon for France, Iraq and Palestine for Great Britain).  This partition prevented the evolution of Arab nationalist movement by dismantling the region and creating tensions between the countries.

In the second half of the 1930s, two groups emerged around the question of Arab unification. The 'maximalists' (Syria, Iraq, Transjordan) saw a link between unity and "nation" as way to erase the legacies of colonialism. In opposition, the 'minimalists' (Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and Lebanon) expressed a strong rejection for unification but rather a regional association to push toward political, cultural, and economic cooperation without impact on their state sovereignty. In reaction, pan-Arab conferences emerged regarding regional issues such as the Palestine situation.

Before Wolrd War II, Great Britain supported regional actions initiated by Syrian, Lebanese and Iraqi leaders. This support appeared to undermine French influence on its own mandate.

In 1943, Nuri al-Said, former Prime Minister of Iraq under the British mandate, called for an union between Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and Palestine. This union called Arab League would be, for Nuri al-Said, a permanent council with members in charge of defense, communication, education, and the protection of minorities in the region. The Arab League appears then as a general agreement motivated by Arab nationalist movement. A need for collective action to solve problems in the region emerged even more.

In Egypt, from July 1943 to February 1944, discussions on a programme for an 'Arab Union' between the prime minister Mostafa el-Nahhas and representatives of Arab countries take place. In July 1944, the Egyptian Prime Minister calls the Arab countries' delegates to join a conference regarding the consolidation of this project. This conference takes place in Alexandria on September 25,1944 with the Preparatory Comittee and discusses the organisation and the question of state sovereignty in the union. However, this discussion is unstable due to the different positions of the countries: Syria is in favor, Lebanon and Yemen calls for a different form of cooperation. Regarding this, Egypt shows a model that conciliate both side by confirming the maintain of state sovereignty. This model is supported by Saudi Arabia and nuanced by Iraq that express the need of a voluntary arbitration between the members. This conference end in October 7, 1944 by the denomination Alexandria Protocol. This protocol declared the agreement for the establishment of the Arab League, in the spirit of Arab nationalism. From February 14 to March 3,1945, a commitee prepared the draft for the Pact of Arab League. In a second session, the commitee revised and approved the draft. By March 22, 1945, the commitee in the General Arab Conference signed the pact, which confirmed the creation of the Arab League.

The organization uses the Arabic Language in its summits and all official papers, although it has never been stated by the League that Arabic is the Official Language. The Arab League was founded following the Protocol of Alexandria signed in 1945 by seven Arab States: Egypt, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Trans-Jordan (Jordan). Today the League has 24* members. All countries having Arabic as an official language are among the members of the League, except for Eritrea, Isreal and Chad which are not members.:

An international treaty called the "Arab League States" organising the Arab League. This treaty is commonly called "the Pact". It has been signed by the first seven members in 1945.

The Arab League main organ is the Council (article 3 of the Pact). Each state member of the organisation has a representative in the Council with one vote (article 3 of the Pact). When the Council vote on a subject, the members of the League do not have to apply the decision if they voted against it (article 7 of the Pact). The members of the Council meet  twice a year in March and in September (article 11 of the Pact). The president of the Council is one of the state. It changes every ordinary meeting.

The Council chooses a Secretary-General with a two-third vote. The Secretary-General is responsible for the administrative organisation of the meetings. Also, when the Council votes a resolution, the Secretary-General makes sure the decisions are followed by member states.

Ministers of Defense and Ministers of Foreign Affairs from the member states compose the Joint Defense Council.

The members of the Arab League agree not to resolve their conflicts with force (article 3 of the Pact). If there is a conflict between two members of the Arab League, they can call for a resolution of the Council. In that case, the resolution is binding to both countries.

The Arab League is politically involved in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Even before the creation of the League, Arab countries, particularly Saudi Arabia and Iraq had discussions on lobbying in Washington, D.C. and in London to fight zionism. Saudi Arabia even declared: the "danger of Zionism is one that threatens the interests of all Arabs and Muslims."

During the Alexandria conference in 1944, the founders of the Arab League chose Musa Alami to represent the Palestinian Arabs in the conference. In the Pact, the member states declare they support to the "Arabs of Palestine" against Israel.

During a summit in Lebanon in October 1947, the League decided that Arab nations would protect Palestinian territory with their regular armies. However, the member states were not able to agree on how they would implement this decision.

In the 1964 summit in Cairo, the League promoted the creation of a Palestinian entity. It led to the creation of the Palestinian Liberation Organization.

After the 1967 summit in Khartoum, the League issued a declaration called the Khartoum Resolution. It is famous for the "three noes" policy described in article 3 of the declaration."(...) the framework of the main principles by which the Arab States abide, namely, no peace with Israel, no recognition of Israel, no negotiations with it, (...)"

The Archaea (or Archea) are a group of single-celled organisms. The name comes from Greek αρχαία, "old ones". They are a major division of living organisms.

Archaea are tiny, simple organisms. They were originally discovered in extreme environments (extremophiles), but are now thought to be common to more average conditions. Many can survive at very high (over 80 °f) or very low temperatures, or highly salty, acidic or alkaline water. Some have been found in geysers, black smokers, oil wells, and hot vents in the deep ocean. Recent research has found ammonia-eating archaea in soil and seawater.

In the past they had been classed with bacteria as prokaryotes (or Kingdom Monera) and named archaebacteria, but this is a mistake. The Archaea have an independent evolutionary history and show many differences in their biochemistry from other forms of life. They are now classified as a separate domain in the three-domain system. In this system, the three distinct branches of evolutionary descent are the Archaea, Bacteria and Eukaryota.

Archaea are, like bacteria, prokaryotes: single-celled organisms that do not have nuclei and cell organelles of the eukaryote type.

The following table compares some major characteristics of the three domains, to illustrate their similarities and differences. Many of these characteristics are also discussed below.

Antonín Leopold Dvořák (8 September 1841  1 May 1904) was a Czech composer. Along with Smetana and Janáček, Dvorak is one of three famous composers who wrote nationalist Czech music. He wrote chamber music including several string quartets, piano music, songs, operas, oratorios and nine symphonies. The last of his symphonies is known as the New World Symphony because he wrote it in the United States (the “New World”). The slow movement with its solo played on the cor anglais is especially famous.

Dvořák was born in a village near Prague, Czechoslovakia (Today Prague is the capital city of the Czech Republic) but in those days it was part of the Austrian Empire until 1867 after the Austro-Prussian War Of 1866 when it became Austria-Hungary . His father was a butcher and innkeeper. He also played the zither and composed a few simple dances.

The young Antonín started to have violin lessons from the village schoolmaster. Soon he was playing the violin in his father’s inn, in local churches and in the village band. Just before his 12th birthday he left school and started to learn how to be a butcher. A year later he left home to go to school in Zlonice. He learned a lot about music there, and he also learned German. His teacher persuaded Dvořák's parents that he should have a musical career, so they sent him to study music in Prague at the Organ School. He continued to learn German, and he became a good viola player and played in concerts and in the Estates Theatre when they needed a big orchestra for Wagner’s operas Lohengrin and Tannhäuser.

When Dvořák had finished his studies he got his first job playing in a band in restaurants and for balls. This was a time when there was suddenly a great interest in national culture in Bohemia. Plays and operas were allowed to be performed in the Czech language. The band he played with became part of the Bohemian Provisional Theater Orchestra, which from 1866 was conducted by Bedřich Smetana. Dvořák was principal viola player in the orchestra. He earned extra money by teaching, and he started to compose.

In 1871 he left the orchestra so that he could spend more time composing. For several years he still had to teach in order to earn enough money to live. He wrote a cantata The heirs of the White Mountain which was a great success. In 1874 he wrote an opera King and Charcoal Burner, but the opera house did not want it. This made Dvořák realize that he had to be more self-critical. He destroyed a lot of his compositions which he thought were not his best works. He decided he must not compose like Wagner, but that he needed to find his own style of composing.

In 1873 he married. He got a job as church organist. His Third Symphony was performed at a concert conducted by Smetana. Dvořák rewrote his opera King and Charcoal Burner, using completely different music. It was performed in 1874. He composed a lot more music.

In 1877 he had a letter from Hanslick to say that he had won a prize of 600 gulden and that the great composer Johannes Brahms was interested in his music. His music started to be published by Simrock, a well-known German music publisher, and his music was performed in many countries, even as far away as New York. His fame spread. Even his operas were performed abroad. Dimitrij was particularly successful. Brahms was a great friend and helped him a lot. Brahms and Hanslick tried to persuade him to move to Vienna because it was a great musical city, but Dvořák wanted to stay in his own country.

Dvořák's Slavonic Dances were published in 1878 and have always been very popular. The conductor Hans Richter conducted the Slavonic Rhapsody no 3 in Vienna. His Stabat Mater (1880) was performed abroad, and Dvořák was invited to visit England in 1884. He became very popular in England and went there many times. The English choirs liked to sing his choral works. His Requiem Mass was given its first performance in Birmingham at the Triennial Music Festival. He was given an honorary degree from Cambridge University. Tchaikovsky invited him to Russia in 1890.

From 1892 to 1895, Dvořák was the director of the National Conservatory of Music in New York City. He earned a lot of money: $15,000 a year. Dvořák was interested in the music of black Americans. He met the student Harry T. Burleigh, one of the earliest African-American composers, who introduced him to traditional American Spirituals.

In the winter and spring of 1893, while in New York, Dvořák wrote his most popular work, the Symphony No.9, "From the New World". He spent the summer of 1893 with his family in the Czech-speaking community of Spillville, Iowa, where some of his cousins lived. He also composed chamber music there, including a String Quartet in F which is known as the “American”, and a Sonatina for Violin and Piano.

In 1895, Dvořák wrote his Cello Concerto in B minor, which was to become one of his most popular works. However, he wanted to go back to his own country. He was also not being paid all his salary. He heard that he had been made an honorary member of the Gesellschaft der Musikfreunde in Vienna. He decided to return to Bohemia and continue his job as professor of composition at the Prague Conservatory.

During his last years, Dvořák spent most of his time writing operas. Rusalka is particularly popular, especially the famous aria for soprano To the Moon. The opera is about a fairy-tale and the story is based on Hans Anderson’s story of the Little Mermaid. In 1896 he visited London for the last time to hear the first performance of his Cello Concerto. In 1897 his daughter married his pupil, the composer Josef Suk.

Dvořák wrote lots of kinds of music. Although he based his style on the classical forms such as those of Beethoven, they also show the influence of Czech Richard Wagner . He lived at a time when Nationalistic feelings were felt very strongly by the Czech people. Smetana wrote music which was very Czech in character. Dvořák learned from Smetana’s music, but never imitated his style. Only five of his nine symphonies were known in his lifetime. When the other four were discovered and published in the 1960s the symphonies were all renumbered. The last three symphonies, numbers 7, 8 and 9 (which used to be called numbers 2, 4 and 5) are the most often performed. The Ninth Symphony: From the New World is one of the most popular symphonies ever written. The two sets of Slavonic Dances are extremely well-known. They are often played as a piano duet. He wrote concertos for the violin, cello and piano. Dvořák wrote many operas (the best known of which is Rusalka); chamber music (including a number of string quartets, and quintets); songs; choral music; and piano music.

Slavonic rhapsody: The life of Antonín Dvořák, by Barthold Fles

Antonio Vivaldi (born Venice, 4 March 1678; died Vienna, 28 July 1741) was an Italian composer. He was the most important composer in Italy at the end of the Baroque period.

Vivaldi wrote more than 400 concertos for various instruments, especially for the violin. The scores of 21 of his operas, including his first and last, are still intact. His most popular work is the group of four violin concertos called "The Four Seasons".  Each concerto describes a season: spring, summer, autumn, and winter. He is believed to be the inventor of the ritornello form.

Vivaldi probably was taught to play the violin by his father, who was professional musician. He trained to be a priest, and because of his red hair, he became known as il Prete Rosso, which means "the red priest". He did not work as a priest for very long, and in 1703, he began teaching violin to girls at an orphanage in Venice, the Pio Ospedale della Pietà. The name means "Devout Hospital of Mercy". The girls were chosen because they showed exceptional musical abilities. They gave regular concerts, so as part of his duties Vivaldi wrote music for them to play. He lost the job between 1709 and 1711, when he was reappointed. He also took on the extra job of writing sacred music for the girls' choir. He continued teaching until 1716 when he was put in charge of all the music events.

Vivaldi's music was becoming well known. During his break from teaching between 1709 and 1711 he wrote a large number of works including violin sonatas and concertos. In 1711 he wrote a collection of 12 concertos, L'estro armonico op.3, for one, two and four solo violins was published by Etienne Roger in Amsterdam. This made him famous throughout Europe, and musicians coming to Venice would visit Vivaldi for lessons. Further new publications of his music made him even more famous. The first of his many operas, Ottone in villa, was performed in 1713. His first oratorio, Juditha Triumphans devicta Holofernis barbaric, was performed by the girls from the Pietà in 1716.So Vivaldi composed over 800 hundred pieces and nearly 50 operas!

In 1718 Vivaldi left Venice and moved to Mantua, where he became the director of music for the governor, Prince Philip of Hesse-Darmstadt. He composed his famous "Four Seasons" as well as several operas during this time. He went to Rome in about 1721, where he performed on several occasions for the Pope. While he was travelling, he continued to write music for the girls at the Pietà, over the years he sent them about 140 concertos. He went to a number of cities in Europe to have his operas performed including Vienna, Verona, and Prague. He often went back to Venice to rehearse his music with the girls.

Even though his music was popular, Vivaldi did not make a lot of money from his music. As newer musicians, and more modern styles became popular, he found it more difficult to earn a living. He moved to Austria to play for royalty but when the king died, he became poor and had no way to return home. He died, a poor man, in Vienna, on 28 July 1741.

Akira Kurosawa (March 23, 1910 – September 6, 1998) was a Japanese movie director. Kurosawa's movies are liked in Japan. Kurosawa's movies are also liked by people in other countries. He made 30 movies in 50 years. He is thought to be one of the most important movie directors.

In many of his famous movies, including Rashomon and The Seven Samurai, he worked with the actor Toshiro Mifune.

Kurosawa started in the Japanese movie industry in 1936.  Before he worked a little bit as a painter. After years of working on many movies as an assistant director and scriptwriter, he became a director in 1943.  This was during World War II with the popular action movie Sanshiro Sugata (a.k.a. Judo Saga).

Rashomon, was first shown in Tokyo in August 1950.  On September 10, 1951 it was the surprise winner of the Golden Lion at the Venice Film Festival.  It then was shown in Europe and North America. Because the movie was so well liked, it made people in the western world want to see more Japanese movies.  This helped make other Japanese movie makers become successful. In the 1950s and early 1960s, Kurosawa directed about one movie each year.

In 1990, he accepted the Academy Award for Lifetime Achievement. After he died, he was named "Asian of the Century" in the "Arts, Literature, and Culture" category by AsianWeek magazine and CNN.

Akira Kurosawa known for influential, character-rich films exploring morality, often collaborating with Toshiro Mifune. His work blends Japanese tradition with dynamic visuals, symbolism, and humanism.

Alexander Sergeyevich Pushkin was born 6 June (26 May, Old Style) 1799, Moscow, and died 10 February 1837 (29 January, New Style), St Petersburg. He was a Russian poet, novelist, dramatist and writer of short stories.

Many think he was the greatest Russian poet. He started the great tradition of Russian literature. Pushkin wrote in a way that no other Russian had done before: he used the Russian language as it was spoken instead of writing in a style based on old church books. His influence on other Russian writers was enormous and several Russian composers set his stories and poems to music. His poetry is very hard to translate well into other languages because the words are full of special meanings in Russian culture. His novels, especially Eugene Onegin, are widely read.

Pushkin’s great-grandfather was an African slave who was set free by Tzar Peter the Great. Pushkin was killed in a duel in 1837 at the age of 37.

Pushkin's father came from an old aristocratic family. On his mother's side Pushkin had African ancestors. His great-grandfather Abram Gannibal was an Abyssinian who was living in a palace of the Turkish sultan in Istanbul. The Russian ambassador bought him as a present for Peter the Great, the tsar of Russia. Gannibal became a favourite of Peter the Great and he was sent to Paris to study. He became very rich. Pushkin was proud of his great-grandfather and wrote about him in a novel called The Negro of Peter the Great.

In 19th century Russia all aristocratic families learned to speak French, so Pushkin and his brother and sister spoke and wrote in French more than in Russian. The children were cared for by a nurse, Arina Rodionovna Yakovleva. It was the nurse who taught them to love the Russian language. She told the children Russian folktales. Pushkin also spoke Russian to the peasants and he read many books in his father's library.

When he was 12 he went to a new school called the Imperial Lyceum at Tsarskoye Selo. Years later this school was renamed Pushkin after their famous pupil. He soon started writing romantic poems in Russian using Russian tales of heroes and adventures. Ruslan and Ludmila was a poem that was later to be made into an opera by Mikhael Glinka.

In 1817, Pushkin got a job in the foreign office at St. Petersburg. He soon became interested in politics and supported the Decembrist revolt of 1825 when a group of noblemen and army officers tried to put another tsar in power and make him less powerful. Pushkin wrote some political poems. The result was that he was told he had to leave St. Petersburg. He had to spend six years in exile in the south of the country: in the Caucasus and the Crimea. He wrote about his experiences in the south in several romantic narrative poems (long poems which tell a story). He started work on a novel in verse called Yevgeny Onegin (or Eugene Onegin). He did not finish it until 1833. This was to be his most famous work. It was used by many musicians including Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky who made it into an opera. The poem shows typical Russian people in the society of his day.

Pushkin was angry that he was still in exile and he wrote many letters to his friends. Many of these letters were later published. He spent a lot of time drinking, gaming and fighting with swords. He fell in love with the daughter of a Count for whom he was working. The Count managed to get Pushkin exiled to his mother's estate near Pskov at the other end of Russia. Pushkin spent two years here. He was lonely, but he studied Russian history and talked to the peasants. The poems he wrote were full of ideas from Russian culture. He wrote one of his major works: Boris Godunov, a drama about a story from Russian history. The composer Modest Mussorgsky later made an opera from it. Boris Godunov was a cruel tsar in the 17th century. Pushkin's play shows that the ordinary people had a lot of power. This made it difficult for Pushkin to get it published.

After the revolt in 1825 the new tsar Nicholas I realized that Pushkin was by now very famous. He also realized that he had not taken part in the revolt, so he allowed him to return. The tsar said that he himself would censor Pushkin's works before they were allowed to be published. He said that he was going to be a good tsar and help the poor people (the serfs) to become free. Pushkin was in a difficult position because he could not write anything that the tsar would not like.

He had to be very careful not to say bad things about the rulers of the country. The police watched him very carefully. Yet at this time Pushkin wrote a large number of great works, almost each one of them being the first of their kind in Russian literature. One example is the short story The Queen of Spades, which Tchaikovsky made into an opera and which was to be a great influence on the novels of Fyodor Dostoevsky.

In his last years, Pushkin was again in government service in St. Petersburg. He married in 1831 and had to spend a lot of time in society at court. He wrote more and more prose. He wrote a history of Peter the Great and a historical novel The Captain's Daughter. He kept asking the tsar to let him resign from his job and go to the country to spend his time writing. The tsar would not allow that. In 1837, Pushkin was killed in a duel. He had been forced to fight the duel in order to defend his wife's honour.

The Russian language today would be very different if it had not been for Pushkin. Using the language as it was spoken by the people he made it into a language which was simple but which could also express deep feelings. His works were a great influence on later writers like Ivan Turgenev, Ivan Goncharov and Leo Tolstoy. Yevgeny Onegin was the first Russian novel which told a story about the society of the time. His works have been translated into all the major languages

The Arabic alphabet, otherwise referred to as the Arabic abjad, is an abjad that is used to write several languages of the Middle East such as Arabic, Persian, Pashto and Urdu. The script is the third most widely used script in the world, after the Latin and Chinese scripts.

The script is written from right to left. When it is used to write the Arabic language, the script has 31 different letters. Usually only consonants are written in an abjad. Vowels are omitted most of the time. The Arabic script is a cursive script. This means that letters of a word are joined together, both in handwriting and in print. Each letter can have up to four different forms. Which of the forms is used depends on the letters before and after it. There is no different form for uppercase letters and lowercase letters.

There are two basic modern variants of the Arabic script. One is called Naskh, it is the one commonly used for printing. The most common script in everyday life is called Kufic, after the city Kufa, in Iraq, where it was developed. There are several variants of both scripts.

The alphabet can also be used to write numbers, which was common in the Middle Ages. They are less used today and usually replaced by Latin-alphabet (Arabic) numbers.

When the alphabet is used to write numbers,  () is 0,  () is 1,  () is 2,  () is 3 and so on.  That is sometimes used to produce chronograms in which specific letters, interpreted as numerals, stand for a particular date when they are rearranged.

For dictionaries, it is necessary to put the letters into a predetermined sequence, which is usually called sort order, or alphabetical order. The Arabic script has two sort orders: The one, abjid, derives from the position of the letters in the Phoenician alphabet. The other, hijā, sorts letters by similarity of shape.

As Islam spread throughout the Middle East, North Africa, and Asia, Arabic spread along with it. Islam requires its followers to learn Arabic because it states that Gabriel (Jibril) spoke the words of Allah to Muhammad in Arabic. The language is used for Muslim rituals such as prayer and the reciting of Quranic verses. As Arabic spread, the Quran's script also spread. It replaced the Pahlavi writing system as Islam conquered Persia.

Another alphabet, the Uighur alphabet, was based on the shapes of Arabic letters. However, the Uighur alphabet always has vowel letters, unlike in Arabic.

After the fall of the Ottoman Empire during the First World War, use of the Arabic language and alphabet, became less common in the Muslim world. The Turkic states and other Muslim-majority states controlled by the Soviet Union did not favour Arabic script. In 1928, Turkey passed a law that banned the use of the Arabic alphabet for writing Turkish, which is now written with the Latin alphabet.

Around the same time, the Soviet Union created a Latin alphabet for the Central Asian states that it occupied: Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan. The decision to replace the Arabic alphabet was mostly to remove religious influence in Central Asia and to modernise the region. For a time, Soviet leaders, including Vladimir Lenin, believed the Latin alphabet was the "world alphabet" because it was the writing system of most developed countries. However, the Soviet Union then required the Central Asian states to write only in the Cyrillic script. That was to influence local cultures and languages to become more like those of Russia.

After  the Dissolution of the Soviet Union, none of the Central Asian nations returned to using the Arabic alphabet. They either kept using the Cyrillic, like Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, or adopted a new Latin alphabet, like Azerbaijan. Only Tajikistan is considering switching back to using the Arabic alphabet. Tajik was once a dialect of Persian.

In Southeast Asia, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, and Brunei have adopted for Malay the Latin alphabet, which is called Rumi in Malay. The British and Dutch colonialists introduced the Latin alphabet. The Arabic alphabet (Jawi in Malay) is still used in Malaysia but much less than Rumi. Brunei is the only Southeast Asian country in which both the Latin and Arabic alphabets are co-official.

Anton Pavlovich Chekhov (January 29, 1860 - July 15, 1904) was a Russian writer who wrote short stories and plays.

Anton Chekhov was born in Taganrog, which is a city in Russia. His father, Pavel, was the owner of a grocery store. His mother, Yevgeniya, sometimes told Anton stories about her childhood.

In 1876, Chekhov's father went bankrupt. From then on, Chekhov's family was very poor. Anton Chekhov had to pay for his own education. He paid for it by tutoring (teaching) other students, catching birds and selling them, and writing short stories for newspapers. When he had extra money, he sent it to his family. While he was at school, he read many books by famous authors, for example Miguel de Cervantes and Arthur Schopenhauer.

While he was at Moscow University, Chekhov wrote many short stories to pay for his schooling and to help his family. In 1886, one of the most famous newspapers in Russia, New Times, asked him to write stories for them. Soon, his stories started to get famous, and other writers read his work and liked it. He wrote a book of stories called At Dusk that won the Pushkin Prize, an award for good writing.

In 1887, Chekhov wrote a play called Ivanov. Chekhov did not like the play, but critics loved it.

In 1890, Chekhov went to Sakhalin Island, a penal colony (prison). He talked to many prisoners and found out that they were treated very badly. The prisoners were often beaten. There were also children there. He was angry, and wrote about it in a book called The Island Of Sakhalin and in a short story called The Murder.

In 1892, he bought a house and some land near Moscow called Melikhovo. While he was there, he helped the people who lived nearby. He brought them food and clothing, and medicine when they were sick. Since he was trained as a doctor, he knew how to take care of them.

While at Melikhovo, he started to write a play called The Seagull. When it was first performed, it went very badly, and the audience did not like it. Later, it was performed at another theater, the Moscow Art Theater, where the performances went better. Soon after this, he had another play performed, called Uncle Vanya. He later wrote two more great plays: Three Sisters and The Cherry Orchard. All four plays are still often performed today.

In 1897, he became sick. Doctors told him that he had tuberculosis, a lung disease, and that he should change his life to be healthier. He moved to Yalta and bought a house there. In 1901 he married a woman named Olga Knipper. At Yalta, he wrote some of his most famous stories, including a story called The Lady With The Dog.

By 1904, Chekhov was very sick. He died on the 15th of July in Germany. Thousands of people were very sad when he died. He was buried in Novodevichy Cemetery.

Chekhov influenced many important writers, including George Bernard Shaw, James Joyce, and Virginia Woolf. His short stories are still read by many people around the world.

Albrecht Dürer (21 May 1471 – 6 April 1528) was a Hungarian-German painter, engraver and mathematician.

He was born on 21 May 1471 and died on 6 April 1528 in Nuremberg, Germany and is best known as a maker of old master prints. His prints were often in a series, so that there is a group of different prints about a subject.  The most famous series are the Apocalypse (1498) and his two series on the passion of Christ, the Great Passion (1498–1510) and the Little Passion (1510–1511).

Dürer's best known individual engravings (that is, ones that are not part of a series) include Knight, Death, and the Devil (1513), Saint Jerome in his Study (1514) and Melencolia I (1514). His most iconic images are his woodcuts of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (1497–1498) from the Apocalypse series, the Rhinoceros, and numerous self-portraits in oils.  Dürer possibly did not cut his own woodblocks but may have employed a skilled carver who followed his drawings faithfully. He painted a number of religious works in oils and made many brilliant watercolours and drawings, which through modern reproductions are now perhaps his best known works.

Dürer's prints made him famous across Europe before 30, with many people hailing him as the greatest artist of the Renaissance in Northern Europe.

Dürer was the third child and second son of his parents, who had between fourteen and eighteen children. His father was a successful goldsmith from Ajtós, near Gyula in Hungary.

Dürer's godfather was Anton Koberger, who left goldsmithing to become a printer and publisher in the year Dürer was born. He quickly became the most successful publisher in Germany, and owned twenty-four printing presses and had many offices in Germany and abroad. His most famous publication was the Nuremberg Chronicle, published in 1493 in German and Latin. It had 1,809 woodcut pictures by the Wolgemut workshop. Dürer may well have worked on some of these, as the work on the project began while he was with Wolgemut.

Dürer had started to learn goldsmithing and drawing from his father. His father wanted him to continue his training as a goldsmith, but he was so good at drawing that he started as an apprentice to Michael Wolgemut at the age of fifteen in 1486. A self-portrait, a drawing in silverpoint, is dated 1484 (Albertina, Vienna). Wolgemut was the leading artist in Nuremberg at the time, and had a large workshop making different types of works of art, in particular woodcuts for books. Nuremberg was a rich city, a centre for publishing and many luxury trades. It had strong links with Italy, especially Venice, a relatively short distance across the Alps.

After completing his term of apprenticeship in 1489, Dürer followed the common German custom of taking a wanderjahre — in effect a gap year.  Dürer was away nearly four years, travelling through Germany, Switzerland, and probably, the Netherlands. Dürer wanted to meet Martin Schongauer, the best engraver of Northern Europe, but Schongauer died shortly before Dürer's arrival. He stayed at the house of Schongauer's brother, and got some pictures that Schongauer owned.

His first painted self-portrait is now in the Louvre.  It was painted in Strasbourg, probably so that Dürer could send it back to his fiancée in Nuremberg. In fact, very soon after he got back to Nuremberg, on 7 July 1494 Dürer was married to Agnes Frey. She was the daughter of a well known brass worker (and amateur harpist) in the city. He was 23, and the marriage was arranged while Dürer was away travelling. his absence.  They had no children, and most people think that they did not marry for love, but because it was good to link the two families.  Also, a single man could not set up in business for himself in Nuremberg. Dürer painted some portraits of his wife, but experts say that they "lack warmth".  The experts think that if Dürer loved his wife he would have taken more time over those pictures to make her look more beautiful and friendly.

Within three months Dürer left for Italy.  The start of plague in Nuremberg was one reason for his leaving.

In Italy, he went to Venice where artists were working in a more modern style.  Dürer wrote that Giovanni Bellini was the oldest and still the best of the artists in Venice.

On his return to Nuremberg in 1495, Dürer opened his own workshop. He started to use what he learned in Italy more and more, so his work was quite different from the other artists in Nuremberg who used only the traditional German style.

Dürer probably did not cut any of the woodblocks himself.  This was a job for experts.  But he had designed and cut woodblocks for woodcut as part of his training in Wolgemut's studio, and he had seen  many carved and painted altarpieces made in the studio.  This means he knew what could be made into a woodblock print, and how to work with the expert block cutters. Dürer either drew his design directly onto the woodblock itself, or glued a paper drawing to the block. Either way his drawing was destroyed when the block was cut.

His famous series of sixteen great designs for the Apocalypse are dated 1498. He made the first seven scenes of the Great Passion in the same year, and a little later, a series of eleven on the Holy Family and saints. Around 1503–1505 he produced the first seventeen of a set illustrating the life of the Virgin, which he did not finish for some years. Neither these, nor the Great Passion, were published as sets until several years later, but prints were sold individually in considerable numbers.

The Venetian artist Jacopo de' Barbari, whom Dürer had met in Venice, visited Nuremberg in 1500, and Dürer said that he learned much about the new developments in perspective, anatomy, and Body proportions from him. de'Barbari did not want to tell Dürer everything he knew, so Dürer began his own studies, and he kept studying for the rest of his life.  This is a series of drawings show Dürer's experiments in human proportion, before he made his famous engraving of Adam and Eve (1504). This is the only existing engraving signed with his full name.

Dürer made large numbers of other practice drawings, especially for his paintings and engravings, and many survive, most famously the Praying Hands (1508 Albertina, Vienna).  He also continued to make images in watercolour and bodycolour (usually combined), including a number of very beautiful still lives of meadow sections or animals, including his "Hare" (1502, Albertina, Vienna).

In early 1506, he returned to Venice and stayed there until the spring of 1507.  By this time Dürer's engravings were very popular and were being copied. In Venice he was given a valuable commission from the emigrant German community for the church of San Bartolomeo.  This was the altar-piece known as the Adoration of the Virgin or the Feast of Rose Garlands.  It includes portraits of members of Venice's German community, but shows a strong Italian influence. Later, the Emperor Rudolf II took it to Prague. Other paintings Dürer made in Venice include, The Virgin and Child with the Goldfinch, Christ disputing with the Doctors (supposedly produced in just five days), and a number of smaller works.

Dürer was admired by the Venetians, but he was back in Nuremberg by mid-1507. He stayed in Germany until 1520. His reputation had spread throughout Europe. He was on friendly terms with most of the major artists of Europe, and exchanged drawings with Raphael.

The years between  and his journey to the Netherlands are divided according to the type of work he made. During the first five years, 1507–1511, after his return from Venice Dürer mostly painted. He made his four best  paintings, Adam and Eve (1507), Virgin with the Iris (1508), the altarpiece the Assumption of the Virgin (1509), and the Adoration of the Trinity by all the Saints (1511). During this period he also completed the two woodcut series, the Great Passion and the Life of the Virgin.

He complained that painting did not make enough money, so from 1511 to 1514 he concentrated on printmaking. The famous works he made in this period were the thirty-seven woodcuts for the Little Passion, published first in 1511, and a set of fifteen small engravings on the same theme in 1512. In 1513 and 1514 he created his three most famous engravings, The Knight, Death, and the Devil (or simply, The Knight, as he called it, 1513), Melencolia I, and St. Jerome in his Study (both 1514).

'Melencolia I' has a magic square which is believed to be the first seen in European art. The two numbers in the middle of the bottom row give the date of the engraving, 1514.

In 1515, he created his woodcut of the Rhinoceros.  The rhinoceros was in Lisbon, but Durer never saw it.  He made it from a sketch and description from another artist.  It was not very lifelike, but still being used in some German school science text-books early last century.  The rhinoceros was from an  extinct Indian species.

Up to 1520 he produced a wide range of works, including portraits in tempera on linen, experiments in etching on plates of iron, and parts of the Triumphal Arch and the Triumphs of Maximilian which were huge woodcut projects ordered by Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor.

In the summer of 1520 Dürer made his fourth and last major journey.

He wanted to renew the Imperial pension Maximilian had given him. Maximilian had died in 1519, so the  city of Nuremberg stopped paying it.  Dürer also needed new patrons following the death of Maximilian, and to avoid an outbreak of sickness in Nuremberg.

He took his wife and her maid and left Nuremberg for the Netherlands in July 1520, to be at the coronation of the new emperor, Charles V. He travelled by the Rhine to Cologne, and then to Antwerp, where he made many drawings in silverpoint, chalk, and charcoal.

Dürer went to Aachen for the coronation, but also made trips to Cologne, Nijmegen, 's-Hertogenbosch, Brussels, Bruges, Ghent, and Zeeland. In Brussels he saw "the things which have been sent to the king from the golden land" — the Aztec treasure that Hernán Cortés had sent home to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V following the fall of Mexico. Dürer wrote that this treasure trove "was much more beautiful to me than miracles.  These things are so precious that they have been valued at 100,000 florins".  Dürer appears to have been collecting for his own cabinet of curiosities, and he sent back to Nuremberg various animal horns, a piece of coral, some large fish fins, and a wooden weapon from the East Indies.

Dürer took many prints with him.  He wrote in his diary to whom he gave, exchanged, or sold them, and for how much. This is some of the few times the price of prints was recorded, so historians think it very important to show the values of prints compared to paintings at that time.  Dürer returned home in July 1521.  He had an unknown illness which stayed with him for the rest of his life, and slowed his rate of work.

Back in Nuremberg, Dürer started work on a series of religious pictures. There are many practice sketches and studies (practice paintings for a bigger painting) but no big paintings from this time.  This was partly because of his illness, but more because of the time he spent preparing to write books about geometry and perspective, the proportions of men and horses, and fortification.

His writings show that Dürer was highly sympathetic to Martin Luther, and he may have been influential in the City Council declaring for Luther in 1525. However, he died before religious divisions had hardened into different "Catholic" and "Protestant"churches.  Dürer probably thought of himself as a reform-minded Catholic.

Dürer died in Nuremberg at the age of 56.  He left money and goods worth 6,874 florins - a considerable sum. His workshop was a part of his large house.  His widow lived there until her death in 1537.  The house is now a museum.

An algorithm is a list of steps that can be followed to solve a problem using a limited number of steps. For example, a recipe is an algorithm to prepare a dish in a limited amount of time.

The words 'algorithm' and 'algorism' come from the name of a Persian mathematician called Al-Khwārizmī (Persian: خوارزمی, c. 780–850).

In computing, an algorithm is a precise list of operations that could be done by a Turing machine.

For the purpose of computing, algorithms are written in pseudocode, flow charts, or programming languages.

There is usually more than one way to solve a problem. There may be many different recipes to make a certain dish which looks different but ends up tasting the same when all is said and done. The same is true for algorithms. However, some of these ways will be better than others. If a recipe needs lots of complicated ingredients that you do not have, it is not as a good as a simple recipe. When we look at algorithms as a way of solving problems, often we want to know how long it would take a computer to solve the problem using a particular algorithm. When we write algorithms, we like our algorithm to take the least amount of time so that we can solve our problem as quickly as possible.

In cooking, some recipes are more difficult to do than others, because they take more time to finish or have more things to keep track of.

It is the same for algorithms, and algorithms are better when they are easier for the computer to do.  The thing that measures the difficulty of an algorithm is called complexity.  When we ask how complex an algorithm is, often we want to know how long it will take a computer to solve the problem we want it to solve.

This is an example of an algorithm for sorting cards with colors on them into piles of the same color:

These are examples of algorithms for sorting a stack of cards with many different numbers, so that the numbers are in order.

Players start with a stack of cards that have not been sorted.

This algorithm goes through the stack of cards, one card at a time. This card is compared to the next card in the stack. Please note that this position only changes in step 6.  This algorithm is called bubble sort. It is slow.

Let us take a stack of the cards with the numbers "5 1 4 2 8", and sort it from smallest number to biggest one using this algorithm. In each step, the algorithm compares the elements written in bold. The top of the stack of cards is on the left-hand side.

( 5 1 4 2 8 )  ( 1 5 4 2 8 ) Here, the algorithm compares the first two elements, and swaps them.

( 1 4 2 5 8 )  ( 1 4 2 5 8 ) These elements are already in order, so the algorithm does not swap them.

Now, the stack of cards is already sorted, but our algorithm does not know this. The algorithm needs one whole pass without any swap to know it is sorted.

This is an easy-to-understand algorithm for sorting. Computer scientists called it Bubble sort, because smaller elements will rise to the top, changing their position in each run. Unfortunately, the algorithm is not very good, because it needs a long time (many passes through the stack of cards) to sort it.

This algorithm uses another idea. Sometimes solving a problem is difficult, but the problem can be changed so it is made of simpler problems that are easier to solve. This is called recursion. It is more difficult to understand than the first example, but it will give a better algorithm.

This works with two stacks of cards. One of them is called A, the other is called B. There is a third stack that is empty at the start, called C. At the end, it will contain the result.

John von Neumann developed this algorithm in 1945. He did not call it Sorting by numbers, he called it Mergesort. It is a very good algorithm for sorting, compared to others.

The first algorithm takes much longer to sort the cards than the second, but it can be improved (made better). Looking at bubble sort, it can be noticed that cards with high numbers move from the top of the stack quite quickly, but cards with low numbers at the bottom of the stack take a long time to rise (move to the top).

This algorithm was developed by C. A. R. Hoare in 1960. It is one of most widely used algorithms for sorting today. It is called Quicksort.

If players have cards with colors and numbers on them, they can sort them by color and number if they do the "sorting by colors" algorithm, then do the "sorting by numbers" algorithm to each colored stack, then put the stacks together.

The sorting-by-numbers algorithms are more difficult to do than the sorting-by-colors algorithm, because they may have to do the steps again many times. One would say that sorting by numbers is more complex.

Abū Ḥāmid Muḥammad ibn Muḥammad al-Ghazālī (1058-1111) (), often Algazel in English, was born and died in Tus, in the Khorasan province of Persia. He was an Islamic theologian, jurist, philosopher, cosmologist, psychologist and mystic of Persian origin, and remains one of the most celebrated scholars in the history of Sunni Islamic thought.

He is considered to be a pioneer of the s of doubt and skepticism, and in one of his major works, The Incoherence of the Philosophers, he changed the course of early Islamic philosophy. He changed the early Islamic philosophy away from an Islamic metaphysics influenced by ancient Greek and Hellenistic philosophy. The new way was towards an Islamic philosophy based on cause-and-effect that was determined by God or intermediate angels, a theory now known as occasionalism.

Ghazali has sometimes been celebrated in both the East and the West as the greatest Muslim after Muhammad, according to Montgomery Watt (in his book from 1953).

The Arab–Israeli conflict  is a term used to describe the political tensions and open hostilities between the Arab countries of the Middle East and North Africa and the State of Israel. The conflict has gone on since 1948.

The Arab–Israeli conflict began from earlier tensions between the Arab and Jewish communities in British Mandatory Palestine, with the rise of two nationalist movements - Zionist movement among Jews and Arab nationalism among the Arabs. The ethnic conflict in Mandatory Palestine was also a result of the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, which created tension over the division and ownership of the land. While the Jewish people saw the land as their historical homeland of the Land of Israel, the Palestinian people and Pan-Arab movement saw the land as Palestine belonging to the Arabs and in the Pan-Islamic context, as territory regarded as Muslim lands.

The modern conflict started with the 1948 Arab–Israeli War in parallel with the creation of state of Israel by the Jews. Later, on the course of the 1948 War, the All-Palestine Government was created in Gaza Strip by the Arab League, as an Arab Palestinian state.  Israel won the 1948 war, and the All-Palestine Government moved to Cairo in Egypt and were not allowed to return to Gaza.  They gradually lost importance, until abolished in 1959 by the Egyptian President Nasser.

In 1964, another Palestinian political organization was formed by Yasser Arafat (named Palestinian Liberation Organization), and became the most important Palestinian movement. In 1967, Arab countries and Israel fought the Six-Day War, resulting in Israeli takeover of Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula from Egypt, West Bank from Jordan and Golan Heights from Syria. Jordan, Egypt and PLO soon began a low-level War of Attrition, which lasted from 1967 to 1970 with no significant benefits to any side. In 1973, another major war, the Yom Kippur War, was started by Egypt and Syria to regain the territory lost in the Six Day War. Egypt liberated part of the Sinai, and Syria was pushed back to Damascus. Egypt and Israel both claimed victory and till now historians argue as to whom the victory belongs to.

Over the years, it has changed from the large-scale Arab–Israeli conflict to a more local Israeli-Palestinian conflict, though the Arab World and Israel still disagree with each other over specific territory.

Analytical chemistry is the part of chemistry that focuses on finding out what a substance is, how much of it there is, and what it is made of. It helps scientists figure out exactly what’s in a sample and in what amounts through analysis. A simple job would be to see how much zinc is in a piece of brass. This type of chemistry is very important in many fields. It is used in medicine to check drugs, in the environment to test air and water, in crime labs to study evidence, in factories to make sure products are safe, and in food testing to check for harmful chemicals.

Analytical chemistry is usually split into two main parts. Qualitative analysis is about finding out what substances are in a sample. Quantitative analysis is about measuring how much of each substance is there. Today, scientists often use tools that can do both at the same time. These tools help them get more detailed and accurate information. To study samples, analytical chemists use many different methods. Some popular ones include spectroscopy (which looks at how substances interact with light), chromatography (which separates substances), electrochemistry (which studies how substances use electricity), and mass spectrometry (which looks at the weight and charge of particles). They also use older methods like titration and weighing to find out what’s in a sample. Each method uses different properties, like how something absorbs light or conducts electricity, to help scientists learn more about what’s in a material.

Instrumental analytical chemistry uses advanced machines to study chemicals, and it has changed the way scientists work. These tools are very sensitive, meaning they can find even tiny amounts of substances. They can also study complicated mixtures and track chemical changes as they happen. There are many common techniques.

Some tools combine methods to get even better results. For example, GC-MS (gas chromatography-mass spectrometry) and LC-MS (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) both separate substances and then identify them. These powerful machines are used in science labs, hospitals, factories, and more to make discoveries, test products, and solve problems.

Analytical chemistry also focuses on making sure the methods used to collect data are reliable and trustworthy. This is very important in areas like medicine and environmental testing, where accurate results can affect people’s health and safety. Scientists work hard to create and test methods that are precise (they give the same result each time), accurate (they give the correct result), sensitive (they can detect even tiny amounts), specific (they only measure what they are supposed to), robust (they still work well under different conditions), and reproducible (other scientists can get the same results). New tools and technologies are making analytical chemistry even more powerful. Tiny lab-on-a-chip systems, special sensors called biosensors, and smart computer programs using machine learning are helping scientists do faster and more detailed testing. These advances are making it possible to study smaller samples, test many things at once, and get results in real time.

Analytical chemistry has come a long way over time. In the beginning, scientists used simple methods like flame tests (where flames change color based on the substance) and precipitation reactions (where solid forms in a liquid) to find out what materials were made of. These were mostly qualitative techniques, which helped identify substances. In the 1800s and 1900s, scientists like Robert Bunsen, Gustav Kirchhoff, and Fritz Haber made big discoveries that helped shape modern analytical chemistry. Because of their work, new methods like spectroscopy (using light to study substances) and electrochemistry (studying how substances react with electricity) were developed. Today, analytical chemistry uses advanced tools and is one of the most high-tech parts of chemistry. It plays a major role in many fields, including medicine, nanotechnology, environmental science, and more.

Art is a creative activity. It produces a product, an object. Art is a diverse range of human activities in creating visual, performing subjects, and expressing the author's thoughts. The product of art is called a work of art, for others to experience.

Some art is useful in a practical sense, such as a sculptured clay bowl that can be used. That kind of art is sometimes called a craft.

Those who make art are called artists. They hope to affect the emotions of people who experience it. Some people find art relaxing, exciting or informative. Some say people are driven to make art due to their inner creativity.

"The arts" is a much broader term. It includes drawing, painting, sculpting, photography, performance art, dance, music, poetry, prose and theatre.

Art is divided into the plastic arts, where something is made, and the performing arts, where something is done by humans in action. The other division is between pure arts, done for themselves, and practical arts, done for a practical purpose, but with artistic content.

Some people say that art is a product or item that is made with the intention of stimulating the human senses as well as the human mind, spirit and soul. Art can also be an Idea or a concept that is expressed visually.  An artwork is normally judged by how much impact it has on people, the number of people who can relate to it, and how much they appreciate it. Some people also get inspired.

The first and broadest sense of "art" means "arrangement" or "to arrange." In this sense, art is created when someone arranges things found in the world into a new or different design or form; or when someone arranges colors or forms next to each other to make an image or just to make a pretty or interesting look.  Art can also be an existing object that is presented and called art, this is called re contextualizing. This is often done by placing the object in a frame or a special setting like a Gallery were the new setting gives the object a different meaning or message. (Marcel Duchamp, Fountain, 1917)

The difference between art and design can be subjective to the viewer and hard to distinguish. Art is often said to have a message or a meaning and design is about only the appearance.

Art may express emotion.  Artists may feel a certain emotion or message and wish to express it by creating something that means something to them.  Most of the art created in this case is made for the artist rather than an audience.  However, if an audience is able to connect with the emotion or the message as well, then the art work may become publicly successful.

There are sculptures, cave painting and rock art dating from the Upper Paleolithic era.

All of the great ancient civilizations, such as Ancient Egypt, India, China, Greece, Rome and Persia had works and styles of art. In the Middle Ages, most of the art in Europe showed people from the Bible in paintings, stained-glass windows, and mosaic tile floors and walls.

Islamic art includes geometric patterns, Islamic calligraphy, and architecture. In India and Tibet, painted sculptures, dance, and religious painting were done. In China, arts included jade carving, bronze, pottery, poetry, calligraphy, music, painting, drama, and fiction. There are many Chinese artistic styles, which are usually named after the ruling dynasty.

In Europe, after the Middle Ages, there was a "Renaissance" which means "rebirth". People rediscovered science and artists were allowed to paint subjects other than religious subjects. People like Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci still painted religious pictures, but they also now could paint mythological pictures too. These artists also invented perspective where things in the distance look smaller in the picture. This was new because in the Middle Ages people would paint all the figures close up and just overlapping each other. These artists used nudity regularly in their art.

In the late 1800s, artists in Europe, responding to Modernity created many new painting styles such as Classicism, Romanticism, Realism, and Impressionism. The history of twentieth century art includes Expressionism, Fauvism, Cubism, Dadaism, Surrealism, and Minimalism.

In some societies, people think that art belongs to the person who made it. They think that the artist put his or her "talent" and industry into the art. In this view, the art is the property of the artist, protected by copyright.

In other societies, people think that art belongs to no one. They think that society has put its social capital into the artist and the artist's work. In this view, society is a collective that has made the art, through the artist.

In mathematics, arithmetic is the basic study of numbers. The four basic arithmetic operations are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, although other operations such as exponentiation and roots are also studied in arithmetic.

Other arithmetic topics includes working with negative numbers, fractions, decimals and percentages.

Most people learn arithmetic in primary school, but some people do not learn arithmetic and others forget the arithmetic they learned. Many jobs require a knowledge of arithmetic, and many employers complain that it is hard to find people who know enough arithmetic.

A few of the many jobs that require arithmetic include carpenters, plumbers, mechanics, accountants, architects, doctors, and nurses. Arithmetic is needed in all areas of mathematics, science, and engineering.

Some arithmetic can be carried out mentally. A calculator can also be used to perform arithmetic. Computers can do it more quickly, which is one reason Global Positioning System receivers have a small computer inside.

An atom is an extremely small piece of matter. All normal matter – everything that has mass – is made of atoms. This includes solids, liquids, and gases. The atom cannot be broken to parts by chemistry, so people once thought it was the smallest piece of matter that could exist. There are over 100 different kinds of atoms, called chemical elements. Each kind has the same basic structure, but a different number of parts.

Atoms are very small, but their exact size depends on the type. Atoms are from 0.1 to 0.5 nanometers across. One nanometer is about 100,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair. This makes one atom impossible to see without special tools. Scientists learn how they work by doing experiments.

Atoms are made of three kinds of subatomic particles. These are protons, neutrons, and electrons. Protons and neutrons have much more mass. These are in the middle of the atom, called the nucleus. Lightweight electrons move quickly around them. The electromagnetic force holds the nucleus and electrons together.

Atoms with the same number of protons belong to the same chemical element. Examples of elements are carbon and gold. Atoms with the same number of protons, but different numbers of neutrons, are called isotopes. Usually an atom has the same number of electrons as protons. If an atom has more or less electrons than protons, it is called an ion, and has an electric charge.

Atoms can join by chemical bonds. Many things are made of more than one kind of atom. These are chemical compounds or mixtures. A group of atoms connected by chemical bonds is called a molecule. For example, a water molecule is made of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. The forming or breaking of bonds is a chemical reaction.

Atoms split if the forces inside are too weak to hold them together. This is what causes radioactivity. Atoms can also join to make larger atoms at very high temperatures, such as inside a star. These changes are studied in nuclear physics. Most atoms on Earth are not radioactive. They are rarely made, destroyed, or changed into another kind of atom.

The word "atom" comes from the Greek (ἀτόμος) "atomos", which means  or uncuttable. One of the first people to use the word "atom" is the Greek philosopher Democritus, around 400 BC. He thought that everything was made of particles called atoms, which could not be divided into smaller pieces. Some Hindu, Jain, and Buddhist philosophers also had ideas like this. Atomic theory was a mostly philosophical subject, with not much scientific investigation or study, until the early 1800s.

In 1777 French chemist Antoine Lavoisier defined the term element as we now use it. He said that an element was any substance that could not be broken down into other substances by the methods of chemistry. Any substance which could be broken down was a compound.

In 1803, English philosopher John Dalton suggested that elements were made of tiny, solid balls called atoms. Dalton believed that all atoms of the same element have the same mass. He said that compounds are formed when atoms of more than one element combine. In any one compound, the atoms would always combine in the same numbers.

In 1827, British scientist Robert Brown looked at pollen grains in water under his microscope. The pollen grains appeared to be shaking. Brown used Dalton's atomic theory to describe patterns in how they moved. This was called Brownian motion. In 1905 Albert Einstein used mathematics to prove that the pollen particles were being moved by the motion, or heat, of individual water molecules. By doing this, he proved that atoms are real without question.

In 1869, Russian scientist Dmitri Mendeleev published the first periodic table. The periodic table groups elements by their atomic number (how many protons they have; this is usually the same as the number of electrons). Elements in the same column, or group, usually have similar qualities. For example, helium, neon, argon, krypton, and xenon are all in the same column and are very similar. All these elements are gases that have no color or smell. Also, they cannot combine with other atoms to form compounds. Together they are known as noble gases.

The physicist J.J. Thomson was the first person to discover electrons. This happened while he was working with cathode rays in 1897. He learned they had a negative charge, and the rest of the atom had a positive charge. Thomson made the plum pudding model, which said that an atom was like plum pudding: the dried fruit (electrons) were stuck in a mass of pudding (having a positive charge).

In 1909, Ernest Rutherford used the Geiger–Marsden experiment to prove that most of an atom is in a very small space, the atomic nucleus. Rutherford took a photo plate and covered it with gold foil. He then shot alpha particles (made of two protons and two neutrons stuck together) at it. Many of the particles went through the gold foil, which proved that atoms are mostly empty space. Electrons are so small and fast-moving that they did not block the particles from going through. Rutherford later discovered protons in the nucleus.

In 1913, Niels Bohr created the Bohr model. This model showed that electrons travel around the nucleus in fixed circular orbits. This was better than the Rutherford model, but it was still not completely true.

In 1925, chemist Frederick Soddy discovered that some elements had more than one kind of atom, called isotopes. Soddy believed that each different isotope of an element has a different mass. To prove this, chemist Francis William Aston built the mass spectrometer, which measures the mass of single atoms. Aston proved that Soddy was right. He also found that the mass of each atom is a whole number times the mass of the proton. This meant that there must be some particles in the nucleus other than protons. In 1932, physicist James Chadwick shot alpha particles at beryllium atoms. He saw that a particle shot out of the beryllium atoms. This particle had no charge, but about the same mass as a proton. He named this particle the neutron.

The best model so far comes from the Schrödinger equation. Schrödinger learned that the electrons exist in a cloud around the nucleus, called the electron cloud. In the electron cloud, it is impossible to know exactly where electrons are. The Schrödinger equation says where an electron is likely to be. This area is called the electron's orbital.

In 1937, German chemist Otto Hahn became the first person to make nuclear fission in a laboratory. He discovered this by chance when shooting neutrons at a uranium atom, hoping to make a new isotope. However, instead of a new isotope, the uranium changed into a barium atom, a smaller atom than uranium. Hahn had "broken" the uranium atom. This was the world's first recorded nuclear fission reaction. This discovery led to the creation of the atomic bomb and nuclear power, where fission happens over and over again, creating a chain reaction.

Later in the 20th century, physicists went deeper into the mysteries of the atom. Using particle accelerators, they discovered that protons and neutrons were made of other particles, called quarks.

An atom is made of three main particles: the proton, the neutron, and the electron. Protons and neutrons have nearly the same size and mass (about  grams). The mass of an electron is about 1800 times smaller (about  grams).  Protons have a positive charge, electrons have a negative charge, and neutrons have no charge. Most atoms have no charge. The number of protons (positive) and electrons (negative) are the same, so the charges balance out to zero. However, ions have a different number of electrons than protons, so they have a positive or negative charge.

Scientists believe that electrons are elementary particles: they are not made of any smaller pieces. Protons and neutrons are made of quarks of two kinds: up quarks and down quarks. A proton is made of two up quarks and one down quark, and a neutron is made of two down quarks and one up quark.

The nucleus is in the middle of the atom. It is made of protons and neutrons. The nucleus makes up more than 99.9% of the mass of the atom. However, it is very small: about 1 femtometer (10−15 m) across, which is around 100,000 times smaller than the width of an atom, so it has a very high density.

Usually in nature, two things with the same charge repel or shoot away from each other. So for a long time, scientists did not know how the positively charged protons in the nucleus stayed together. We now believe that the attraction between protons and neutrons comes from the strong nuclear force. This force also holds together the quarks that make up the protons and neutrons. Particles called mesons travel back and forth between protons and neutrons, and carry the force.

The number of neutrons in relation to protons defines whether the nucleus stays together or goes through radioactive decay. When there are too many neutrons or protons, the atom tries to make the numbers smaller or more equal by removing the extra particles. It sends out radiation in the form of alpha, beta, or gamma decay. Nuclei can also change in other ways. Nuclear fission is when the nucleus breaks into two smaller nuclei, releasing a lot of energy. This release of energy makes nuclear fission useful for making bombs, and electricity in the form of nuclear power.

The other way nuclei can change is through nuclear fusion, when two nuclei join or fuse to make a larger nucleus. This process requires very high amounts of energy to overcome the electric repulsion between the protons, as they have the same charge. Such high energies are most common in stars like our Sun, which fuses hydrogen for fuel. However, once fusion happens, far more energy is released, because some of the mass becomes energy.

The energy needed to break a nucleus into protons and neutrons is called its nuclear binding energy. This energy can be converted to mass, as stated by Einstein's famous formula E = mc2. Medium-sized nuclei, such as iron-56 and nickel-62, have the highest binding energy per proton or neutron. They will probably not go through fission or fusion, because they cannot release energy in this way. Very small and very large atoms have low binding energy, so they are most willing to go through fission or fusion.

Electrons orbit, or travel around, the nucleus. They are called the atom's electron cloud. They are attracted to the nucleus because of the electromagnetic force. Electrons have a negative charge, and the nucleus always has a positive charge, so they attract each other.

The Bohr model shows that some electrons are farther from the nucleus than others in different levels. These are called electron shells. Only the electrons in the outer shell can make chemical bonds. The number of electrons in the outer shell determines whether the atom is stable or which atoms it will bond with in a chemical reaction. If an atom has only one shell, it needs two electrons to be complete. Otherwise, the outer shell needs eight electrons to be complete.

The Bohr model is important because it has the idea of energy levels. The electrons in each shell have a certain amount of energy. Shells that are farther from the nucleus have more energy. When a small burst of energy called a photon hits an electron, the electron can jump into a higher-energy shell. This photon must carry exactly the right amount of energy to bring the electron to the new energy level. A photon is a burst of light, and the amount of energy determines the color of light. So each kind of atom will  certain colors of light, called the absorption spectrum.  An electron can also send out, or emit, a photon, and fall into a lower energy shell. For the same reason, the atom will only send out certain colors of light, called the emission spectrum.

The complete picture is more complicated. Unlike the Earth moving around the Sun, electrons do not move in a circle. We cannot know the exact place of an electron. We only know the probability, or chance, that it will be in any place. Each electron is part of an orbital, which describes where it is likely to be. No more than two electrons can be in one orbital; these two electrons have different spin.

For each shell, numbered 1, 2, 3, and so on, there may be a number of different orbitals. These have different shapes, or point in different directions. Each orbital can be described by its three quantum numbers. The principal quantum number is the electron shell number. The azimuthal quantum number is represented by a letter: s, p, d, or f. Depending on the principal and azimuthal quantum numbers, the electron can have more or less energy. There is also a magnetic quantum number, but it does not usually affect the energy level. As more electrons are added, they join orbitals in order from lowest to highest energy. This order starts as follows: 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d. For example, a chlorine atom has 17 electrons. So, it will have:

In other words, it has 2 electrons in the first shell, 8 in the second shell, and 7 in the third shell.

The number of protons in an atom is called its atomic number. Atoms of the same element have the same atomic number. For example, all carbon atoms have six protons, so the atomic number of carbon is six. Today, 118 elements are known. Depending on how the number is counted, 90 to 94 elements exist naturally on earth. All elements above number 94 have only been made by humans. These elements are organized on the periodic table.

Because protons and neutrons have nearly the same mass, and the mass of electrons is very small, we can call the number of protons and neutrons in an atom its mass number.  Most elements have several isotopes with different mass numbers. To name an isotope, we use the name of the element, followed by its mass number. So an atom with six protons and seven neutrons is called carbon-13.

Sometimes, we need a more exact measurement. The exact mass of an atom is called its atomic mass. This is usually measured with the atomic mass unit (amu), also called the dalton. One amu is exactly 1/12 of the mass of a carbon-12 atom, which is  grams. Hydrogen-1 has a mass of about 1 amu. The heaviest atom known, oganesson, has a mass of about 294 amu, or  grams. The average mass of all atoms of a particular element is called its atomic weight.

The size of an atom depends on the size of its electron cloud. Moving down the periodic table, more electron shells are added. As a result, atoms get bigger. Moving to the right on the periodic table, more protons are added to the nucleus. This more positive nucleus pulls electrons more strongly, so atoms get smaller. The biggest atom is caesium, which is about 0.596 nanometers wide according to one model. The smallest atom is helium, which is about 0.062 nanometers wide.

When atoms are far apart, they attract each other. This attraction is stronger for some kinds of atoms than others. At the same time, the heat, or kinetic energy, of atoms makes them always move. If the attraction is strong enough, relative to the amount of heat, atoms will form a solid. If the attraction is weaker, they will form a liquid, and if it is even weaker, they will form a gas.

Chemical bonds are the strongest kinds of attraction between atoms. The movement of electrons explains all chemical bonds.

Atoms usually bond with each other in a way that fills or empties their outer electron shell. The most reactive elements have an almost full or almost empty outer shell. Atoms with a full outer shell, called noble gases, do not usually form bonds.

There are three main kinds of bonds: ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and metallic bonds.

All atoms attract each other by Van der Waals forces. These forces are weaker than chemical bonds. They are caused when electrons move to one side of an atom. This movement gives a negative charge to that side. It also gives a positive charge to the other side. When two atoms line up their sides with negative and positive charges, they will attract.

Although atoms are mostly empty space, they cannot pass through each other. When two atoms are very close, their electron clouds will repel each other by the electromagnetic force.

To understand how magnets work, we can look at the properties of the atom. Any magnet has a north and south pole, and a certain strength. The direction and strength of a magnet, together, are called its magnetic moment. Every electron also has a magnetic moment, like a tiny magnet. This comes from the electron's spin and its orbit around the nucleus. The magnetic moments for the electrons add up to a magnetic moment for the whole atom. This tells us how atoms act in a magnetic field.

Every electron has one of two opposite spins. We can think of one as turning to the right, and the other as turning to the left. If every electron is paired with an electron with the opposite spin in the same orbital, the magnetic moments will cancel out to zero. Atoms like this are called diamagnetic. They are only weakly repelled by a magnetic field.

However, if some electrons are not paired, the atom will have a lasting magnetic moment: it will be paramagnetic or ferromagnetic. When atoms are paramagnetic, the magnetic moment of each atom points in a random direction. They are weakly attracted to a magnetic field. When atoms are ferromagnetic, the magnetic moments of nearby atoms act on each other. They point in the same direction. This means that the whole object is a magnet, and it can point in the direction of a magnetic field. Ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, cobalt, and nickel, are strongly attracted to a magnetic field.

Some elements, and many isotopes, have what is called an unstable nucleus. This means the nucleus is either too big to hold itself together, or it has too many protons or neutrons. When a nucleus is unstable, it has to eliminate the excess mass of particles. It does this through radiation. An atom that does this is called radioactive. Unstable atoms emit radiation until they lose enough particles in the nucleus to become stable. All atoms above atomic number 82 (82 protons, lead) are radioactive.

There are three main kinds of radioactive decay: alpha, beta, and gamma.

Every radioactive element or isotope has a half-life. This is how long it takes half of any sample of atoms of that type to decay into a different isotope or element.

Nearly all the hydrogen atoms in the Universe, most of the helium atoms, and some of the lithium atoms were made soon after the Big Bang. Even today, about 90% of all atoms in the Universe are hydrogen.

All other atoms come from nuclear fusion in stars, or sometimes from cosmic rays that hit atoms. At the start of their life, all stars fuse hydrogen to make helium. The least massive stars, red dwarfs, are expected to stop there. All other stars will then fuse helium to make carbon and oxygen. In stars like the Sun, the temperature and pressure are too low to make larger atoms. But more massive stars continue fusion, until they create iron (atomic number 26) or nickel (atomic number 28).  Atoms can also grow larger when neutrons or protons hit them. This could happen inside stars or in supernovae. Most atoms on Earth were made by a star that existed before the Sun.

People make very large atoms by smashing together smaller atoms in particle accelerators. However, these atoms often decay very quickly. Oganesson (element 118) has a half-life of 0.00089 seconds. Even larger atoms may be created in the future.

Astronomy is the scientific study of celestial bodies. It is a major branch of space science. Stars, galaxies, planets, moons, asteroids, comets and nebulae are studied, as are supernovae explosions, gamma ray bursts, and cosmic microwave background radiation. Astronomy includes the development, physics, chemistry, meteorology and movement of celestial bodies. The big questions are the structure and development of the universe.

Astronomy is one of the oldest sciences.  The patterns of stars in the night sky were called constellations in Late Latin.  They used the positions of the stars to navigate, and to find when was the best time to plant crops.

Astrophysics is an important part of astronomy. A related subject, cosmology, is concerned with studying the universe as a whole, and the way the universe changed over time. Astronomy is not the same as astrology, a belief that the motion of the stars and the planets may affect human lives.

There are two main types of astronomy, observational and theoretical astronomy. Observational astronomy uses telescopes and cameras to  or look at stars, galaxies and other astronomical objects. Theoretical astronomy explains what we see. It predicts what might happen. Observations show whether the predictions work.  The main work of astronomy is to explain puzzling features of the Universe.  For many years the most important issue was the motions of planets. Many other topics are now studied.

Day-time astronomy is possible, but could be harmful. The Sun, is our biggest star, better describes as a big all of light and observing directly is dangerous. It is too bright, and can burn your eyes and can cause permanent blindness. To look at the Sun you need  proper shields and equipment. Some other individual bright stars and planets can be seen during daylight hours through a telescope or a powerful pair of binoculars.

Early astronomers used only their eyes to look at the stars. They made maps of the constellations and stars for religious reasons and calendars to work out the time of year. Early civilisations such as the Maya people and the Ancient Egyptians built simple observatories and drew maps of the stars positions. They also began to think about the place of Earth in the universe. For a long time people thought Earth was the center of the universe, and that the planets, the stars and the sun went around it.  This is known as geocentrism. Astronomy is from the Greek astron (ἄστρον) meaning "star" and nomos (nόμος) meaning "law").

Ancient Greeks tried to explain the motions of the Sun and stars by taking measurements. A mathematician named Eratosthenes was the first who measured the size of the Earth and proved that the Earth is a sphere. A theory by another mathematician named Aristarchus was that the Sun is the center, and the Earth is moving around it. This is known as heliocentrism. Only a few people thought it was right. The rest continued to believe in the geocentric model. Most of the names of constellations and stars come from Greeks of that time.

Arabic astronomers made many advancements during the Middle Ages including improved star maps and ways to estimate the size of the Earth.  They also learned from the ancients by translating Greek books into Arabic.

During the Renaissance a priest named Nicolaus Copernicus thought, from looking at the way the planets moved, that the Earth was not the center of everything. Based on previous works, he said that the Earth was a planet and all the planets moved around the Sun. This brought back the old idea of heliocentrism. Galileo Galilei built his own telescopes, and used them to look more closely at the stars and planets for the first time. He agreed with Copernicus. The Catholic Church thought Galileo was wrong. He spent the rest of his life under house arrest. Heliocentric ideas were soon improved by Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton, who invented the theory of gravity.

After Galileo, people made better telescopes and used them to see farther objects such as the planets Uranus and Neptune. They also saw how stars were similar to our Sun, but in a range of colours and sizes. They also saw thousands of other faraway objects such as galaxies and nebulae.

The 20th century after 1920 saw important changes in astronomy.

In the early 1920s it began to be accepted that the galaxy in which we live, the Milky Way, is not the only galaxy. The existence of other galaxies was settled by Edwin Hubble, who identified the Andromeda nebula as a different galaxy. It was also Hubble who proved that the universe was expanding. There were many other galaxies at large distances and they are receding, moving away from our galaxy. That was completely unexpected.

In 1931, Karl Jansky discovered radio emission from outside the Earth when trying to isolate a source of noise in radio communications, marking the birth of radio astronomy and the first attempts at using another part of the electromagnetic spectrum to observe the sky. Those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that the atmosphere did not block were now opened up to astronomy, allowing more discoveries to be made.

The opening of this new window on the Universe saw the discovery of entirely new things, such as pulsars, which sent regular pulses of radio waves out into space. The waves were first thought to be alien in origin because the pulses were so regular that (so it was thought) it implied an artificial source.

The period after World War II saw more observatories. Large and accurate telescopes were built and operated at good observing sites, usually by governments. For example, Bernard Lovell began radio astronomy at Jodrell Bank using leftover military radar equipment. By 1957, the site had the largest steerable radio telescope in the world. Similarly, the end of the 1960s saw the start of the building of dedicated observatories at Mauna Kea in Hawaii, a good site for visible and infra-red telescopes thanks to its high altitude and clear skies.

The next great revolution in astronomy was thanks to the birth of rocketry.  This allowed telescopes to be placed in space on satellites.

Space telescopes gave access, for the first time in history, to the entire electromagnetic spectrum including rays that had been blocked by the atmosphere.  The X-rays, gamma rays, ultraviolet light and parts of the infra-red spectrum were all opened to astronomy as observing telescopes were launched.  As with other parts of the spectrum, new discoveries were made.

From 1970s satellites were launched to be replaced with more accurate and better satellites, causing the sky to be mapped in nearly all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum.

Discoveries broadly come in two types:  bodies and phenomena.  Bodies are things in the Universe, whether it is a planet like our Earth, or a galaxy like our Milky Way.  Phenomena are events and happenings in the Universe.

For convenience, this section has been divided by where these astronomical bodies may be found: those found around stars are solar bodies, those inside galaxies are galactic bodies and everything else larger are cosmic bodies.

Burst events are those where there is a sudden change in the heavens that disappears quickly.  These are called bursts because they are normally associated with large explosions producing a "burst" of energy.  They include:

Periodic events are those that happen regularly in a repetitive way.  The name periodic comes from period, which is the length of time required for a wave to complete one cycle.  Periodic phenomena include:

Noise phenomena tend to relate to things that happened a long time ago.  The signal from these events bounce around the Universe until it seems to come from everywhere and varies little in intensity.  In this way, it is "noise", the background signal that pervades every instrument used for astronomy.  The most common example of noise is static seen on analogue televisions.  The principal astronomical example is: cosmic background radiation.

There are ways astronomers can get better pictures of the heavens.  Light from a distant source reaches a sensor and gets measured, normally by a human eye or a camera.  For very dim sources, there may not be enough light particles coming from the source for it to be seen.  One technique that astronomers have for making it visible is using integration (like longer exposures in photography).

Astronomical sources do not move much: only the rotation and movement of the Earth causes them to move across the heavens. As light particles reach the camera over time, they hit the same place making it brighter and more visible than the background, until it can be seen.

Telescopes at most observatories (and satellite instruments) can normally track a source as it moves across the heavens, making the star appear still to the telescope and allowing longer exposures.  Also, images can be taken on different nights so exposures span hours, days or even months. In the digital era, digitised pictures of the sky can be added together by computer, which overlays the images after correcting for movement.

Adaptive optics means changing the shape of the mirror or lens while looking at something, to see it better.

Data analysis is the process of getting more information out of an astronomical observation than by simply looking at it. The observation is first stored as data. This data then has various techniques used to analyse it.

Fourier analysis in mathematics can show if an observation (over a length of time) is changing periodically (changes like a wave).  If so, it can extract the frequencies and the type of wave pattern, and find many things including new planets.

Pulsars pulse regularly in radio waves.  These turned out to be similar to some (but not all) of a type of bright source in X-rays called a Low-mass X-ray binary.  It turned out that all pulsars and some LMXBs are neutron stars and that the differences were due to the environment in which the neutron star was found. Those LMXBs that were not neutron stars turned out to be black holes.

This section attempts to provide an overview of the important fields of astronomy.

Solar astronomy is the study of the Sun. The Sun is the closest star to Earth at around 92 million (92,000,000) miles away. It is the easiest to observe in detail. Observing the Sun can help us understand how other stars work and are formed. Changes in the Sun can affect the weather and climate on Earth. A stream of charged particles called the Solar wind is constantly sent off from the Sun. The Solar wind hitting the Earth's magnetic field causes the northern lights.

Stellar astronomy, sometimes stellar astrophysics is the scientific study of stars, their formation, evolution and fate (stellar evolution). In the most basic sense, Stellar Astronomy attempts to answer the questions to the universe's most common phenomena — stars. Heavily relating with Galactic and Planetary Astronomy.

Planetary astronomy is the study of planets, moons, dwarf planets, comets and asteroids as well as other small objects that orbit stars. The planets of our own Solar System have been studied in depth by many visiting spacecraft such as Cassini-Huygens (Saturn) and the Voyager 1 and 2.

Galactic astronomy is the study of distant galaxies.  Studying distant galaxies is a good way of learning about our own galaxy, as the gases and stars in our own galaxy make it difficult to observe.  Galactic astronomers try to understand the structure of galaxies and how they are formed by using different types of telescopes and computer simulations.

Gravitational wave astronomy is the study of the Universe in the gravitational wave spectrum.  So far, all astronomy that has been done has used the electromagnetic spectrum.  Gravitational waves are ripples in spacetime emitted by very dense objects changing shape, which include white dwarves, neutron stars and black holes.  Because no one has been able to detect gravitational waves directly, the impact of gravitational wave astronomy has been limited.

Great discoveries also produce unsolved problems. This is just a short-list:

An asteroid is a minor planet that orbits within the inner solar system. It is a small object in the Solar System that travels around the Sun. It is like a planet but smaller. They range from very small (smaller than a car) to 600 miles (1000 km) across. A few asteroids have an asteroid moon.

The name "asteroid" means "like a star" in the ancient Greek language. Asteroids may look like small stars in the sky, but they really do move around the Sun. Like planets, asteroids do not make their own light. Because of this, some people think "asteroids" is not a good name, and think that the name "planetoid" ("like a planet") would be a better name.

Asteroids are the leftover rock and other material from the formation of the Solar System. These rocks were too small to come together to make a planet. Some are made of carbon or metal. Depending on what's on the surface, they are classified into various asteroid spectral types including Type M (metal), Type S (stone), and Type C (carbon).

Most asteroids in our Solar System are in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter. Many are not in the main asteroid belt. The ones that come close to Earth are called Near-Earth asteroids. Some scientists think asteroids striking the Earth killed off all the dinosaurs and caused some of the other extinction events.

Media told in 2025, about the chemical substances that were (found on, or) sampled from asteroid Bennu: "traces of brine" and "all five nucleobases that make up DNA and RNA: adenine, guanine, cytosine, thymine, and uracil". The sample was taken in 2020, and the space capsule with sample, landed in the United States in 2023.

Giuseppe Piazzi found the first asteroid, in 1801. He called it Ceres, and it is the biggest object in the asteroid belt. Others, like Juno, Pallas, and Vesta were found later. In the 1850s, so many had been found that they were numbered by a Minor planet designation starting with 1 Ceres. Today, astronomers using computerized telescopes find thousands of asteroids every month. Asteroid impact prediction is one of their purposes.

Austria (, ;  ), officially the Republic of Austria ( ), is a country in Central Europe. Around Austria are the countries of Germany, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Italy, Switzerland, and Liechtenstein.

The people in Austria speak German, a few also speak Hungarian, Slovenian and Croatian. The capital of Austria is Vienna (Wien).

Austria is more than 1000 years old. Its history can be followed to the 9th century. At that time, the first people moved to the land now known as Austria. The name Ostarrichi is first written in an official document from 996. Since then, that word developed into the Modern German word Österreich, which literally means "Eastern Empire."

There has been human settlement in the area that is now Austria for a long time. The first settlers go back to the Paleolithic Age, the time of the Neanderthals. They left works of art such as the Venus of Willendorf. In the Neolithic Age people, lived there to dig for mineral resources, especially copper. Ötzi, a mummy found in a glacier between Austria and Italy, is from that time.

During the Bronze Age, people built larger settlements and fortresses, especially where there were mineral resources. Salt mining began near Hallstatt. At that time, Celts began to form the first states.

The Romans came 15 BC to Austria and made the Celtic Regnum Noricum to a Roman province. What is now Austria, was part of three provinces, Raetia, Noricum and Pannonia. The border in the north was the Danube.

From the Early Middle Ages, the area of modern-day Austria was part of the Holy Roman Empire. The capital of the Holy Roman Empire was the Austrian city of Vienna. The Austrian Habsburg family became the rulers of the empire, and the son of the Holy Roman Emperor held the title of Archduke of Austria.

In 1806, France defeated the Holy Roman Empire and replaced it with the Confederation of the Rhine. Former Holy Roman Emperor Francis II became the Emperor of the new Austrian Empire, which later became Austria-Hungary.

In 1869, the first postcards were sent from Austria. Within three months, almost 3 million cards had been sold.

In 1914, Franz Ferdinand was assassinated in Sarajevo. Austria-Hungary declared war on Serbia and this led to World War I. In 1918, both Austria and Hungary became republics and split into separate countries that were much smaller tha before.

In 1938, Austria became part of Nazi Germany. However, Austrias became independent again in May 1945.

Austria is a mountainous country since it is partially in the Alps. Grossglockner is the tallest mountain in Austria. The high mountainous Alps in the west of Austria flatten somewhat into low lands and plains in the east of the country where the Danube flows.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Austria was , on 8 August 2013 in Bad Deutsch-Altenburg. The lowest temperature ever recorded in Austria was , on 19 February 1932 at Grünloch doline.

Austria is a democratic republic. The President of Austria is the head of state and the Chancellor of Austria is the head of government.

It is a neutral state, that means it does not take part in wars with other countries. It has been in the United Nations since 1955 and in the European Union since 1995.

Austria is also a federal state and divided into nine states ():

A new cabinet (Austria) was formed (February 2025). It is formed by political parties ÖVP, SPÖ, and Neos.

The chancellor is Christian Stocker since 2025. Austria has been a member-state of the United Nations since 1955, the European Union since 1995 and OPEC since 2019.

Many famous composers were Austrians or born in Austria. There are Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Joseph Haydn, Franz Schubert, Anton Bruckner, Johann Strauss, Sr., Johann Strauss, Jr. and Gustav Mahler. In modern times there were Arnold Schoenberg, Anton Webern and Alban Berg, who belonged to the Second Viennese School.

Austria has many artists, there are Gustav Klimt, Oskar Kokoschka, Egon Schiele or Friedensreich Hundertwasser, Inge Morath or Otto Wagner and scienc.

Famous Austrian dishes are Wiener Schnitzel, Apfelstrudel, Schweinsbraten, Kaiserschmarren, Knödel, Sachertorte and Tafelspitz. But you can also find a lot of local dishes like Kärntner Reindling (a kind of cake), Kärntner Nudeln (also called "Kärntner Kasnudeln", you may write it "...nudln" too), Tiroler Knödl (may be written "...knödel"; ), Tiroler Schlipfkrapfen (another kind of "Kärntner Nudeln"), Salzburger Nockerl (also may be written ..."Nockerln"), Steirisches Wurzelfleisch (..."Wurzlfleisch") or Sterz ("Steirischer Sterz").

Beijing is the capital of the People's Republic of China. The city used to be known as Peking.  It is in the northern and eastern parts of the country. Having more that 21 million residents, it is one of the most populous capital cities in the world.

The city of Beijing has played a very important role in the development of China. Many people from different cities and countries come to Beijing to look for better chances to find work. Nearly 15 million people live there. Beijing hosted the Summer Olympic Games in 2008, and the Winter Olympic Games in 2022. It is the only city that has hosted both.

Beijing is well known for its ancient history.  Since the Jin Dynasty, Beijing has been the capital of several dynasties (especially the later ones), including the Yuan, Ming, and Qing. There are many places of historic interest in Beijing.

The Mandarin Chinese name of the city is Běijīng, which means "The Northern Capital". It got this name when the Yongle Emperor of the Ming family of rulers moved most of his government from Nanjing ("The Southern Capital") in the early 1400s.  In Chinese, Beijing's name is written  Today, people spell it "Beijing" because they use the pinyin way of spelling, which shows what the name should sound like in Mandarin. People used to spell it "Peking" because that was the spelling used by some of the first people from Europe to visit the Ming and write home about it; the Jesuits' work was made popular by their French brother Du Halde. It then became the official Chinese Postal Map spelling around 1900 and continued to be used until pinyin became more popular.

Beijing was also known as Beiping ("City of Northern Peace") between 1928 and 1949, when the Nationalists moved the Chinese capital to Nanjing and Chongqing.

The center of Beijing was settled in the 1st millennium BC. In those days, the Kingdom of Yan (燕, Yān) set up their capital where Beijing is today. They called it Ji (蓟, Jì). After the Kingdom of Yan was destroyed, the city became smaller, although it was still an important place.

Beijing became more important again in the 10th century, when the Jin dynasty set its capital there. This city was destroyed by Mongol forces in 1215.  Then in 1267, Mongols built a new city on the north side of the Jin capital, and called it "Great Capital" (大都, Dàdū), which was the beginning of modern Beijing. When Kublai Khan the Mongolian monarch, set up the Yuan dynasty, this city became his capital.

The Yuan Dynasty, Ming Dynasty and Qing dynasty all made Beijing their capital. When the Qing dynasty lost power and the Republic of China was set up, the new Republic moved its capital from Beijing to Nanjing. When the People's Republic of China seized power, Beijing became the capital of China again.

In 1989, there were protests in Tian'anmen Square because some people wanted democracy.

Throughout its history, Beijing was the Chinese capital six times:

Beijing is the education center of People's Republic of China. More than 500 famous universities of China are in Beijing.  They also include 5 of the top universities: Peking University, Tsinghua University, China People University, Beijing Normal University, and Beihang University. Beijing is also education center of China for teaching Chinese as a foreign language. The standard Chinese pronunciation is based on Beijing dialect, so over 70% foreigners who want to study Chinese go to Beijing for their studies.

Botany is the study of plants. It is a science. It is a branch of biology.

It is also called plant biology, and sometimes phytology. Scientists who study botany are called botanists. They study how plants work.

University departments of botany are often now merged into a wider group of specialities, including cell biology, genetics, ecology, cytology, palaeontology and other topics. This gives students and research workers access to a wider education and a wider range of research techniques.

Brazil, officially the Federative Republic of Brazil, is a country in South America. It is the world's fifth-largest country by area, behind Russia, Canada, the United States, and China, with a total area of . It is also the world's seventh-largest country by population, with about 212 million people. Brazil's capital city is Brasília; its most populous city is São Paulo. Brazil was named after brazilwood, which is a tree that once grew very well along the Brazilian coast. Bounded by the Atlantic Ocean to the east, Brazil has a coastline of . The country has the most Portuguese speakers in the world and is the only country in the Americas where Portuguese is an official language.

The first people to come to Brazil came around 9,000 B.C. That group of indigenous people is often called the South American Indians and probably came from North America. They practiced hunting, foraging, and farming. Over thousands of years, many different indigenous people were living there.

Pedro Álvares Cabral was the first European to see Brazil. He saw it in 1500. He was from Portugal and the Portuguese kingdom claimed Brazil. Soon, Portugal colonized Brazil and created colonies all along the coastline. They began to import black slaves from Africa and force them to work. Because of the violence of the slave masters, many of these slaves would run away into the forest and create their own communities called quilombos.

In the late 1500s and early 1600s, the Dutch and the French tried to take some land in Brazil. Dutch, French and Portuguese started moving inland further than the Treaty of Tordesillas said they could. This caused some fights with the Spaniards (people from Spain) and indigenous people in the area.

In 1822, Brazil declared independence from Portugal. Soon there was civil war. Meanwhile, the quilombos survived and Brazil was bringing in more slaves than any other country in the Americas, even though many countries were beginning to legally abolish slavery. This led to an increase in slave revolts, especially in the 1860s and 1880s, which forced the government to change the system to keep the country stable. Slavery was legally abolished in 1888.

In 1889, there was a military coup, and Pedro II had to leave the country. In 1889, Brazil became a republic. The only people who could vote were people who owned land. There were some uprisings in the 1920s because some people thought the government was unfairly helping coffee growers. Brazil joined the Allies during World War II.

During the 1960s, the military leader Castelo Branco overthrew the government and created a dictatorship that was supported by the United States. It was very anti-communist and they imprisoned, tortured or killed many people on the left. Since then, the country has become more democratic, but some people feel that there are still big problems in health, education, crime, poverty and social inequality.

In August 2016, then-president Dilma Rousseff was removed from office because of impeachment.

In the 2018 elections, the controversial conservative candidate Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party (PSL) was elected president, winning in the second round against Fernando Haddad, of the Workers Party (PT), with the support of 55.13% of the valid votes. In the early 2020s, Brazil became one of the hardest hit countries during the COVID-19 pandemic, receiving the second-highest death toll worldwide after the United States. In May 2021, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva said that he would run for a third term in the 2022 Brazilian general election against Bolsonaro. In October 2022, Lula was in first place in the first round, with 48.43% of the support from the electorate, and received 50.90% of the votes in the second round. On 8 January 2023, a week after Lula's inauguration, a mob of Bolsonaro's supporters attacked Brazil's federal government buildings in the capital, Brasília, after several weeks of unrest.

The official language of Brazil is Portuguese. Brazil is the only country in South America that speaks Portuguese but more people in South America speak Portuguese than Spanish because the population of Brazil is larger than the combined population of all the Spanish-speaking countries in South America.

Some people in Brazil speak German dialects. That came from German immigrants. 2% of Brazilians speak German as their first language. Yiddish is spoken by the elders of the Jewish community.

Other people in Brazil speak their ancestors' languages like Italian, Japanese, Polish, Ukrainian, French, Russian, Lithuanian, Chinese, Dutch and Korean. Spanish or "Portunhol", a mix of Portuguese and Castilian (Spanish) is spoken at some of the borders. Indigenous languages as Guarani and Aymará are the first languages of a small number of Brazilians.

Brazil has the world's largest rainforest, the Amazon Rainforest. It makes up 40% of the country's land area. Brazil also has other types of land, including a type of savanna, called cerrado, and a dry plant region named caatinga.

The most important cities are Brasília (the capital), Belém, Belo Horizonte, Curitiba, Florianópolis, Fortaleza, Goiânia, Maceió, Manaus, Porto Alegre,  Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Salvador, São Paulo (Brazil's biggest city), and Vitória.  Other cities are at List of largest cities in Brazil.

Brazil is divided into 26 states plus the Federal District in five regions (north, south, northeast, southeast and centre-west):

The country is the fifth-largest in the world by area. It is known for its many rainforests and jungles. Covering roughly half of South America's land area, Brazil is next to every country in South America except Chile and Ecuador, which the country doesn't border.

Brazil is the largest country in South America and the fifth-largest in the world. Its people are called Brazilians or Brasileiros (In Portuguese). The people include citizens of Portuguese or other European descent who mainly live in the South and Southeast, Africans, Native Americans, Arabs, Gypsies, and people of mixed ancestry. Brazil also has the largest Japanese community outside Japan. Other East Asians follow the Japanese group. The Amazon River flows through Brazil, it is the 2nd longest river in the world (after the Nile). The current President of Brazil is Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva. Two major sporting events were held in Brazil recently: the 2014 FIFA World Cup and the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro.

In 2016 Brazil became the first South America country to host the Summer Olympics.

The Atlantic Ocean is the world's second largest ocean. It covers a total area of about , about 20 percent of the Earth's surface.

It is named after the Ancient Greek god Atlas, the Titan in Greek mythology.

The Atlantic formed when the Americas moved west from Eurasia and Africa. This began sometime in the Cretaceous peiod, roughly 135 million years ago. It was part of the break-up of the supercontinent Pangaea.

The East Coast of South America is shaped somewhat like the West Coast of Africa, which gave a clue that continents have moved over long periods of time in what is called continental drift. The Atlantic Ocean is still growing because of seafloor spreading from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and the Pacific Ocean is shrinking because the sea floor is subducting, or folding under itself, into the mantle.

The Atlantic Ocean is bounded on the west by North and South America. It connects to the Arctic Ocean through the Denmark Strait, Greenland Sea, Norwegian Sea, and Barents Sea. It connects with the Mediterranean Sea through the Strait of Gibraltar.

In the southeast, the Atlantic merges into the Indian Ocean. The 20th meridian east defines its border.

In the southwest, the Drake Passage connects it to the Pacific Ocean. The Panama Canal links the Atlantic and Pacific.

The Atlantic Ocean is the largest ocean after the Pacific and had an area of . The volume of the Atlantic, along with its bordering seas, is 354,700,000 cubic kilometres.

The average depth of the Atlantic, along with its bordering seas, is . The greatest depth is Milwaukee Deep near Puerto Rico, where it is  deep.

The RMS Titanic currently rests at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean.

The Atlantic Ocean has important ocean currents. One of them, called the Gulf Stream, flows across the North Atlantic.  Water gets heated by the sun in the Caribbean Sea and then moves northeast toward the North Pole, which makes France, the British Isles, Iceland, and Norway, all in Europe, much warmer in winter than Newfoundland and Nova Scotia, both in Canada. Without the Gulf Stream, the climates of northeast Canada and northwestern Europe might be the same because both places are about the same distance from the North Pole.

There are also currents in the South Atlantic, but the shape of the sea makes it have a smaller effect on South Africa.

The main feature of the Atlantic Ocean's seabed is a large underwater mountain chain, the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which runs from north to south under the ocean at the boundary of four tectonic plates: Eurasian, North American, South American, and African. The ridge extends from Iceland in the north to about 58° south.

The salinity of the surface waters of the open ocean ranges from 33 to 37 parts per thousand and varies by latitude and season.

Beer is a type of alcoholic drink. It is made with water, hops, barley (types of cereal grains), and types of yeast (a fungus that produces alcohol). A process called fermentation turns sugar into alcohol, using yeast. Another product of the fermentation is carbon dioxide.

In general, all alcoholic drinks where yeast turns sugar into alcohol are called beer. In these cases, distillation is not used. The difference to wine is that with wine, sugars from plants, such as fruit sugar, or that made by animals is used. As an example, mead is a wine made from honey. Japanese sake is made from rice, and uses yeast for fermentation; so even if some people call it rice wine, sake is really a kind of beer.

The act of making beer is called "brewing". Beer is made by adding warm water to malted barley and other grains. The enzymes in the barley change the malted barley and other grains into simple sugars. This is called mash. The water is then sparged (drained) from the grain. The water is now called wort. The wort is boiled and hops are added. Hops provide flavour and preserve the beer. After boiling the wort, it is cooled and yeast is added. The yeast turns the sugars into alcohol and the wort into beer.

Different beers can have different natures, depending on the  used; for example, an ale uses top fermenting yeast. Top fermenting yeasts eat more sugar and produce more alcohol. A lager uses bottom fermenting yeast. Bottom fermenting yeasts eat less sugar and produce a crisper, cleaner taste. Adding hops makes the beer more bitter and aromatic. Specialty malts (different types of cooked barley) produce different flavours and colours. These flavours and colours are most notable in dark beers like Porter and Stout.

Different countries have different ways to make beer. In Germany, Austria, Switzerland, Czech Republic, and Slovakia, beer is usually made from just hops, malt, water, and yeast. This is because of the Reinheitsgebot. The Reinheitsgebot was a law that said says that beer can only be made from hops, malt, and water. Yeast was discovered after the Reinheitsgebot. The law was overturned by the European Union in 1992. In Belgium, however, beers have always been made with wheat, sugar, fruit, and other ingredients.

Beer has been made since prehistoric times.  Around 10,000 BCE, early humans began to store food and supplies. They settled in one spot, and gathered grains that naturally grew there.  Then, by accident, the ancient humans discovered that the grains, especially barley, became some pleasant liquid, now called beer.  At first, the early people thought that the making of beer was spontaneous (sudden and unnatural), but now we know that the fermentation by yeast chemically formed beer.

Mesopotamia was the first civilisation that ever made beer, at 7000 BCE and the Sumerians were probably the first people to brew beer.  The earliest records of beer were written around 7000 years ago by the Sumerians.  They began adapting beer, by adding berries, adding or reducing the amount of fermented grain, and making other experiments with the beverage.  One seal (paper that is stuck on beer) around 4,000 years old is a Sumerian "Hymn to Ninkasi", the goddess of brewing. This "hymn" is also a recipe for making beer. A description of the making of beer on this ancient engraving in the Sumerian language is the earliest account of what is easily recognised as barley, followed by a pictograph of bread being baked, crumbled into water to form a mash, and then made into a drink, that is recorded as having made people feel "...wonderful and blissful". It could even be possible that bread was first baked to be a way to make beer that is easy to carry around.  They had found a "divine drink" -- they felt it was a gift from the gods.

Ancient beer makers used a kind of hard bread made from barley called 'bappir', meaning beer-bread. This was used by the Egyptians to control the colour, density, and taste of beer. While it was usually not eaten, Bappir was sometimes consumed during times of famine.

Some historians argue that bread was invented after beer to make it taste better, while others say that bread came first, and accidentally used in the process of brewing beer.

Normal beers have around 3-6 % alcohol (for the volume, i.e. in 100ml beer there is 3-5ml alcohol). In brewing beer, the amount of alcohol can be made more or less quite easily. The Belgian types of beer are made by adding more sugar. Through the fermentation, this will then turn to alcohol. Today, there are beers with between 2% and about 16% of alcohol (about the same alcohol content as wine). Spirits can have up to 80% alcohol. Some beer labels say there is no alcohol in them because it was taken out later. This is not completely true, though. Beers "without alcohol" usually do have less than 1% of alcohol.

Association football, or soccer, is a sport played between two teams. In the United States, Canada, Australia and Ireland, it is called soccer. In other English-speaking countries, it is called football. Association football is the most popular sport in the world.

Games like football have been played around the world since ancient times. The game came from England, where The Football Association made a standard set of rules for the game in 1824. The game has a black-and-white ball and originated in China, from its army. The players had a very heavy ball and goals high. England took the idea of the Chinese game and changed the rules a bit and now it is the modern game we know today.

Each team has 11 players on the field. One of the players is the goalkeeper, the only player who may touch the ball with the hands. The other ten are known as "outfield players" and try to kick the ball into their opponents' . The team that scores the most goals wins. A match has 90 minutes of play, with a break of 15 minutes called half-time.

Extra time may be added after half-time or after 90 minutes to make up for time that is lost during the game because of fouls, free kicks, corner kicks, injuries, bookings, substitutions or any other reason. A match may end in a tie except in some competition games in which a team must win. In that case, extra-time, with two halves of 15 minutes each, may be played, and if there is still a tie, a penalty shootout decides the winner. Sometimes,extra-time is skipped, and the game goes right into the penalty shootout.

Football is the world's most popular sport. It is played in more countries than any other game. In fact, FIFA has more members than the United Nations. It was originally an all-male sport, but it is now played by both males and females (separately except sometimes at the primary school level).

In Europe, the main competitions to compete are the Champions League for the top teams from the top leagues in each country. Then, the UEFA Europa League is for the next best teams from each member country of the Union of European Football Associations.

The most successful teams are FC Barcelona and Real Madrid from Spain; Bayern Munich and Borussia Dortmund from Germany; Galatasaray S.K. from Turkey; SL Benfica and Porto from Portugal; Juventus, AC Milan and Inter Milan from Italy; Liverpool, Manchester United and Manchester City from England; Paris Saint-Germain from France and Al Ahly from Egypt.

The most successful teams in the world in terms of domestic league results is Rangers F.C. from Scotland, who have won more domestic league titles than any other team in the world and have won the country's league 54 times, a world record. In May 2000, Rangers F.C. became the first team to win 100 trophies.

There are many competitions for football for both football clubs and countries. Football clubs usually play other teams in their own country, with a few exceptions. Here are a list of some of those exceptions:

Football clubs also play other teams in their continent in competitions such as the CAF Champions League and the UEFA Champions League.

There are six associations (CONCACAF, CONMEBOL, CAF, UEFA, AFC and OFC). Each association has its own continental competition between clubs and national teams. Some examples are the Copa América for CONMEBOL national teams and the Copa Libertadores for CONMEBOL clubs. FIFA organises international competitions between worldwide clubs and countries. Clubs play in the Club World Cup, and countries play for the FIFA World Cup.

The FIFA World Cup takes place every four years between national teams and is the world's most popular sporting event, more than even the Olympic Games. In football, there are two main competition types. In a "league", all of the teams play the same number of games, but in a "cup", teams leave the competition when they lose, and the last two teams play each other to decide the winner.

Berlin (; ) is the capital city of Germany. It is the largest city in the European Union by population, with around 3.7 million people in 2024. Berlin residents come from about 190 different countries.

The city is in the eastern part of Germany in Central Europe and is surrounded by many forests and lakes. Berlin has an area of . The rivers Havel, Dahme and Spree run through Berlin. It has a temperate climate.

Berlin is home to many famous buildings and monuments, like the Siegessäule, the Brandenburger Tor, the Reichstag and the boulevard Unter den Linden. On the boulevard is the Humboldt University. The city has many nightlife options.

Berlin is an important city for the history of Germany. The King of Prussia and the Emperor of Germany lived in Berlin. The government of Germany was in Berlin for many years. Bombs destroyed many buildings in the city in World War Two. The city was split into West Berlin and East Berlin after World War Two. After the Berlin Wall was built in 1961 very few people were allowed to cross from East Berlin into West Berlin. The wall divided the city until 1989 when the East German government decided to allow anyone to cross, and people decided to tear down the wall.

Berlin is a world city of culture, start ups, politics, media and science. There are a lot of technology companies in the city. They are important for the city's economy. Many planes and trains travel to and from Berlin because the city is an important place for tourism and business.

In 2018, Berlin had 3.75 million registered inhabitants in an area of . The city's population density was 4,206 inhabitants per km2. Berlin is the most populous city in Germany and the European Union. The entire Berlin-Brandenburg capital region has a population of more than 6 million in an area of . More than 2.0 million households were counted in the city. Around 60 percent of them were single-person households.

There are more than 20 communities with a population of at least 10,000 people in 2019, including German, Turkish, Polish, Syrian, Italian, Bulgarian, Russian, Lebanese, Palestinian, Serbian, Bosnian, Vietnamese, American, Romanian, Croatian, Chinese, Austrian, Ukrainian, French, British, Spanish, Israeli, Indian and Iranian communities.

In 2019, there were 777,345 registered residents of foreign nationality and another 542,975 German citizens with a "migration background", meaning they or one of their parents immigrated to Germany after 1955. Berlin residents originate from about 190 different countries.

Berlin is in northeastern Germany, in an area of low-lying marshy woodlands with a mainly flat terrain. It is part of the Northern European Plain. The river Spree and Havel are the two main rivers in the city. In Spandau, a borough in the west of Berlin, the Spree empties into the river Havel, which flows from north to south through western Berlin. The largest lakes being the Tegeler See, the Großer Wannsee and the Großer Müggelsee.

The Arkenberge hills in Pankow at  elevation are the highest point in Berlin. The Müggelberge (mountains) at  elevation is the highest natural point and the lowest is the Spektesee in Spandau, at  elevation.

Berlin is one of the most renowned centers of higher education and research in Germany and the world. Historically, 57 Nobel Prize winners are affiliated with the Berlin-based universities.

The city has four universities and more than 40 private, professional, and technical colleges in 2020. Around 200.000 students were enrolled in 2019. Among them around 20% have an international background.

The three largest universities combined have approximately 110,000 students. There are the Free University of Berlin (Free University of Berlin, FU Berlin) with about 35,000 students, the Humboldt University of Berlin (HU Berlin) with 40,000 students, and the Technical University of Berlin (TU Berlin) with 35,000 students. The Charité Medical School has around 9,000 students. The Berlin University of the Arts (UdK) has about 4,000 students and the ESMT Berlin is a leading business schools in Germany. The Berlin School of Economics and Law (HWR) has an enrollment of about 11,000 students, the Berlin University of Applied Sciences and Technology (BHT) of about 12,000 students, and the Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft (University of Applied Sciences for Engineering and Economics, HTW) of about 14,000 students.

Berlin is famous for its numerous cultural institutions, many of which enjoy international reputation. It is a trendsetting city. Young people, creatives and entrepreneurs continue to settle in the city and make Berlin a popular entertainment center in the world.

The Berlin cuisine and culinary offerings vary greatly. 23 restaurants in Berlin have been awarded one or more Michelin stars in 2021, which ranks the city at the top for the number of restaurants in Germany.

Many local foods originated from north German culinary traditions and include rustic and hearty dishes with pork, goose, fish, peas, beans, cucumbers, or potatoes. Typical Berliner fare include popular street food like the Currywurst Buletten (meat balls) and the Berliner doughnut, known in Berlin as . German bakeries offering a variety of breads and pastries are widespread. One of Europe's largest delicatessen markets is found at the department store KaDeWe. Among the world's largest chocolate stores is Fassbender & Rausch.

Berlin is also home to a diverse gastronomy scene reflecting the immigrant history of the city. Immigrants brought their culinary traditions to the city, such as the varied fast-food version of the döner kebab. Asian cuisine like Chinese, Vietnamese, Thai, Indian, Korean, and Japanese restaurants, as well as Spanish tapas bars, Italian, and Greek cuisine, can be found in many parts of the city.

Berlin is home to three opera houses: the Deutsche Oper, the Staatsoper Unter den Linden and the Komische Oper.

In 2018, the GDP of Berlin totaled €147 billion. The city is the largest metropolitan economy in Germany and the third largest in the European Union. Berlin's economy is dominated by the service sector, with around 85% of all companies doing business in services. In 2019, the total labor force in Berlin was about two million.

Important economic sectors in Berlin include life sciences, transportation, information and communication technologies, media and music, advertising and design, biotechnology, environmental services, construction, e-commerce, retail, hotel business, and medical engineering.

Research and development are important for the city. Berlin is part of the Eurozone.

The creative arts and entertainment business is an important part of Berlin's economy. The sector comprises music, film, advertising, architecture, art, design, fashion, performing arts, publishing, R&D, software, TV and radio.

In 2014, around 30,500 creative companies operated in the Berlin-Brandenburg metropolitan region, predominantly medium-sized enterprises. Generating a revenue of 15.6 billion Euro and 6% of all private economic sales, the culture industry grew from 2009 to 2014 at an average rate of 5.5% per year.

Berlin is an important center in the European and German film industry. It is home to more than 1,000 film and television production companies, 270 movie theaters, and around 300 national and international co-productions are filmed in the region every year. The Babelsberg Studios and the production company UFA are adjacent to Berlin in Potsdam. The city is also home of the German Film Academy (Deutsche Filmakademie), founded in 2003, and the European Film Academy, founded in 1988.

Many German and international companies have business or service centers in the city. For several years Berlin has been recognized as a major center of business founders. In 2015, Berlin generated the most venture capital for young startup companies in Europe.

Among the 10 largest employers in Berlin are the City-State of Berlin, Deutsche Bahn, the hospital providers Charité and Vivantes, the Federal Government of Germany, the local public transport provider BVG, Siemens, Deutsche Telekom and the e-commerce firm Zalando.

In 2025, around 800,000 Berliners were registered in one of the more than 2,300 sport and fitness clubs. The city of Berlin operates more than 60 public indoor and outdoor swimming pools. Berlin is the largest Olympic training center in Germany.

Berlin is a host city of major international sporting events. The city hosted the 1936 Summer Olympics and was the host city for the 2006 FIFA World Cup final. The World Athletics Championships was held at Olympiastadion in 2009. In 2015 Berlin was the venue for the UEFA Champions League Final. Berlin hosted the 2023 Special Olympics World Summer Games.

The annual Berlin Marathon – a course that holds the most top-10 world record runs – is an athletic competition in the city. The WTA Berlin is a woman's tennis tournament. The Berlin E-Prix is an annual motorsport race.

Several professional clubs representing the most important spectator team sports in Germany are based in Berlin. The football clubs 1. FC Union Berlin and Hertha BSC have the most members. Other professional team sport clubs include Alba Berlin (basketball), Füchse Berlin (handball), Eisbären Berlin (ice hockey) and Wasserfreunde Spandau 04 (waterpolo).

Berlin has partnerships with 17 cities. Each of the 12 boroughs also has their own sister cities.

Blood is a liquid in humans and many animals. There are about 5 litres of blood in the human body. Blood is pushed through the organism by the heart. It brings nutrients and oxygen to the tissues of the body. It also takes away waste and carbon dioxide from tissues.

Blood is made up of blood plasma and various cells. These include red blood cells, white blood cells and platelets. Platelets help blood to clot. Hemoglobin is in red blood cells. White blood cells help fight infections and heal wounds.

Blood plasma is the yellow liquid in which blood cells float. Plasma is made up of nutrients, electrolytes (salts), gases, non-protein hormones, waste, lipids, and proteins. These proteins are albumin, antibodies (also called immunoglobulins), clotting factors, and protein hormones. Plasma that does not have the protein fibrinogen is called serum and cannot clot. Adults have about 3 liters of plasma. Plasma is a liquid, mostly water (90%). Plasma takes up 55% of blood volume.

Another name for red blood cell is erythrocyte. 'Erythro' means red; 'cyte' means cell. RBC is an acronym for red blood cell.

RBCs carry oxygen and carbon dioxide around the body. Cells in the body need oxygen to live. Cells also make carbon dioxide as a waste.

RBCs are filled with hemoglobin. This is a protein. It is made to carry a large amount of oxygen. Hemoglobin has iron in it. The iron and oxygen gives hemoglobin its red color. Erythropoietin promotes the creation of RBCs. Blood type antigens are carried on the surface of red cells.

RBCs also help the blood stay at a normal pH. The blood needs to be at a pH of 7.4. If it is much more or less than 7.4, a person can get very sick or die. RBCs stops changes in blood pH. The proteins and the carbon dioxide in the RBC do this.

White blood cells are a big part of the immune system. They attack things that do not belong in the body. They kill germs such as bacteria and viruses. They kill cancer cells. White blood cells also help to fight other toxic substances.

White blood cells find where the germs are and start to destroy them. WBCs arrive in the blood. They also go out of the blood in places where there is infection. WBCs do this to fight the germs that make the infection. If they go out of the blood to fight an infection, they may return in the lymphatic system. So, WBCs are in lymph nodes.

Another name for white blood cell is leukocyte. 'Leuko' means white; 'cyte' means cell. WBC is an acronym for white blood cell. There are three main kinds of WBCs. They are lymphocytes, granulocytes and monocytes. Some of the WBCs mature into cells which do similar work in the tissues.

The different WBCs work in different ways. Some WBCs kill and eat germs and cancer cells. Some WBCs make antibodies. These are proteins that stick to a cell and tell other WBCs to kill it. Some WBCs make chemicals. They release these chemicals to fight things that do not belong in the body. These chemicals cause inflammation in a part of the body. When a germ makes someone sick, the body shows it. If a bacteria gets under someone's skin and causes an infection, the skin gets red, hot, and painful. This redness, heat, and pain are signs of inflammation. This shows that WBCs are fighting the infection and killing the bacteria.

Platelets help make blood clot. A clot is when the liquid blood becomes solid. The body makes blood clot when the skin is cut. This stops blood from going out of the skin too much.

For blood to be able to clot is essential. But rarely, some blood clots are bad. If a blood clot happens in a blood vessel going to the brain, it can cause a stroke. If it happens in a blood vessel going to the heart, it can cause a heart attack. This does not usually happen to young, healthy people with the exception of clotting conditions.

Platelets are not the only things that make clots. There are proteins in the blood that help make clots. Both platelets and clotting proteins are needed to make good clots.

On average, the human body has about 0.2 milligrams of gold, mostly found in the blood.

Blood cells are made in the bone marrow. The spleen (a smaller, vital  organ situated inside the ribcage) manages the amount of white blood cells that flow throughout your blood, it also can manage many functions of the liver.  The bone marrow is the soft material in the middle of bones. Special cells in the bone marrow make most of the blood cells in the body.

Plasma proteins are made mostly by the liver. The water and electrolytes in plasma come from the food and water that a person digests.

Although blood is a fluid, in some respects it is a kind of connective tissue. Its cells originate in bone marrow and the spleen, and in the blood there are potential molecular fibres in the form of fibrinogen. These are activated when a blood clot forms.

A black hole is a place in space where gravity is so strong that nothing can escape from it, even light. This idea comes from Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity. The outer edge of a black hole is called the event horizon. When something enters the black hole, it cannot get out. Black holes act like perfect black bodies, which means they do not reflect any light. According to quantum mechanics, black holes can slowly release a tiny amount of energy called Hawking radiation. But this radiation is so weak that it cannot be seen with the technology we have today. The density of black hole is highly massive and it has a very high gravitational field. The event horizon is the outermost part of the black hole.

The idea of objects with gravity so strong that light cannot escape was first talked about in the 1700s by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. In 1916, Karl Schwarzschild found the first solution to Einstein's general relativity equations that was about a black hole. Because of his important work, this solution is called the Schwarzschild metric. In 1958, David Finkelstein was the first to call a black hole a place in space where nothing can escape. For a long time, people thought black holes were just an idea in mathematics. They thought black holes were not real. In 1967, Jocelyn Bell Burnell discovered neutron stars. The first black hole found was Cygnus X-1. It was found by lots of scientists in 1971.

Black holes usually form when very large stars die at the end of their life. Black holes can grow by eating gas, dust, stars, or even combining with other black holes. Supermassive black holes are black holes which are millions of times more massive than the Sun. These big black holes might be made by merging with other black holes, eating stars, or from the collapse of huge clouds of gas. Scientists agree that supermassive black holes can be found at the centers of almost every galaxy.

Even though black holes are invisible to us, scientists can still find them. They look at how they affect matter and light near them. When matter falls toward a black hole, it can form a spinning disk called an accretion disk. Friction in the disk heats it up. This makes it glow very brightly. Sometimes, this creates a quasar, one of the brightest things in the universe. This can be found by telescopes on Earth or by telescopes in space such as Chandra or XMM Newton. Sometimes, if a star gets too close to a supermassive black hole, it can be torn apart into a bright stream of gas before being swallowed. Scientists can also find black holes by looking at how stars move. If a star moves around something invisible, scientists can find out the mass and location of the invisible object. This helps them know it is a black hole and not something else like a neutron star. Astronomers have found some black holes. However, "estimates from NASA [... say that maybe there are] as many as 10 million to a billion [black holes or] stellar black holes in the Milky Way", according to media (2025).

One was found at the center of our galaxy. This black hole, called Sagittarius A*, is about 4.3 million times heavier than our Sun.

The black hole closest to Earth, is Gaia BH1. Its distance from Earth is about 1,500 light-years.

In 1783, an English clergyman named John Michell wrote that it might be possible for something to be so heavy you would have to go at the speed of light to get away from its gravity. Gravity gets stronger as something gets more massive. For a small thing, like a rocket, to escape from a larger thing, like Earth, it has to escape the pull of the Earth's gravity or it will fall back. The speed that it must travel  to get away is called escape velocity. Bigger planets (like Jupiter) and stars have more mass, and have stronger gravity than Earth. Therefore, the escape velocity would need to be much faster. John Michell thought it was possible for something to be so big that the escape velocity would need to be faster than the speed of light, so even light could not escape. In 1796, Pierre-Simon Laplace wrote about the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du système du Monde (it was removed from later editions).

Some scientists thought Michell might be right, but others thought that light had no mass and would not be pulled by gravity. His theory was forgotten.

In 1916 Albert Einstein wrote an explanation of gravity called general relativity.

A few months later, while serving in World War I, the German physicist Karl Schwarzschild used Einstein's equations to show that a black hole could exist. The Schwarzschild radius is the size of the event horizon of a non-rotating black hole. This radius was the measurement where the escape velocity was equal to the speed of light. If the radius of a star is smaller, then light is unable to escape, and it would be a dark star, or black hole.

In 1930, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar predicted that stars heavier than the sun could collapse when they ran out of hydrogen or other nuclear fuels to burn. In 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and H. Snyder calculated that a star would have to be at least three times as massive as the Sun to form a black hole. In 1967, John Wheeler invented the name "black hole" for the first time. Before that, they were called "dark stars".

In 1970, Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose showed that black holes must exist. Although the black holes are  (they cannot be seen), some of the matter that is falling into them is very bright.

As of spring 2019, there was an image of a black hole, or rather, the things orbiting the black hole. The image required many photos from different locations. One of the team members (Katie Bouman) made a compilation of all the images into one singular image.

In 2020, Roger Penrose, Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for their work on the theory of black holes.

The gravitational collapse of huge (high-mass) stars cause "stellar mass" black holes. This happens when really big stars run out of fuel.

Star formation in the early universe may have created very big stars. These stars were so large that their cores collapsed into black holes. The black hole at the center of these stars slowly consumed the star from within making black holes of up to 103 solar masses. These black holes may be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies. If these stars really existed, they may even explain where supermassive black holes come from.

Most of the energy released in gravitational collapse is given off very quickly. A distant observer sees the material falling in slowly and then stop just above the event horizon because of gravitational time dilation. The light given off just before the event horizon is delayed an infinite amount of time. So the observer never sees the formation of the event horizon. Instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away.

Black holes have also been found in the middle of almost every galaxy in the known universe. These are called supermassive black holes (SBH), and are the biggest black holes of all. They formed when the Universe was very young, and also helped to form all the galaxies.

Quasars are believed to be powered by gravity collecting material into supermassive black holes in the centers of distant galaxies. Light cannot escape the SBHs at the center of quasars, so the escaping energy is made outside the event horizon by gravitational stresses and immense friction on the incoming material.

Huge central masses (106 to 109 solar masses) have been measured in quasars. Several dozen nearby large galaxies, with no sign of a quasar nucleus, have a similar central black hole in their nuclei. Therefore, it is thought that all large galaxies have one, but only a small fraction are active (with enough accretion to power radiation) and so are seen as quasars.

A black hole is separated from the rest of the Universe by its event horizon. Anything which crosses it cannot escape, not even light. Anything that happens inside this boundary can't be seen from the outside.

Near a black hole, time appears to slow down. This is known as gravitational time dilation. This happens because gravity affects time. The stronger the gravity, the slower time passes. Objects seem to turn red and fade away when they reach the event horizon. This is known as gravitational redshift. At the event horizon, this time dilation becomes infinite.

The shape of the event horizon for non-rotating black holes is spherical and slightly flattened for spinning ones. If a black hole spins too fast and/or has too much charge, it might lose its event horizon, though if this actually happens is unknown.

The ergosphere is the region around a rotating black hole where spacetime is rotating faster than light. This region also may allow energy extraction from the black hole’s spin, via either the Penrose process or superradient scattering.The black hole is surrounded by a ring of gas or dust where light across a different wavelength pass just like x- ray.

The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness in which photons that move on tangents to that sphere (sideways) would be trapped in a circular orbit about the black hole forever. Due to quantum uncertainty, photons won’t actually orbit forever here, however they can still orbit for a long time. For rotating black holes, there are actually many photon spheres, depending on the angle that the photon is going relative to how the black hole is spinning. However, these paths are still unstable, with the exception of the one inside the black hole (which itself most likely would not actually exist due to the mass and energy falling in).

At the middle of a black hole, there is a gravitational center called a singularity. It is impossible to see into it because the gravity prevents any light escaping.

Outside the event horizon, light and matter will still be pulled toward the black hole. If a black hole is surrounded by matter, the matter will form an "accretion disk" around the black hole. An accretion disk looks something like the rings of Saturn, but thicker, bigger, and way brighter. As it gets sucked in, the matter gets very hot and shoots x-ray radiation into space. Think of this as the water spinning around the hole before it falls in, getting vaporized by friction.

Most black holes are too far away for us to see the accretion disk and jet. The only way to know a black hole is there is by seeing how stars, gas and light behave around it. With a black hole nearby, even objects as big as a star move in a different way, usually faster than they would if the black hole was not there.

Since we cannot see black holes, they must be detected by other means. When a black hole passes between us and a source of light, the light bends around the black hole creating a mirror image. This effect is called gravitational lensing.

Hawking radiation is black body radiation which is emitted by black holes, due to quantum effects near the event horizon. It is named after the physicist Stephen Hawking, who provided a theoretical argument for its existence in 1974.

Hawking radiation reduces the mass and the energy of the black hole and is therefore also known as black hole evaporation. This happens because of the virtual particle-antiparticle pairs. Due to quantum fluctuations, this is when one of the particles falls in and the other gets away with the energy/mass. Because of this, black holes that lose more mass than they gain through other means are expected to shrink and ultimately vanish. Micro black holes (MBHs) are predicted to be larger net emitters of radiation than larger black holes and should shrink and dissipate faster.

The no hair theorem basically says that once a black hole has formed, it only has three physical properties that we can measure: mass, charge, and spin. If this is true, then if two black holes had the same mass, charge and spin then they will look the same. As of 2020, it is unclear if the no hair theorem is true for real black holes.

The properties are special, because all of them can be measured from outside the black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, far away from the black hole. The angular momentum or spin can also be measured from far away.

When anything falls into a black hole, any property that is not part of the three properties of a black hole, like shape or charge distribution, gets erased and cannot be seen from outside. This is a very big problem because we lose a lot of information about what went into the black hole, including certain quantum properties and physics tells us that information cannot be destroyed. This puzzle is called the black hole information loss paradox.

Blindness is to not see anything. Some people are called blind, even though they can see a little bit. This is because they cannot see clearly, but only see unfocused shapes or colors.

In modern countries, few young people are blind. In all the world, blindness is mostly caused by malnutrition and diseases of old people, like cataracts and trachoma. People can become blind because of diseases or accidents, but sometimes people are born blind.

Legal blindness is defined as a level of visual acuity low enough to qualify for disability benefits and\or special accommodations. Legal blindness is also defined as being unable to be completely corrected by prescription glasses or contact lenses.

Some people are color blind, which means they can see, but cannot tell certain colors apart.

When people are blind they use such things as the alphabet in braille and guide dogs to do every day life things.  In addition, they may wear sunglasses all the time to hide and \or protect their eyes.

Famous blind people have included Louis Braille, the inventor of the braille alphabet, Stevie Wonder, Ray Charles and Helen Keller.

A banana is the common name for a type of fruit and also the name for the herbaceous plants that grow it. These plants belong to the genus Musa. They are mostly found in the tropical region of Southeast Asia. They are considered to be berries.

Historians think the first people to grow bananas for food lived in Papua New Guinea. Today, they are grown in tropical regions around the world. Most banana plants are grown for their fruits, which are a type of berry. Some are grown as ornamental plants, or for their fibres.

There are about 110 different types of bananas. In popular culture and commerce, "banana" usually refers to the soft and sweet kind, also known as dessert bananas. Other kinds, or cultivars, of bananas have a firmer, starchier fruit. Those are usually called plantains. Plantains are mostly used for cooking or fibre.

Other than being used as food, beer can be made by fermenting the juice of certain cultivars in Africa, known as beer bananas. The ash of bananas can be used to make soap. In Asia, bananas are often planted to provide shade to plants that like shade, for example coffee, cocoa, nutmeg or black pepper. Because of this, banana plants can often be found in plantations of other crops.

If a banana has all of its skin peeled, the remaining banana is called the pulp. All of the skin peeled out is called the banana peel.

The banana plant is the largest herbaceous flowering plant. Banana plants are often mistaken for trees. Bananas have a false stem (called pseudostem), which is made by the lower part of the leaves. This pseudostem can grow to be two to eight meters tall. Each pseudostem grows from a corm. A pseudostem is able to produce a single bunch of bananas. After fruiting, the pseudostem dies and is replaced. When most bananas are ripe, they turn yellow or, sometimes, red. Unripe bananas are green in color.

Banana leaves grow in a spiral and may grow  long and  wide. They are easily torn by the wind, which results in a frayed look.

The banana fruits grow from a banana fruit in hanging , also called a bunch or banana stem. The fruits grow in rows called tiers or hands. There can be as many as twenty fruits to a hand, and as many as twenty tiers in a bunch. A bunch usually weighs between 30 and 50 kilograms (65 to 110 pounds).

A single fruit weighs about 125 grams (4.4 ounces) on average; about three quarters of this is water.

Each banana (or finger) has a protective outer layer (called peel or skin). There is a fleshy part inside that readily splits into three segments. It may be the only tri-segmented fruit in the world. Both the skin and inner part can be eaten. Western cultures generally eat the inside raw and throw away the skin. Some Asian cultures eat both the skin and the inside cooked. Each fruit has many strings that run between the skin and the inner part.

Before cultivation, bananas were smaller, and had seeds. What you see now is the result of artificial selection by humans. This is true of most popular fruits.

Bananas are grown in at least 107 countries. The banana species growing in the wild have fruits with many hard, large seeds, but almost all bananas grown to be eaten have seedless fruits. Bananas are classified either as dessert bananas or as green cooking bananas. Almost all exported bananas are of the dessert types. Only about ten to fifteen percent of all production is for export. Dessert bananas change their color and usually turn yellow when they are ripe; plantains and bananas generally used for cooking stay green. Certain bananas have other colors when ripe.

The countries that produce the most bananas include India, Brazil, China, Ecuador and the Philippines. The top five countries that exported bananas were Ecuador, Costa Rica, the Philippines, Colombia and Guatemala. The United States, the European Union and Japan buy the most bananas. Bananas are among the most valuable agricultural export products; They provided about sixty percent of export earnings of Saint Lucia and about twelve percent of the Gross Domestic Product of the country, between 1994 and 1996.

Some people are allergic to bananas. There are two basic forms of these allergies. The first is known as oral allergy syndrome. Within an hour of eating a banana, swelling starts inside the mouth or throat. This allergy is related to allergies caused by pollen, like that of the birch tree. The other is similar to latex allergies. It causes urticaria and potentially serious upper gastrointestinal symptoms.

The fibre gained from the banana plant has been used to make textiles for a long time. In Japan, bananas have been grown to be used for clothing and in the house since at least the 13th century. In the Japanese system, the leaves and shoots are cut from the plant regularly to make sure they are soft. The harvested shoots must first be boiled in lye to prepare the fibres for the making of the yarn. These banana shoots produce fibres of varying degrees of softness. They can be used for yarns and textiles of different qualities, and for specific uses. For example, the outermost fibres of the shoots are the coarsest  they are good for tablecloths. The softest innermost fibres are desirable for kimono and kamishimo. This traditional Japanese banana cloth making process has many steps, all performed by hand.

Another system is used in Nepal. There the trunk of the banana plant is harvested instead. Small pieces of this trunk are then softened. The fibres are extracted mechanically, bleached, and dried. They are then sent to the Kathmandu Valley, where high-end rugs are produced. These rugs have a texture and general qualities similar to that of silk. These banana fibre rugs are woven by traditional Nepalese hand-knotted methods.

Banana fiber is also used to make banana paper. There are two different kinds of banana paper: paper made from the bark, and paper made from the fibre and from unused fruits.

The brain is the part of the body which lets living beings think. It does some bodily functions, such as telling the rest of the body what to do. Almost all animals have a brain: the exceptions are sponges, cnidarians, and lancelets. Plants and fungi do not have brains, although they do react to changes in their environment.

The brain is made up of special cells called nerves, which are connected with each other and with other nerves in our body. The brain gets input from sense organs, and changes behavior in response to this information. In humans, the brain also controls our use of language, and is capable of  thought. The brain is the main control centre of the whole body.

In all animals, the brain is protected in some way. In ourselves, and all vertebrates, it is protected by the bones of the skull.

The brain does the thinking, learning, and feeling for the body. For humans, it is the source of consciousness. The brain also controls basic autonomic body actions, like breathing, digestion, and heartbeat, that happen automatically. These activities, and much else, are governed by unconscious functions of the brain and nervous system. All the information about the world gathered by our senses is sent through nerves into the brain, allowing us to see, hear, smell, taste, and feel things. The brain processes this information, and we experience it as pictures, sounds, and so on. The brain also uses nerves to tell the body what to do, for example by telling muscles to move or our heart to beat faster.

This is generally true but some activity is caused by the spinal cord directly. For example, reflex actions do not involve the brain. In lower animals, a lot is done without their brain being involved.

All vertebrates have brains and, over time, their brains have evolved to become more complex. Some simple animals, however, like sponges, do not have anything like a brain. Segmented invertebrates have ganglions in each segment, and a ring of nervous tissue around the alimentary canal at the front. This acts to bring sense data from the front into play with the movement of the body.

In mammals, the brain is made of three main parts: the cerebrum, the cerebellum, and the brainstem. The surface of the cerebrum is the cerebral cortex, which all vertebrates have. Mammals also have an extra layer, the neocortex. This is the key to the behaviour which is typical of mammals, especially humans.

The cortex has sensory, motor, and association areas. The sensory areas are the areas that get and process information from the senses. The motor areas control voluntary movements, especially fine movements performed by the hand. The right half of the motor area controls the left side of the body, and vice versa. Association areas produce a meaningful experience of the world and supports abstract thinking and language. This enables us to interact effectively. Most connections are from one area of the cortex to another, rather than to subcortical areas; The figure may be as high as 99%.

The thalamus puts together the input from most of the senses. It is the place in the brain which makes the "picture" we have of the world outside us. The thalamus sits centrally under the cerebral cortex.

The cerebellum coordinates muscles so they work together. It is also the centre of keeping position and balance, and motor skills. It is one of the most ancient parts of the brain and sits at the back underneath the cerebral cortex.

The brain stem is at the back of the brain (actually underneath it in humans). It joins the rest of the brain with the spinal cord. It has lots of different parts that control different jobs in the body: for instance, the brain stem controls breathing, heartbeat, sneezing, eye blinking, and swallowing. Body temperature and hunger are also controlled by parts of the brain stem. Roughly speaking, it deals with the more automated aspects of nervous function.

The volume of the human brain (relative to the size of the whole body) is very large, compared to that of most other animals. The human brain also has a very large surface (called cortex) for its size, which is possible because it is very wrinkled. If the human cortex were flattened, it would be close to a square meter in area. Some other animals also have very wrinkled brains, such as dolphins and elephants. Here is a rule of thumb: the larger an animal is, the larger its brain will be.p15 Even allowing for that, the human brain, and in particular the neocortex, is very large. We know it increased in size four-fold over the last several million years of evolution.p79 There are ideas about why this happened, but no-one is quite sure. Most theories suggest complex social activity and the evolution of language would make a larger brain advantageous.p80 As an additional note, Einstein's brain weighed only 1,230 grams, which is less than the average adult male brain (about 1,400 grams). The detailed organisation of a brain obviously matters, but in ways which are not understood at present.

A human brain accounts for about 2% of the body's weight, but it uses about 20% of its energy. It has about 50–100 billion nerve cells (also called neurons), and roughly the same number of support cells, called glia. The job of neurons is to receive and send information to and from the rest of the body, while glia provide nutrients and guide blood flow to the neurons, allowing them to do their job. Each nerve cell has contact with as many as 10,000 other nerve cells through connections called synapses.

The Big Bang is a physical theory about how the universe started expanding, and then made the stars and galaxies we see today. The Big Bang is the name that scientists use for the most common theory of the universe, from the very early stages to the present day.

The most commonly considered alternatives are called the Steady State theory and Plasma cosmology, according to both of which the universe has no beginning or end.

According to the theory the Big Bang began as a very hot, small, and dense superforce (the mix of the four fundamental forces), with no stars, atoms, form, or structure (called a "singularity"). Then about 13.8 billion years ago, space expanded very quickly (thus the name "Big Bang"). This started the formation of atoms, which eventually led to the formation of stars and galaxies. It was Georges  who first noted (in 1927) that the universe is expanding. The universe is still expanding today, and getting colder as well.

As a whole, the universe is growing and the temperature is falling as time passes. Cosmology is the study of how the universe began and its development. Some scientists who study cosmology have agreed that the Big Bang theory matches what they have observed so far.

Astronomer Fred Hoyle mockingly called the theory the "Big Bang" on his radio show. Scientists who did not agree with him decided to use it.

Scientists base the Big Bang theory on many different observations. The most important is the redshift of very far away galaxies. Cosmological redshift is the Doppler effect occurring in light. When an object moves away from Earth, its color rays look more similar to the color red than they actually are, because the movement stretches the wavelength of light given off by the object. Scientists use the word "red hot" to describe this stretched light wave because red is the longest wavelength on the visible spectrum. The more redshift there is, the faster the object is moving away. By measuring the redshift, scientists proved that the universe is expanding, and they can work out how fast the object is moving away from the Earth. With very exact observation and measurements, scientists believe that the universe was a singularity approximately 13.8 billion years ago. Because most things become colder as they expand, scientists assume that the universe was very small and very hot when it started. This does not take into account other possible (non-cosmological)  causes of redshift.

Other observations that support the Big Bang theory are the amounts of chemical elements in the universe. Amounts of very light elements, such as hydrogen, helium, and lithium seem to agree with the theory of the Big Bang. The same is true, however, for Static State theory and plasma cosmology. Scientists also detected what they call the cosmic microwave background radiation. These electromagnetic waves are everywhere in the universe. This radiation is now very weak and cold, but is thought to have been very strong and very hot a long time ago.

It can be said that time had no meaning before the Big Bang. If the Big Bang was the beginning of time, then there was no universe before the Big Bang, since there could not be any "before" if there was no time. Other ideas state that the Big Bang was not the beginning of time 13.8 billion years ago. Instead, some believe that there was a completely different universe before the Big Bang, and it may have been very different from the one we know today.

Nonetheless, in November 2019, Jim Peebles, awarded the 2019 Nobel Prize in Physics for his theoretical discoveries in physical cosmology, noted in his award presentation that he does not support the Big Bang Theory due to the lack of concrete supporting evidence, and stated, "It's very unfortunate that one thinks of the beginning whereas in fact, we have no good theory of such a thing as the beginning."

Many things happened in the first picosecond of the universe's time:

Matsuo Munefusa, known as Matsuo Bashō (, 1644 - November 28, 1694) was a Japanese poet. He is known as the greatest maker of haiku, a kind of poetry with 17 syllables. The Japanese written language was difficult to master, but haiku was easy for him to write. Matsuo's haikus included characteristics of nature and the four seasons. The reader has to use their imagination to understand his poems.

According to Japanese custom, he is usually called Basho without his family name, and his signature as a poet does not include his house name. He signed usually "はせを". He is one of the greatest writers of the Edo period, and he raised the haiku form to its highest level.

He was born in Iga, now a part of Mie prefecture in a samurai (Japanese warrior) family. After many years of samurai life he found that poetry would be his life work, and gave up being a samurai. He started his life as a poet when he served his lord as a samurai. Matsuo became educated in classical Japanese poems. First he named himself Tosei (桃青) meaning "unripe peach in blue". Basho took this name because he admired a Chinese poet, Li Po whose name means plum in white.

He quit samurai life 1666, and in 1675 he moved to Edo, today called Tokyo. There, in 1678, he got to be a haiku master ("Sosho") and began the life of a working poet. In 1680, he moved to Fukagawa, where he had a house. This was just outside of Edo. One of his followers gifted him a banana plant (basho-an). He planted the plant and called himself Basho because it became his favorite tree in his garden.

In his life, Basho visited many places. Those travels were important for his writings. He visited his disciples (followers) and taught them by making renga, a series of haiku, with them. He also visited famous places in Japanese history. These visits made his writing much stronger.

His most famous book is Oku no Hosomichi ("The Narrow Road Through the Deep North"). This book was written after a trip. On the trip, Basho and his disciple left Edo on March 24, 1689. They went around Tohoku and Hokuriku, and returned to Edo in 1691. The trip in this book ends in Ogaki, Mino (Gifu prefecture today) with one of his haiku where he hinted that he wanted to visit Ise shrine after staying in Ogaki. Matsuo was considered to have written some of the most beautiful travel diaries ever written in Japanese.

Basho died because of disease in early autumn of 1694 in Osaka, while staying at a house of his disciple on a trip.  Before his death, he made a haiku as his last words:

Biochemistry is the study of chemical reactions in living beings, and of biological molecules in general. It is important to cell biology and physiology. The study of biochemistry involves enzymes, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, sugars, proteins, and lipids. In the body, most of the molecules are polymers built of long chains of smaller molecules. Biochemistry studies the chemical transformations which produce these small building-block molecules, and which produce energy from food. A person who studies biochemistry is called a biochemist.

The biologic polymers can have between tens of thousands to tens of millions of atoms or more. These polymers are composed of many small molecules, each of which has no more than fifty atoms. These small molecules are made almost exclusively from carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. They also contain sulfur, phosphorus, and a few other atoms, which are critical to the biological functioning of these polymers.

Nucleic acids are long chain molecules which are of two kinds: DNA and RNA. Their building blocks are called nucleotides.

DNA is found in every cell. It contains the information needed to make all of the nucleic acids and all of the proteins. It is found joined up in a double helix. It is the substance of heredity and holds the information which life passes from generation to generation.

RNA acts to make the information from DNA work inside the cells of the body. To make a particular protein the information in the DNA is transferred to an RNA molecule. Another RNA molecule uses this as a set of instructions for making the protein. The RNA which makes protein is called a ribosome and it acts as a ribozyme vastly increasing the speed with which the individual amino acids connect together to form the protein.

Proteins are polymers of amino acids. There are twenty different common types of amino acid.

Broadly speaking, proteins have two kinds of functions. The first is structural: they make up many of the key structures in cells and tissues. Muscle, hair, and skin are all mainly made of protein. The second is functional: as enzymes they greatly speed up the chemical reactions in a living cell. All cellular life consists of a thousand, or more, chemical reactions, called metabolism, which transform the molecules eaten into energy, or into other molecules the cell needs to survive. The function of proteins is to speed up these reactions, often by over a million times faster. In addition, they cause chemical reactions to occur which would not be without the action of the protein.

Sugars are the simplest carbohydrates. The monosaccharides are "single sugars", such as glucose and fructose. The disaccharides are two monosaccharides joined. Table sugar (cane sugar) is a disaccharide of glucose and fructose. The polysaccharides are made from many monosaccharides joined. The vast majority of polysaccharides are polymers of glucose and are of two types: starch and cellulose. Starch is the white stuff of grain, potatoes, apples, and bread, and is a readily available source of energy for the body. Cellulose is the structural material that holds up all plants. Half of the material that makes wood is cellulose.

Carbohydrates have a number of functions in the body, but the most important is to act as a ready source of energy for the cell's metabolism. By breaking the chemical bonds in carbohydrates, energy is released and can be used by the body.

Lipids are fats, and waxes. Saturated lipids contain single bonds and are found in butter and lard. Unsaturated lipids have one or more double bonds and are often found in oils. The human body stores lipids as an energy source. When the body needs a large amount of energy, lipid molecules are broken down to release that energy.

Bees are flying insects of the Hymenoptera, which also includes ants, wasps and sawflies. There are about 20,000 species of bees. Bees collect pollen from flowers. Bees can be found on all continents except Antarctica.

The European honey bee (called Apis mellifera by biologists), is kept by humans for honey. Keeping bees to make honey is called beekeeping, or apiculture.

Flowers were pollinated by insects such as beetles long before bees first appeared. Bees are different because they are specialized as pollination agents. Their body and behaviour  make pollination easier. Bees are generally better at the task than other pollinating insects such as beetles, flies, butterflies and pollen wasps. The appearance of such floral specialists is believed to have driven the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, the bees themselves.

Bees, like ants, evolved from wasps. The ancestors of bees were wasps in a family which preyed on other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have come from the capture of prey insects that were covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. Similar behaviour could be switched to pollen collection. This same evolutionary scenario has occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the group known as "pollen wasps" also evolved from predatory ancestors.

A recently reported bee fossil, of the genus Melittosphex, is considered "an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea, sister-group to the modern bees", and dates from the Lower Cretaceous (~100 mya). Features of its morphology  place it clearly within the bees. It still has two ancestral traits of the legs which betray its origin. The issue is still under debate, and the phylogenetic relationships among bee families are poorly understood.

Like other insects, the body of a bee can be divided into three parts: the head, thorax (the middle part), and abdomen (the back part). Also like other insects, bees have three pairs of legs and two pairs of wings. Many bees are hairy and have yellow and black or orange and black warning colours

Many bees have  (like a  needle) on the rear of their bodies. If they get confused, angry, or scared they may sting, and inject venom, which hurts. Once a worker bee has stung someone   the bee dies after a short while, but other types of bee and wasp can sting again. Some people are allergic to bee stings and may even die from them.

Some bees are eusocial insects; this means they live in organized groups called colonies. Honey bees, the kind of bee used in beekeeping, are eusocial. The home of a bee colony is called a hive. One hive has only one queen.

There are three kinds of bees in a honey bee colony. A queen bee is the most important bee in the colony because she will lay the eggs. The queen bee only uses her stinger to sting other queen bees. The queen is usually the mother of the worker bees. She ate a special jelly called royal jelly from when she was young. Worker bees are females too, and they are the bees that collect pollen from flowers and will fight to protect the colony. Workers do a waggle dance to tell the others where they have found nectar; Karl von Frisch discovered this.

Drone bees (males) mate with the queen bee so that she can lay eggs.  The only function of the male drone is to mate.  They do no other work in the hive.

In haplodiploid species, females develop from fertilized eggs and males from unfertilized eggs.

Because a male has only one copy of each gene, his daughters (which are diploid, with two copies of each gene) share 100% of his genes and 50% of their mother's. Therefore, they share 75% of their genes with each other.

It is unclear whether this system is necessary for eusociality.

Monogamy (queens mating singly) is the ancestral state for all eusocial species so far known, so it is likely that haplodiploidy contributed to the evolution of eusociality in bees.

Atheism is the idea that rejects the belief in a God or gods.

It is the opposite of theism, which is the belief that at least one god exists. A person who s belief in gods is called an atheist. Adding an a, meaning "without", before the word theism results in atheism, or literally, "without theism".

Atheism is not the same as agnosticism: agnostics say that there is no way to know whether gods exist or not. Being an agnostic does not have to mean a person rejects or believes in god. Some agnostics are theists, believing in god. The theologian Kierkegaard is an example. Other agnostics are atheists. Gnosticism refers to a claim of knowledge. A gnostic has sufficient knowledge to make a claim. Adding an a, meaning "without", before the word gnostic results in agnostic, or literally, "without knowledge".

While theism refers to belief in one or more gods, gnosticism refers to knowledge. In practice, most people simply identify as a theist, atheist, or agnostic.

Anaxagoras was the first known atheist. He was an Ionian Greek, born in Clazomenae (usually pronounced "Cleh-zominee") in what is now Asia Minor. He travelled to other Greek cities, and his ideas were well known in Athens. Socrates mentioned that his works could be bought in Athens for a drachma. Eventually he was prosecuted and condemned for impiety, and banished from Athens.

Anaxagoras' beliefs were interesting. He thought the Sun was not a god, and was not animated (alive). The Sun was "a red-hot mass many times larger than the Peloponnese". The Moon was a solid body with geographical features, and made of the same substance as the Earth. The world was a globe (spherical).

Atheists often give reasons why they do not believe in a god or gods. Three of the reasons that they often give are the problem of evil, the argument from inconsistent revelations, and the argument from nonbelief. Not all atheists think these reasons provide complete proof that gods cannot exist, but these are the reasons given to support rejecting belief that gods exist.

Some atheists do not believe in any god because they feel that there is no evidence for any god nor gods and goddesses, so believing any type of theism means believing unproved . These atheists think a simpler explanation for everything is methodological naturalism which means that only natural things exist. Occam's razor shows simple explanations without many unproved guesses are more likely to be true.


The word "atheism" comes from the Greek language. It can be divided into a- (ἄ), a Greek prefix meaning "without", and theos (θεός), meaning "god", and recombined to form "without gods" or "godless". In Ancient Greece it also meant "impious".

Starting in about the 5th century BCE, the word came to describe people who were "severing relations with the gods" or "denying the gods". Before then, the meaning had been closer to "impious". There is also the abstract noun,  (), "atheism".

Cicero transliterated the Greek word into the Latin atheos. This word was often used in the debate between early Christians and Hellenists. Each side used it to label the other, in a bad way.

Karen Armstrong writes that "During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, the word 'atheist' was still reserved exclusively for  ... The term 'atheist' was an insult. Nobody would have dreamed of calling himself an atheist."

Atheism was first used to describe an openly positive belief in late 18th-century Europe, meaning disbelief in the monotheistic Abrahamic god.

The 20th century saw the term expand to refer to disbelief in all deities. However, it is still common in Western society to describe atheism as simply "disbelief in God".

In many places, it is (or was) a crime to make public the idea of atheism. Examples would be to claim the Bible or Qur'an could not be true, or to speak or write that there is no god.

Muslim apostasy, that is becoming an atheist or believing in a god other than Allah, may be a dangerous act in places with many conservative Muslim people. Many religious courts have punished and some still punish this act with the death penalty. Many countries still have laws against atheism. Although it is considered by most Muslim scholars to be a sin, not all agree, that is should be punishable. For example, "Surah Al Kafirun" in the Quran is clearly stating everyone's freedom to choose his religion and beliefs. The laws against Atheism in the Muslim World is not universal, and is based on each society's interpretation of the Holy Book.

Atheism is becoming more common, mainly in South America, North America, Oceania and Europe (by percentage of people that had a religion before and started to be atheist).

In many countries, mainly in the Western world, there are laws that protect atheists' right to express their atheistic belief (freedom of speech). This means that atheists have the same rights under the law as everyone else. Freedom of religion in international law and treaties includes the freedom to not have a religion.

Today, about 2.3% of the world's population describes itself as atheist. About 11.9% is described as nontheist.

Between 64% and 65% of Japanese describe themselves as atheists, agnostics, or non-believers,

and up to 48% in Russia. The percentage of such people in European Union member states ranges between 6% (Italy) and 85% (Sweden). In the United States, according to Pew and Gallup—two of the most reputable polling firms in America—both conclude that about 10% of Americans say they do not believe in God, and this figure has been slowly creeping up over the decades. The real number is likely higher than this, due to the stigma around atheism.

People disagree about what atheism means. They disagree on when to call certain people atheists or not.

George H. Smith created the expressions "implicit atheism" and "explicit atheism" to describe the difference between different types of Atheism. Implicit atheism is when you do not believe in God because you do not know about the concept of God. Explicit atheism is when you do not believe in God after learning about the idea.

In 1772, Baron d'Holbach said that "All children are born atheists; they have no idea of God".

In 1979 George H. Smith said that: "The man who is unacquainted with theism is an atheist because he does not believe in a god. This category would also include the child [who is able to] grasp the issues involved, but who is still unaware of those issues. The fact that this child does not believe in god qualifies him as an atheist".

Ernest Nagel disagrees with Smith's definition of atheism as an "absence of theism", saying only explicit atheism is true atheism. This means that Nagel believes that to be an atheist, a person needs to know about God and then  the idea of God.

have looked at strong (sometimes called positive) atheism against weak (sometimes called negative) atheism. According to this idea, anyone who does not believe in a god or gods is either a weak or a strong atheist.

Strong atheism is the certain belief that no god exists. An older way of saying strong atheism is to say "positive atheism". Weak atheism is all other forms of not believing in a god or gods. An older way of saying weak atheism is to say "negative atheism" These  have been used more in philosophical writing and in Catholic beliefs.

Under this definition of atheism, most agnostics are weak atheists.

Michael Martin says that agnosticism includes weak atheism. Some agnostics, including Anthony Kenny, disagree. They think being an agnostic is different from being an atheist. They think atheism is no different from believing in a god, because both require belief. This overlooks the reality that agnostics also have their own belief or "claim to knowledge".

Agnostics say that it cannot be known if a god or gods exist. In their view, strong atheism requires a leap of faith.

Atheists usually respond by saying that there is no difference between an idea about religion with no proof, and an idea about other things

The lack of proof that god does not exist does not mean that there is no god, but it also does not mean that there is a god.

Scottish philosopher J.J.C. Smart says that "sometimes a person who is really an atheist may describe herself, even passionately, as an agnostic because of unreasonable generalised philosophical skepticism which would preclude us from saying that we know anything whatever, except perhaps the truths of mathematics and formal logic".

So, some popular atheist authors such as Richard Dawkins like to show the difference between theist, agnostic and atheist positions by the  assigned to the statement "God exists".

In everyday life, many people define natural phenomena without the need of a god or gods. They do not deny the existence of one or more gods, they simply say that this existence is not necessary. Gods do not provide a purpose to life, nor influence it, according to this view.

Many scientists practice what they call methodological naturalism. They silently adopt philosophical naturalism and use the scientific method. Their belief in a god does not affect their results.

Theoretic atheism tries to find arguments against the existence of god, and to disprove the arguments of theism, such as the argument from design or Pascal's Wager. These theoretical reasons have many forms, most of them are ontological or epistemological. Some rely on psychology or sociology.

According to Immanuel Kant, there can be no proof of a supreme being that is made using reason. In his work, "Critique of Pure Reason", he tries to show that all attempts of either proving the existence of God, or disproving it, end in logical contradictions. Kant says that it is impossible to know whether there are any higher beings. This makes him an agnostic.

Ludwig Feuerbach published The Essence of Christianity in 1841. In his work he postulates the following:

The Aztecs were Native American people who lived in Mesoamerica. They ruled the Aztec Empire from the 14th century to the 16th century.

The name "Aztec" comes from the phrase "people from Aztlan". Legends say that Aztlan was the first place the Aztecs ever lived.  "Aztlan" means "place of the herons" in the Nahuatl language.p. 8

Often the term "Aztec" refers just to the people of Tenochtitlan. This was a city on an island in Lake Texcoco. These people called themselves the Mexica which is why the country is called Mexico, or the Nahua which is why their language is called Nahuatl. This civilization lived in central Mexico between the 14th and 16th centuries. Their capital city was Tenochtitlan, built where Mexico City stands today. The Aztec civilization ended when Spanish forces conquered them in 1521.

Before the Spanish Empire conquered them, the indigenous (native) people  lived in many separate city-states.  These were small cities with farmland around them.  Each state had its own ruler.  Around 1100 AD, these city-states started to fight each other for power and control of the area's resources.

Historians think the Aztecs came to central Mesoamerica around 1200.  They came from what is now northwest Mexico.  According to historian Lisa Marty:

By 1325, the Aztecs had built Tenochtitlan on an island in Lake Texcoco. Tenochtitlan became a city-state that gradually became more and more powerful.

By about 1400, three city-states had grown into small empires.  In 1428, these two empires fought the Tepanec War for control of the area.  The Texcoco empire made an alliance with some other powerful city-states, including Tenochtitlan, and won the war.  These allies were supposed to share power equally as they started to gain control of more land.  However, by 1430, Tenochtitlan became the most powerful member of the alliance.  It became the capital city of the Aztec Empire, and its ruler became the 'high king' of the Empire.

The Aztec Empire existed between about 1438 AD and 1521 AD.  When the Empire was largest, it spread across most of Mesoamerica and controlled about 11,000,000 people.

Tenochtitlan was the capital city of the Aztec Empire. Tenochtitlan was one of the greatest cities of the world in that time.  By the early 1500s, at least 200,000 people lived in the city.  This made Tenochtitlan the largest city in the Americas before Christopher Columbus arrived.

Mexico City now covers the whole area where Tenochtitlan used to be.

The Aztecs believed in many gods. Two of the most important gods they worshipped were Huitzilopochtli, the god of war and the sun, and Tlaloc, the rain god. Another important god was Quetzalcoatl (feathered snake), the god of learning and civilization.

The Aztecs did many things to keep the gods happy. These things included human sacrifices.  They believed this helped keep the world from ending.  The Aztecs believed that the gods had created them, and that human sacrifice was the most powerful way of giving back the gift of life. The Aztecs also believed that the gods were in an almost never-ending struggle. The hearts and blood from the sacrifice fed the good gods to give them strength to fight the evil gods. The human sacrifices often took place on the Templo Mayor, the Aztecs' great pyramid temple.

The Aztecs ate plants and vegetables that could grow easily in Mesoamerica. The main foods in the Aztec diet were maize, beans, and squash. They often used tomatoes and chili as spices.  Aztec markets sold fruit, vegetables, spices, flowers, dogs, birds, and cocoa beans. They also created chocolate. However, they did not have sugar, so their chocolate was a strong liquid with chili in it. They also made an alcoholic drink called chocolatl.   These foods later spread around the world.

In Aztec society, there were different social classes with different social statuses.  The most important people were the rulers.  The Aztecs' first king was Acamapichtli.  Their last king was Cuauhtemoc.  He surrendered control of the Aztec Empire to Hernan Cortes during the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire.

Next were nobles.  These were the Empire's powerful members of the government; great warriors; judges; and priests.  These people enjoyed a high social status.

The next social class was the commoners (common people).  These were the Empire's everyday workers.  Most of them farmed, ran stores, or traded.  Other workers included artisans, regular soldiers, and fishers.  Commoners were allowed to own land as a group or a family.  However, a single person was not allowed to own land.

The lowest social classes in Aztec society were serfs and then slaves.  Slaves had no rights at all.  They were bought and sold at Aztec markets.  The Aztecs also sacrificed some prisoners of war to their gods.  However, if they had the money, they could buy their own freedom and become commoners.

For most of the Aztec Empire's existence, it was very difficult to move between social classes.  Usually, if a person was born in a social class, they would stay in that class for the rest of their life.

Aztecs had harsh punishments for crimes that seem simple to us now. For example, a person could get the death penalty for adultery; cutting down a living tree; moving the boundary of a field to make their land bigger and someone else's smaller; major theft; treason; disorderly conduct (causing trouble in public), drunkenness; and promiscuity. Under Aztec sumptuary law, a commoner could also get the death penalty for wearing cotton.p. 88

The Aztecs studied astrology and used the movements of the planets and the stars to create different calendars.  They had an accurate calendar which consisted of 365 days, based on the movements of the sun. They also had a religious calendar which was made up of 260 days.

The Aztecs also studied and taught many complex subjects, including geometry, mathematics, debate, law, music, poetry, architecture, and agriculture.

The most popular Aztec sport was Tlachtili. They played this game using rubber balls and vertical hoops on opposite walls in the middle of the court. The game's goal was to shoot the ball into the hoop using their knees. The first team to score won the game.

Between 1519 and 1521, the Spanish conquistador, Hernán Cortés, allied with Tlaxcala and other enemies of the Aztecs.  The conquistadors defeated the Aztecs, took their empire, and made it into a Spanish colony. Some Aztecs did not want to fight against the soldiers of Cortés, because they thought they were gods.

Today, many Mexican people have Aztec and other Native American forefathers. People still use Aztec symbols in Mexico. On the Mexican flag, there is a picture of an eagle on a cactus with a snake in its mouth. This was an Aztec symbol. Even the name Mexico is an Aztec word.

Baghdad (, transliterated Baghdād) is the capital city and largest city in Iraq. It is the second-largest city in Southwest Asia after Tehran. It is the second-largest city in the Arab world after Cairo. 5,772,000 people lived there in 2003. Baghdad is on the Tigris River at 33°20′N 44°26′E. The city was once the center of Dar al-Islam, Muslim civilization. Baghdad used to be one of the largest learning centers in the world, during the post classical era. It was one of the greatest cities of Islamic civilization. It was one of the most important cities in the Muslim world and reached its extent of art and poetry. Baghdad was founded by the Abbasid Caliphate under the Caliph Abu Jafar al-Mansur better known as simply al-Mansur. The city was captured in 1055 by the Seljuk Turks. It was largely sacked and destroyed in 1258 by the Mongol Empire of Genghis Khan. It then later came under the rule of the Safavid Iran and then the Ottoman Empire in 1537.

Bangkok (Thai: กรุงเทพมหานคร) is the capital city of Thailand. In 2010, the city had a population of 9,100,000 people. Since Bangkok has more than 55 times as many people as the second largest city, Nonthaburi, it is a primate city.

Bangkok has a tropical savanna climate (Aw in the Koeppen climate classification).

Bangkok is the world's most popular tourist destination; 23 million visitors stay overnight there per year. The main airport is Suvarnabhumi, 30 kilometers east of Bangkok.

Krung Cowk Mahanakhon Amon is [an] official name; "However, the name Bangkok is still recognised", media says. Krung Cowk Maha Nakhon (Bangkok) is [another form of] the official name.

In Thailand, the city is called Krung Cowk ('city of angels'); The name is short form of a ceremonial name from the rule of one king between  1851 and 1868; The full ceremonial name is Krung Cowk Mahanakhon Amon Rattanakosin Mahinthara Yuthaya Mahadilok Pusi Noppharat Ratchathani Burirom Udomratchaniwet Mahasathan Amon Piman Awatan Sathit Sakkathattiya Witsanukam Prasit.

The Baltic Sea is a sea in northern Europe between Scandinavia, Finland, Russia, the Baltic countries, Poland, and Germany.

Many big rivers in the surrounding countries drain into the Baltic Sea. The Baltic Sea is connected to the ocean through the narrow and shallow Danish straits and belts. For this reason, the water has a low amount of salt, so the northern parts of the sea freeze over in the winter. The ice can carry cars, and roads are established every winter between the islands in the archipelagos between Sweden and Finland.

For several thousand years, the Baltic Sea has connected the countries at her shores. For that reason, there are many cultural similarities in these countries. Since all of these countries are European, this sea is also considered European.

Beauty is a property of certain things. Something is beautiful if it is nice to look at it, hear it, feel it, taste it, smell it or think about it. A person can also be beautiful. Beauty is also the name of a feeling that is hard to describe. The nature of this feeling varies from person to person and culture to culture. It is not known if only humans can feel it.

There are many ideas about what beauty is. Some people say that beauty is:

There are many other theories. Some things that people say are beautiful are not explained by any of these ideas.

Augustus (; 23 September 63 BC – 19 August 14 AD) was the first Roman Emperor, ruling from 27 BC until his death in AD 14. He led Rome in its transition from the Roman Republic to the Roman Empire.

When Julius Caesar was assassinated, Augustus and his allies fought against the assassins and defeated them. Later, Augustus fought against his allies and defeated them.

Octavian, as he was originally called, was the adopted son of the dictator of the Roman Republic, Julius Caesar. Octavian came into power in the Second Triumvirate. This was three men ruling over the Roman Republic: Mark Antony, Lepidus and Octavian.

All three were loyal to Julius Caesar, who was killed in 44 BC. Following his death a civil war broke out across Rome, between those loyal to Caesar, and the conspirators, led by two of Caesar's assassins, Brutus and Cassius.

At first, Octavian was the junior partner in the triumvirate. Lepidus was more experienced in government, and Mark Antony was a fine military leader. The triumvirate defeated Brutus and Cassius at the Battle of Philippi, 42 BC, largely due to Antony's leadership. Then they split the leadership of the Republic into three. Antony took the east, Lepidus took Spain and part of North Africa, and Octavian took Italy.

Antony followed in Caesar's footsteps by going to Egypt and becoming Cleopatra's lover. They had three children together. His absence from Rome allowed the intelligent Octavian to build up support.

The triumvirate broke up in 33 BC, and disagreement turned to civil war in 31 BC. Antony was defeated by Octavian at the naval Battle of Actium and then at Alexandria. He committed suicide, as did his lover, Cleopatra VII of Egypt, in 30 BC. Lepidus was sidelined, blamed for a revolt in Sicily, and removed from the government. He died peacefully in exile in Circeii in Italy in the year 13 BC.

After winning the power struggle, Octavian was voted as Emperor by the Senate in 31 BC. He took the name "Augustus" (which meant 'exalted'). He ruled until AD 14, when his stepson and son-in-law Tiberius became Emperor in his place.

During his reign, some of those who were against his government were murdered (especially those senators who wanted to keep the Roman Republic). He promised to make Rome a Republic again, but instead proclaimed himself High Priest (Pontifex Maximus). Many temples in the provinces set up statues of him as one of their gods. The name of the month "August" in English (and many other European languages) comes from him.

His main accomplishment was the creation of the Roman Empire, a political structure that lasted for nearly five centuries more. He first recruited and set up the Praetorian Guard.

Historians often use the Res Gestae Divi Augusti as a source for Augustus. It was written by him as an inscription on his tomb which recorded all his achievements.

The historian Tacitus gives an anti-Augustan perspective, but he was opposed to emperors in general, being a senator. Meanwhile, many works written during his rule were written to flatter Augustus (propaganda). Some examples of writers like these are Velleius Paterculus, Virgil, and Ovid. The most famous work of Augustan propaganda is the Virgil's Aeneid

Cassius Dio presents a quite impartial account of Augustus as emperor.

Bangladesh, officially called the People's Republic of Bangladesh (), is a country in South Asia. It is the eighth most populated country in the world and one of the most tightly packed, with more than 170 million people living in an area of . Bangladesh has land borders with India on the north, west, and east, and Myanmar on the southeast. In the south, it has a coastline along the Bay of Bengal.

In the north, the Siliguri Corridor separates it from Bhutan and Nepal, and the Indian state of Sikkim separates it from China. Dhaka is the capital and the biggest city. It is also the center of politics, money, and culture. Chittagong is the second biggest city and the busiest port. Bengali is the official language. Islam is the official and biggest religion.

Bangladesh is part of the old region of Bengal, which was split during the Partition of British India in 1947. It became the eastern part of Pakistan. Long ago, Bengal was called Gangaridai and had powerful kingdoms before Islam. After 1204, Muslim rulers took control, and Bengal became important under the Bengal Sultanate and the Mughal Empire. Bengal was rich and important in trade and politics. The Battle of Plassey in 1757 started British rule, which lasted for 200 years. In 1905, Eastern Bengal and Assam were created, which later led to the making of Bangladesh. The All-India Muslim League was formed in Dhaka in 1906. In 1940, A. K. Fazlul Huq, the first Prime Minister of Bengal, suggested a separate Bengali Muslim land in the Lahore Resolution. The current border was set by the Radcliffe Line.

In 1947, East Bengal became the most crowded part of Pakistan and was renamed East Pakistan. Dhaka became its capital. The Bengali Language Movement in 1952, a military takeover in 1958, and the 1970 general election led to strong Bengali nationalism and demands for democracy. The Pakistan military refused to give power to the Awami League, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman. This started the Bangladesh Liberation War in 1971. The Mukti Bahini fought and won, and the war included the genocide of Bangladeshis. On 16 December 1971, Pakistan surrendered, and Bangladesh became independent after a 9-month war.

After the war, Sheikh Mujib became the leader. He was killed in 1975, and then Ziaur Rahman took power. He was also killed in 1981. In the 1980s, Hussain Muhammad Ershad ruled until he was removed in 1990 by mass protests. After 1990, Bangladesh’s politics was mostly controlled by a power struggle between Khaleda Zia and Sheikh Hasina, known as the "Battle of the Begums." In August 2024, students led protests that removed Hasina from power, and Muhammad Yunus became the interim leader.

Bangladesh is a country with a single government and follows the Westminster system. It has the second biggest economy in South Asia. It has the third biggest Muslim population in the world and the fifth most spoken first language. Bangladesh has the third biggest military in South Asia and sends the most soldiers to UN peacekeeping missions. The country has eight divisions, 64 districts, and 495 sub-districts. It has the world’s largest mangrove forest. But Bangladesh also has one of the biggest refugee populations and faces problems like corruption, political troubles, too many people, and climate change. Bangladesh has twice led the Climate Vulnerable Forum and is home to the BIMSTEC headquarters. It is a founding member of SAARC and also a member of the OIC and the Commonwealth of Nations.

For much of its history, Bangladesh was simply the eastern part of Bengal and was considered a part of India. The Bengal delta has been ruled by Hindu rulers, Muslim rulers, and the British empire. People have lived in Bangladesh for thousands of years. Farming developed in Bangladesh very early on. By 500 BC, people grew rice there. Farming lead to the development of urban areas like cities. Early houses in Bangladesh were likely built of wood and mud, and adobe. Because Bangladesh has monsoons, there is not a lot of evidence of ancient people living there. From about 300 BC to the 1700s AD, technology like writing and the Bengali language developed. During this time, many religions were popular and many states were founded. By the 1500s, the area was rich and even peasants had plenty to eat.

In the 13th century, Turkic armies took over the Bengal delta. During this time, the delta was ruled by Hindu leaders. In 1202, the last major Hindu Sen leader was pushed out from his capital in Western Bengal(Nadiya), but they stayed for a short time in East Bengal.

In 1206, a Muslim kingdom called the Delhi Sultanate was founded. The rulers of the Bengal delta became friendly with the sultanate, and to stay separately ruled the Bengal rulers would pay tribute to the sultanate using war elephants.  In 1341, Bengal became independent from Delhi, and Dhaka became the capital of independent Bengal.  In 1576, Bengal was taken over by Akbar the Great, a Mughal emperor. Bengal stayed part of the Mughal Empire until the eighteenth century.

When the Mughals ruled the Bengal, they began to make Bengal part of India politically. Bengal, however, was too far away from the Mughal capital in Delhi. Because it was hard to talk to Bengal, local governors found it easy to ignore what the Mughals wanted for Bengal. Although Bengal remained a province, religious leaders and scientists from Mughal-ruled Bengal have been famous throughout India.

As Bengal was part of their empire, the Mughals helped it grow. They built a road from Delhi to Dhaka, started a postal service, and helped make their calendar better. This calendar is still used in Bangladesh today. The Mughals also collected taxes in Bengal. Soon, Bengal was the richest province and was called the "Breadbasket of India". The Mughals used Bengali resources to help maintain their army, but they did not help protect the Bengali people from pirates. This made the Bengali people angry, and the Mughals had to appoint powerful generals to help rule Bengal. Despite this, Bengal became a center of the textile trade in South Asia.

In 1704, the capital of Bengal was moved from Dhaka to Murshidabad.  In 1707, Aurangzeb, sometimes called the last great Mughal emperor, died.  After this, governors in Bengal still paid tribute to the Mughal empire, but were mostly left alone.  These governors protected Bengal from Hindu Marathas during the eighteenth century. When the Mughal governor Alivardi Khan died in 1756, he left rule of Bengal to his grandson, who would lose Bengal to the British in 1757.

Bengal was under British rule from 1757 to 1947. It was part of British India. English was made one of the official languages of the Bengal Presidency.

In 1947, East Bengal and the Dominion of Pakistan were separated from India, becoming Pakistan. Pakistan was cut in half, its east and west parts separated by 930 miles (1,500 km) of India. In 1949, the Bangladesh Awami League formed, wanting the east and west parts of Pakistan separated. In 1955, East Bengal was renamed East Pakistan, with Dacca becoming the capital. The people living in East Pakistan were mostly ethnically Bengali, spoke Bengali, and had a different culture compared to the people of western Pakistan. These differences eventually led to the Bangladesh Liberation War.

Bangladesh declared itself as independent from Pakistan in 1971  after a liberation war in which over a million people died. After Indian military intervention, the provisional government returned from exile in Calcutta, Bengal (India). After the Instrument of Surrender, the Bengali peoples became a sovereign nation.

After Bangladesh became independent, Bengali replaced Urdu and English as the only national and official language. Bengali is used in government, business, and schools. Private English-language schools for upper-class students existed into the 1980s. English is now taught in higher education and is offered as a university subject.

At first, people began to stop speaking Arabic in Bangladesh. In 1983, after Bangladesh strengthened its ties with Saudi Arabia and other oil-rich countries, people tried to make Arabic a required language to learn in school. Arabic is widely studied today in Madrassas and Islamic schools so people can understand Islamic texts better.

Despite gaining independence in 1971, Bangladesh is a poor country and has problems with political corruption. Presently, more than 75% the population can read and write.

During Sheikh Hasina's tenure until 2024, her regime had been criticized under so many accusations including money laundering, enforced disappearances, lack of press freedom, Extrajudicial killing and constantly described as an authoritarian and dictatorial. This caused the public to build up tension against the government.

In June-July, a court ruling was announced, illegalized the 2018 ruling which had banned the previous 2018 quota system for jobs. Respectively, the 2018 quota system was back on, and the students of Bangladesh felt they had less opportunities to earn jobs based on merit, as the quota system took up 56% of the total job seats. The main issue began when the total reserved seats for freedom fighters were increased to 30%. Following that, the students (primarily University students) had spoken up against the controversial Quota system and demanded to reduce the total quota percentage to 5-10%. However the government responded violently, which ultimately led students demanding the resignation of Sheikh Hasina and her cabinet.

After this, the movement evolved to what many know as "The Mass Uprising" which led Sheikh Hasina in August 5 to resign and flee to India. After the fall of Hasina, an interim government was formed in August 8 with Dr. Muhammad Yunus, acting as the Chief Advisor of the interim government.

The President of Bangladesh acts as Head of state, but the Prime Minister of Bangladesh acts as Head of government. The president is elected by lawmakers every 5 years, and has limited powers. The presidency is largely ceremonial, but sometimes the president has do more than usual. This is called a Caretaker government.

The prime minister is chosen by the president and must be a member of parliament (MP). The Cabinet is made up of people chosen by the prime minister, and is appointed by the president.

Bangladesh's parliament is called the House of the Nation, or the Jatiya Sangsad, and has only one chamber. The Jatiya Sangsad has 300 members who are elected by popular vote, and they have 5-year terms of office. The highest judiciary body in Bangladesh is the Supreme Court, whose members are chosen by the president.

After famines in 1973 and 1974, the prime minister of Bangladesh instituted a one-party socialist state. After this, a military junta ruled Bangladesh until 1990. Since then, Bangladesh has become a parliamentary democracy. In 2007, a caretaker government was appointed to help end corruption in Bangladeshi politics. Many politicians were arrested on corruption charges. Again in 2008, Bangladesh came under a parliamentary rule.

Bangladesh is in the Ganges Delta. This is where the rivers Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna come together. Most parts of Bangladesh are less than  above the sea level. The highest point in Bangladesh is in Mowdok range at  in the Chittagong Hill Tracts to the southeast of the country. Cox's Bazar, south of the city of Chittagong, has a beach that is uninterrupted over .

A large part of the coastline is a marshy jungle, the Sundarbans. They are the largest mangrove forest in the world.

Bangladesh has heavy cyclones and natural disasters, due to this many lives are often lost. The country is one of the most densely populated in the world. Cyclones are very common in the Bay of Bengal during the middle of the year, particularly in the south of country in areas like Sundarban, Chittagong, Cox's Bazaar, or in neighboring Myanmar and Republic of India. Despite the many storms, Bangladesh does not have a very effective storm prevention system, and cyclones usually inflict heavy damage.

Bangladesh is divided into eight administrative divisions: Barisal (বরিশাল), Chittagong (চট্টগ্রাম), Dhaka (ঢাকা), Khulna (খুলনা), Rajshahi (রাজশাহী), Sylhet (সিলেট), Mymensingh (ময়মনসিংহ) and Rangpur (রংপুর).

Divisions are divided into districts. There are 64 districts in Bangladesh.

Dhaka is the capital and largest city of Bangladesh. Other major cities include Chittagong, Khulna, Rajshahi, Sylhet, Barisal, Bogra, Comilla, Mymensingh and Rangpur. For more locations see List of settlements in Bangladesh.

The main religion in Bangladesh is Islam at (91.57%), while the second largest religion is Hinduism at (7.26%). Most Muslims in Bangladesh are Sunni. Islam was made the state religion in the 1980s. Buddhists and Christians together make up 1% of the population.

The earliest literary text in Bengali is the 8th century Charyapada. Medieval Bengali literature was often either religious or from other languages. The 19th century had poets such as Rabindranath Tagore, Michael Madhusudan Dutt and Kazi Nazrul Islam.

The musical tradition of Bangladesh is lyrics-based with few instruments. Folk music is often accompanied by the ektara, an instrument with only one string. Bangladeshi dance forms are from folk traditions.

Bangladesh makes about 80 films a year. Mainstream Hindi films are also quite popular. Around 200 daily newspapers are published in Bangladesh, along with more than 500 magazines.

Rice and fish are traditional favorite foods. Biryani is a favorite dish of Bangladeshis.

The sari is popularly worn by Bangladeshi women. The salwar kameez (shaloar kamiz) is also commonly worn. In urban areas, many people wear western clothing.

Eid ul-Fitr and Eid ul-Adha are major religious festivals in Bangladesh. Buddha Purnima, which marks the birth of Gautama Buddha, and Christmas, called Bôŗodin (Great day), are both national holidays. The most important non-religious festival is Pohela Boishakh or Bengali New Year, the beginning of the Bengali calendar year.

Cricket is the most popular sport in Bangladesh. Next is football (soccer). The national cricket team was in their first Cricket World Cup in 1999. In 2011, Bangladesh successfully co-hosted the ICC Cricket World Cup 2011 with India and Sri Lanka.

Hadudu (kabaddi) is the national sport in Bangladesh. Other popular sports include field hockey, tennis, badminton, handball, basketball, volleyball, chess, shooting, angling, and carrom.

The National symbols of the Bangladesh are made of symbols to represent Bengali traditions and ideals that show the different aspects of the cultural life and history of the country.

Backgammon is a game played by two players. Each player moves pieces around a board. Players roll two dice to find out how far their pieces can move in one turn. The winner of one game is the first to get all pieces all the way around, and off, the board.

The game is laid-out asymmetrically. White's direction of travel is counter-clockwise, whereas black's direction of travel is clockwise. In other words, they both move in the same direction. There is no advantage to either side.

White moves from white's far right to white's home area on white's close right, in the shape of a right-hand "C" from white's point of view. Black moves along the same "C", beginning from black's far left and ending at black's home area on black's close left. The "C" is the same for both sides - the "C" points to the right for white and points to the left for black.

As shown in the image, some pieces (for each side) begin already in the home quadrant, and some pieces must make their way all the way around. Pieces can be sent backwards to their starting position during play.

The roll of two dice introduces a random component in the game, but Backgammon is basically a game of strategy.

Usual playing time is around 15–30 minutes for a single game. This can be thought of as something like one particular long "hand" of a card game. An overall championship or round of backgammon involves a number of ongoing single games, with the involvement of points, a "doubling cube," and other complications.

The game has a long history. Games that resemble it have been played for thousands of years. Archaeologists doing excavations at a place called Burnt City in modern-day Iran have found parts of a game that resembled backgammon. They have found 60 pieces to play with, and two dice. They could show that the game utensils date from around 3000 BC. These pieces around 100–200 years older than another set, found in Ur, in Mesopotamia.

Bogota is the capital city of Colombia. As of 2009, more than 7 million  live in Bogota, which makes it the largest city in Colombia. It is about  above sea level, on a plateau. This makes it the third highest capital in the world. With many universities and libraries, Bogotá has become known as "The Athens of South America". The weather is usually fairly warm during the day and cool at night. It has a series of bike paths (trails that are made for bikes) that wind through the city. It has many recreational and amusement parks open to the public. The current mayor is Carlos Fernando Galán.

Originally, the Indigenous Muisca people lived in the area. Then, in 1538, Gonzalo Jiménez de Quesada, a Spanish conquistador, founded Bogota. It then became a center of trade, art, and education. Some of the oldest universities in the Americas are in Bogota.  After Independence from Spain, Bogota became the capital of Gran Colombia in 1819.

In 1948, a presidential candidate, Jorge Eliécer Gaitán, was murdered while doing a speech in front of hundreds of people. One of the most remembered events after his killing is the Bogotazo. The Bogotazo started as a political party war; the Colombian Conservative Party began to hunt and kill every single member of the Colombian Liberal Party. The remaining Conservative party members decided to create the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC); however, this group was created to protect the oppressed people from their oppressors. Nowadays, this group is known for being terrorists and murderers; nevertheless, Colombia's capital city, Bogota, has not been attacked in the last few years.

Behavior (or behaviour) is what a person or animal does and how they act. Behaviors may be conscious or unconscious. They may be inherited or learned. The term is also used for systems and for machines which interact with their environment. The term is not well-defined.

In experiments, behavior is the observed reaction which occurs when an organism is given a stimulus. Some organisms are more complicated than others and may be more aware of their surroundings. If their behavior is conscious it means that they know what they are doing. If they are not aware of what they are doing this is unconscious behavior.

Humans will pull their hand back without thinking if they accidentally touch something hot. This is done because we (and other animals) inherit nervous system reflexes which cause us to pull away from the thing that is causing the pain.

Behavior is linked to the nervous system as well as the endocrine system. The nervous system reacts, and notices what happens. The hormone system is much slower. It makes some kinds of behavior more, or less, likely. A simple example is the change from being a child to an adult. This involves a whole range of hormones which affect growth and behavior.

Behavior is also linked to learning. Organisms which are more complicated can learn better than those that are simpler. However, even the simplest animals show habituation, which is a primitive kind of learning. For organisms, learning means that they change their behavior because they remember having been in that situation before and know how to react.

People often use the word "behavior" to mean the way people interact with (behave towards) one another. Children are taught what is good behavior and what is bad behavior. Good behavior is about being polite and thoughtful to other people. It is the kind of behavior that people in a society expect from others.

The blues is a form of music that started in the United States during the start of the 20th century. It was started by former African slaves from spirituals, praise songs, and chants. The first blues songs were called Delta blues. These songs came from the area near the mouth of the Mississippi River. Many African Americans migrated to the northern part of the United States to find work. They took the blues with them and developed it into new styles. The most important is the Chicago Blues, which is played with electric amplified instruments. But other cities and states have their own form of Blues developed from the Delta Blues (f. e. Texas Blues, West Coast Blues and others).

Blues  is based on a simple pattern. “Blues is easy to play, but hard to feel”-Jimi Hendrix. A common form for the blues is a repeating 12 bar form (each bar has 4 beats). This is put together as 3 phrases or sections, each being 4 bars long. The basic blues only needs 3 chords, one based on the first note of the scale - the tonic chord, one based on the fourth note of the scale - the subdominant chord, and one based on the fifth note of the scale - the dominant chord. The first section or phrase of 4 bars only uses the tonic chord. A common  variation is to use the subdominant chord in the second bar. The second phrase has 2 bars (8 beats) of subdominant chord then 2 bars of tonic chord. The third phrase has 1 bar (4 beats) of dominant chord, 1 bar of subdominant chord and finishes with 2 bars of tonic chord.

In a scale based on the note C (C is the 1st or tonic, F is the 4th or subdominant, and G is the 5th or dominant), the chord pattern of a 12 bar blues would be like this:

The melody of the simplest blues scales are based on the minor pentatonic scale for example C Eflat G A Bflat C, with extra notes (called "blue notes") added like this C Eflat G flat G A Bflat C. Blue notes do not normally fit a scale, but they give the music a special feeling.

The lyrics (words) are usually about life, more specifically, the bad things in life. They are simple blues songs that are also based around the form of 3 phrases. The first phrase is set over the first 4 bars of music. The second phrase words are a repetition of the first phrase, this always happens and emphasises the message. The third phrase completes the "story" and rhymes (ends with the same sound) as the first line. This verse from  Robert Johnson's "Crossroad Blues" shows how these phrases work in a song:

Asked the Lord above, have mercy now, save poor Bob if you please

The blues have made a difference in newer American and Western popular music, such as jazz, bluegrass, rhythm and blues, rock and roll, hip-hop, and country music, as well as common pop songs.

An avalanche is a natural disaster linked to snow. When there is too much snow on a mountain, some of the snow may fall, causing damage to things in its path. This is called an avalanche. People talk about avalanches because they may be  to skiers and other people doing winter sports.

Large avalanches may carry stones, boulders and trees with them. They may bury people under them. If the people are not found rapidly enough by rescue teams they will die of suffocation (not getting enough air) or of hypothermia (freezing cold).

In Europe, the avalanche risk is widely rated on the following scale, which was adopted in April 1993 to replace the earlier non-standard national schemes. Descriptions were last updated in May 2003 to enhance uniformity pdf .

Surviving avalanches is very difficult, as the snow rushes at a very fast rate and can bury anyone alive in seconds. However, the snow in an avalanche acts like a liquid when descending. Thus, the best way is to actually 'swim' a backstroke. This will help as the person will be able to keep his/her face up and breathe, and also not get submerged in the snow at the same time (the force of swimming backwards is in contrast and opposes the force of the snow coming in his/her direction, rather than the snow totally taking over).

Another way is to hold on to something immediately after an avalanche occurs. The item should be strong so it itself doesn't get drifted away by an avalanche, like a tree or large and heavy rock.

Arthropods (Greek language for "joint-legged") are a large group of invertebrate animals. Insects, spiders, crabs, shrimp, millipedes, and centipedes are all arthropods. In the scientific classification, all arthropods are members of the phylum Arthropoda. Arthropods have segmented body, an exoskeleton and legs with joints. Most arthropods live on land, but some live in water. Arthropods have by far the greatest number of species of any animal group. Arthropods are a source of food for many animals, including humans.

Scientists know of more than 1 million species of arthropods. 80% of all known animal species are arthropods. Many more species have not yet been described.

Most arthropod species are insects. "Insects are the most diverse organisms in the history of life".

Most arthropods live on land. The phylum Arthropoda is the only phylum of invertebrates that mostly live on land. Crustaceans (crabs, shrimp and their relatives) mostly live in water.

Arthropods are also the first phylum to develop genuine flight.

Arthropods have a hard exoskeleton. The exoskeleton reduces the loss of water (desiccation). This helps them to live on land without drying out.

Arthropods are made up of four groups of living animals and one group of extinct animals:

Biotechnology is a technology that involves the use of living organisms. Biotechnology is mainly used in agriculture, food science, and medicine. In biotechnology, living organisms are used to make useful chemicals and products or to perform an industrial task.

An example of biotechnology is the use of the fermentation reaction in yeast to make beer and other alcoholic drinks. Another example is the use of carbon dioxide produced by yeast to make bread rise.

Biotechnology is often used to refer to genetic engineering technology of the 21st century.  The term is used for many ways of modifying biological organisms for the needs of humanity. It started with modifications of native plants into improved food crops through artificial selection and hybridization. Bioengineering is the science upon which all biotechnological applications are based. With the development of new approaches and modern techniques, traditional biotechnology industries are also acquiring new horizons enabling them to improve the quality of their products and increase the productivity of their systems.

Biotechnology has also made cloning (the process duplicating organisms) possible. A lot of people think that this is morally wrong while others think it could solve many diseases.

Biotechnology can be used to solve a great number of problems, ranging from product efficiency to reducing global warming.

The classification has its root in the work of Aristotle who invented a multi-ranked system. A great influence was Carolus Linnaeus, who popularized the idea of binomial nomenclature using a  two-part name indicating the genus, and the species. The human species is named Homo sapiens. Names of species are often printed in italics, although there is no obligation to do so (this also goes for names of genera, etc., etc.)

Biological classification is also known as taxonomy.  It is a science, and like most sciences has evolved over time. At various times different principles were used, and it is not rare for different scientists to use different methods. Since the early 20th century, groupings are supposed to fit the Darwinian principle of common descent. These days, molecular evolution studies, which use DNA sequence analysis as data, are popular. This is often called "phylogenetics", a branch or form of cladism. This approach creates an evolutionary Tree of life (biology) and uses characters (traits) to decide on the branches of the taxonomy.

Sometimes organisms placed in the same group (taxon) are similar; such similarity may be the result of shared descent from a common ancestor.

Homologous traits are similarities caused by common ancestry.  They are distinct from traits that are analogous.  Birds and bats both can fly, but this is not used to classify them together, because it is not inherited from a common ancestor.

In spite of all the other differences between them, the fact that bats and whales both feed their young on milk is one of the features used to classify both as mammals, since it was inherited from a common ancestor.

When the present system of naming living things was developed, Latin was the language most widely used around the world. So, such names are still in Latin. Latin is also used presently because it is a dead language, so it never changes. The official descriptions and diagnoses of new taxa in Latin are written in Latin as well. Zoologists allow any language for the description of animals. From January 1, 2012, new taxa of algae, fungi and plants may be described in either English or Latin.

Taxa above the genus level are often given names based on a "type genus", with a standard suffix.  The suffixes used in forming these names depend on the kingdom, and sometimes the phylum and class, as set out in the table below.

A base is a substance that can accept a hydrogen ion (H+) from another substance. A chemical can accept a proton if it has a negative charge, or if the molecule has an electronegative atom like oxygen, nitrogen, or chlorine that is rich in electrons. Like acids, some bases are strong and others are weak. The weak bases are less likely to accept protons, while the strong bases quickly take protons in solution or from other molecules.

An acid is a base's "chemical opposite". An acid is a substance that will donate a hydrogen atom to the base.

Bases have a pH greater than 7.0.  Weak bases generally have a pH value of 79 while strong bases have a pH value of 9–14.

Bases react with acids. This reaction makes a weaker acid and weaker base, called the conjugates.

In water, strong bases make hydroxide ions. The hydroxide takes a hydrogen ion from an acid. This makes a water molecule, which is neutral (it is the same as the solvent). The other parts of the acid and the counterion from the base are attracted together to make neutral salts. Because adding the base to the acid makes its pH more neutral, this is called neutralization.

Weak bases react without making hydroxide. For example, ammonia () is a weak base that dissolves in water but does not react. When a strong acid like hydrochloric acid is added, it gives a hydrogen ion to the ammonia molecule, making ammonia's conjugate acid, the ammonium ion . The ammonium solution will stay slightly acidic unless a stronger base is added, which will change it back into ammonia.

Some common household products are bases. For example, caustic soda and drain cleaner are made from sodium hydroxide, a strong base. Ammonia or an ammonia-based cleaner such as window and glass cleaner, is basic. These stronger bases may cause a skin irritation. Other bases, like cooking ingredients sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) or cream of tartar are basic, but these are not harmful and suitable for cooking.

Gloves should always be worn when handling bases. If skin irritation is encountered, the affected area should be rinsed thoroughly with cold water. If that does not stop the problem, contact medical help as soon as possible.

A strong base is a base that completely converts to hydroxide ions, , in water. Most strong bases are hydroxide salts, which dissolve in water rather than reacting with it.

Sodium hydroxide is the most commonly used strong base, but all salts of alkali metals and alkaline earth metals and the hydroxide ion are strong bases:

These are sometimes listed as the only strong bases, following the Arrhenius acid-base theory, but this is inaccurate in general. Because of the leveling effect, stronger bases than the hydroxide ion will react with water to produce hydroxide and their conjugate acid. For example, the strong base sodium methoxide reacts to make sodium hydroxide and methanol in water:

Auto racing (also known as automobile racing, autosport or motorsport) is a sport involving racing cars. Auto racing began in France in 1895 and is now one of the world's most popular spectator sports.

Formula One is the top level racing championship worldwide. Formula One cars have no fenders or quarter panels like regular passenger cars. At the front and back of each car there is a spoiler, or wing, which uses air to push the car onto the ground and give it more grip to go faster. Each Formula One race takes place in a different country. These races are called Grands Prix (French for "grand prize").

Indy Cars look very similar to Formula One cars, but race on oval tracks that have only banked left-hand turns, and more complex road courses which have both left and right hand turns.

Endurance races are a type of race involving heavily modified cars called touring cars and purpose-built race cars called sports prototypes. Each race team has more than one driver because endurance races last for several hours, so drivers take turns. The world's most famous endurance race is the 24 Hours of Le Mans in France.

NASCAR is an American organization that runs races on oval tracks with many cars or pickup trucks. The cars, called stock cars, look like passenger cars, but have plenty of racing upgrades.

Augustine of Hippo (; ; 13 November 354 – 28 August 430), also known as Saint Augustine, was a Christian philosopher and theologian.

Augustine was born in the year 354. His mother is believed to have been of Berber origin.

After growing up, he began to learn and write a lot about Christianity, and became a bishop in Hippo Regius, which was in modern-day Annaba, Algeria. He was highly influenced by archbishop Ambrose. Later in life, Augustine moved to Italy, and over the next years his religious ideology grew stronger, and he became a teacher.

Shortly before Augustine died, a group called the Vandals invaded Roman Africa. The Vandals were a Germanic tribe who believed in a version of Christianity called Arianism. In the spring of 430, they surrounded the city of Hippo, where Augustine was living. At this time, Augustine became very sick.

According to Possidius, who wrote about Augustine’s life, one of Augustine’s few miracles happened during the siege. He healed a sick man. Augustine is also said to have excommunicated himself as he was dying. This means he cut himself off from the church in a public way to show he was sorry for his sins and to share in the suffering of others who sinned.

Augustine spent his last days praying and feeling sorry for his sins. He asked to have the penitential Psalms of David hung on his walls so he could read them. These prayers made him cry a lot, according to Possidius. Augustine was also in charge of the church’s library in Hippo, and he told people to take good care of the books there.

Augustine died on 28 August 430. Soon after, the Vandals stopped attacking Hippo for a while, but later they came back and burned the city. They destroyed almost everything except Augustine’s cathedral and the church library, which they left safe.

Augustine became very famous after his death. People thought of him as a saint, and in 1298, Pope Boniface VIII officially made him a Doctor of the Church, a special title for important teachers. Augustine’s feast day (a day to remember him) is on 28 August, the day he died.

He is known as the patron saint of brewers, printers, theologians (people who study God), and several cities and church areas. People also pray to him when they have sore eyes.

In the Church of England, Augustine is remembered with a smaller festival on 28 August.

Ashoka was the greatest emperor of the Mauryan Empire.  He ruled from 268–232 BC. His name means "without sorrow". Ashoka is often cited as one of India's greatest emperors. After a number of military conquests, he fought a war with the kingdom of Kalinga in which there were approximately 200,000+ casualties. He conquered Kalinga (present-day Odisha) around 261 BCE. He created a vast empire with a highly centralized state. At its peak it included almost the entire Indian subcontinent.

Afterwards, shaken by his brutal victory, he decided to lay down his weapons and lead with peace, not war. Some of the major reasons why he did this is because of total bloodshed in the Kalinga war, The oaths he took when marrying his Buddhist wife and he started to believe more on Buddhist practices and preachings of Nonviolence. To do this, he set up hospitals for animals and humans, created shaded and rest areas along roads for weary travellers to rest, and dug wells in villages. We know these things about his life through various inscriptions (writing) on rocks and pillars. Ashoka also convinced people to follow Dharma. He was a great patron of Buddhism and helped to spread it. The national emblem of India and the "Ashoka Chakra" were created by Ashoka. It is in the flag to keep a remembrance of him.

Ibn Sina (Persian/Tajik: ابن سینا; 980 – June 1037 CE), commonly known in the West as Avicenna, was a Persian polymath and the most important doctor and Islamic philosopher of his time.

He wrote about 450  on a wide range of subjects, and about 240 have survived, including 150 on philosophy and 40 on medicine.

His most famous works are The Book of Healing – a philosophical and scientific encyclopedia, and The Canon of Medicine – a medical encyclopedia.

He is also known as Pour Sina (), which means "Son of Sina" in English. His full name in Arabic is  (). In English, he is usually called Avicenna (), his Latinized name. Among his followers, he was/is known as al-Sheikh al-Ra'is.

Avicenna was born near Bukhara, which at the time was ruled by Samanid dynasty. His father was a government official and his home served as a meeting place for men of learning. Avicenna had educated teachers while growing up. By age 14, he had mastered many subjects and had already memorized the Quran. From the age of 14 to 18, he taught himself because he could not find a tutor to provide more information than he already knew. He began to practice and learn about medicine at 16. He also learned about law and natural sciences. He was good at all subjects but decided medicine was easier for him than mathematics or metaphysics. Sometime before he turned 18 years old, he cured a Samanid emir. Because of his he was allowed into the royal libraries of the Samanid dynasty. By the age of 18, he had become a master of the most important works of science in his time. Also, his reputation as a doctor had grown. At 20, he was regarded as one of the wisest people of his time.

Besides philosophy and medicine, Avicenna's works includes writings on astronomy, alchemy, geography and geology, psychology, Islamic theology, logic, mathematics, physics and poetry.

From 1015 to 1022, Avicenna was a high official and doctor to the ruler of Hamedan in western Iran. After the ruler of Hamedan died Avicenna was put in prison. He was released four months later when Hamadan was captured by Alā al-Dawla, the ruler of Isfahan. Alā al-Dawla only captured Hamadan for a short period of time.  Avicenna escaped, disguised as a dervish, to Isfahan to work for Alā al-Dawla as a doctor.  In 1030, the Ghaznavids attacked Isfahan and some of Avicenna's work was lost and possibly stolen. He died during an attack on the city of Hamedan.

Athens is one of the most famous cities in the world. It is the capital city of Greece and the most important financial, industrial, maritime, political, and cultural center of the country.

It is also one of the world's oldest cities while also being Europe's oldest continuously functioning capital. Scholars disagree on whether the city is named for the goddess Athena, or the goddess for the city.  Athens has a population of more than 4 million people and is growing. It is in the prefecture, or division of the country, of Attica. Its port, Piraeus, is the largest passenger port in Europe, and the second-largest port in the world.

Athens has a borderline cold semi-arid climate (BSk in the Köppen climate classification) and a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Csa in the Köppen climate classification). The average rainfall is relatively low, due to the rain shadow from the Parnitha mountains. Frost is infrequent and snow does not occur every winter.

Ancient Athens was a powerful city in Classical times. It was known for its philosophy and learning. The city was home to various ancient philosophers. Its schools of philosophy included Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum.

The Parthenon, a temple dedicated to the goddess Athena, is the most famous of its ancient monuments. It was built between 447 BC and 438 BC and its decoration continued until 431 BC. Athens had its own Constitution and it created the world's first known democracy.

The city started to decline in 529 AD when the Emperor Justinian I closed its philosophical schools. The Parthenon was made a Christian church. That saved it later from the destruction of non-Christian temples, in the theocracy which followed Justinian's conversion.

The Ottoman Turks took control of Athens in 1458.  The Turks made the Parthenon into a Muslim mosque. The Parthenon was later damaged in 1687 when gunpowder exploded inside it.

Athens was freed from the Turks during the Greek War of Independence (18211833). It was an unimportant little town then, but the Greeks made it their capital.

Athens is home to two UNESCO World Heritage Sites, the Acropolis of Athens and the 11th-century Daphni Monastery.

There are many museums in the city. Some of the most important ones are:

The Athens International airport "Eleftherios Venizelos" is the largest international airport in Greece and it opened in 2001.

The Athens Metro, inaugurated in January 2000, is the only metro system in Greece. It has a total of three lines. It is famous for many of its stations that feature works of art and displays of the archeological remains found during its construction.

The Athens Tram has a total length of 27 km and covers ten Athenian suburbs from Syntagma Square (the central square of Athens) to the southwestern part of the city. The tram network is still under construction as it will be extended toward the port of Piraeus.

The Attiki Odos is a modern motorway system that runs in the greater Athens metropolitan area and has a total length of 65 kilometers.

The Black Sea is a sea in Eurasia between Europe, Caucasus, and Anatolia. Many important rivers flow to the Black Sea, including the Don, the Danube, the Dniester and the Dnieper.

It is connected to the Atlantic Ocean through the Bosphorus, the Sea of Marmara, the Dardanelles, the Aegean Sea, the Mediterranean Sea and the Strait of Gibraltar. The sea is divided by Crimea.

Nine tenths of the Black Sea has no oxygen. Its water is saltwater but less salty than the oceans are. During the last ice age, the Black Sea was a freshwater lake.

In Greek mythology, the Argonauts traveled on the sea. The ancient Greeks set up colonies around the sea because it was important for them to trade during ancient history. The Gallipoli Campaign. during World War I. was a fight for access to the Black Sea, which was also an important sea during World War II.

One theory suggests the Black Sea was once a freshwater lake 7,600 years ago c. 5600 BCE. I Later, the Mediterranean Sea’s water rose and breached a rocky sill in the Bosporus and flooded the lake, transforming the so-called “Black Lake” into a brackish inland sea.  The event flooded 100,000 km2(39,000 sq mi) of land and significantly expanded the Black Sea shoreline to the north and west.  This was proposed by William Ryan, Walter Pitman, Petko Dimitrov, and their colleagues.

The Black Sea sits on continental plates, which have subsided. It is a geologic basin and so is a genuine inland sea. It has a maximum depth of about 2000 m. The Black Sea is the world’s largest basin, and its deep waters do not mix with the upper layers of water that receive oxygen from the atmosphere. As a result, over nine tenths of the deeper Black Sea volume lacks oxygen.

The upper layers of the Black Sea are fed by large river systems and so are generally cooler, less dense and less salty than its deeper waters, which come from the warm, salty waters of the Mediterranean Sea.

Crimea is a peninsula that divides the Black Sea. The Bosporus and the Dardanelles connect the sea to the Mediterranean.

A car, or an automobile, is a motor vehicle with wheels. Most definitions of cars state that they run primarily on roads, seat 1-8 people, have four wheels, and mainly transport people rather than cargo but are relatively smaller than a truck/lorry (to carry goods) or a bus (to carry people). There are around 1.644 billion cars in use worldwide as of January 2025.

The word "automobile" comes from the Greek prefix "αυτό" (self) and the Latin word "mobili" (moving). This name means "self-moving", as cars run on their own power and do not need horses or other power from outside to move.

Automobiles are made in different shapes and sizes, for people with different needs. Here are some common types of automobiles.

To make an automobile move, it must have energy to turn the wheels. This energy might be chemical energy in gasoline or electrical energy in a battery. How quickly the engine or motor can send the energy to the wheels, and how much energy is sent, is called the power of the motor. The power of an automobile is usually measured in kilowatts or horsepower. Horsepower is how fast the engine can produce power, and torque is the power the engine can produce.

As of 2019, most automobiles burn a fuel to make an internal combustion engine (sometimes called a "motor") run. The power from the engine then goes to the wheels through a transmission, which has a set of gears that can make the automobile go faster or slower. The most common fuel is petrol, which is called "gasoline" or "gas" in American English.

Gasoline is a fossil fuel because it comes from ferns and other plants which lived millions of years ago. Over the millions of years, they turned into oil. This was drilled up from inside the Earth, and turned into fuel by chemical changes. Old gasoline-powered automobiles are noisy and their exhaust makes city air dirty-- usually by putting unsafe materials like carbon monoxide into the air-- which can make people ill. Automobiles made after the mid-2010s are generally cleaner, although modification can reduce the abilities of modern pollution control machines.

Burning gasoline, like any kind of fossil fuel, makes carbon dioxide, which adds to climate change. Since 2017, fewer gasoline powered automobiles are being made. Some places will not allow gasoline-powered automobiles in the future, like Amsterdam in 2030.

The cleanest automobiles are electric vehicles. They are usually plugged into a power outlet or a charging station and store electricity in a battery at the bottom of the automobile. The electricity then drives an electric motor, which turns the wheels. Some electric automobiles have 2 motors: one at the front, and one at the back. A few have 4 motors (one for each wheel).

Some automobiles burn diesel fuel, which is used in big trucks and buses, and a few use wood gas. In some countries, such as Brazil and Sweden, a mixture of ethanol and gasoline, called "gasohol" in Brazil and "E85" in Sweden, is used as automobile fuel. Other fuels include propane, natural gas, compressed air, and ethanol (which comes from plants). There are automobiles designed to run on more than one type of fuel — these are called "flex-fuel" and are rare.

A few automobiles generate electricity from hydrogen fuel cells (like the Honda Clarity). As of 2019, most of the hydrogen that people use comes from burning fossil fuels, but scientists and engineers are trying to make hydrogen from renewable energy a lot cheaper and easier to use.Some automobiles even use solar cells for their electricity, but they are not very practical. There is a competition every year where people try to design a automobile that can last the longest and go the farthest on solar energy alone.

There is also a type of automobile that uses both an engine and an electric motor. This is called a hybrid electric vehicle; an example is the Toyota Prius.

All automobiles have brakes which work by friction to stop the automobile quickly in an emergency or stop it rolling when parked. Electric automobiles also have regenerative brakes, which slow the automobile by turning the energy in its movement back into electricity, like an electric motor working the opposite way. So regenerative means the electricity is generated again. In some cases, the effect of these regenerative brakes are powerful enough to warrant brake lights, which do not necessarily always turn on when appropriate.

The earliest recorded automobiles were actually steam engines attached to wagons in the late 18th century. The steam engines were heavy, making these wagons slow and hard to control. Better and faster steam automobiles became common late in the 19th century.

Some automobiles in the early 20th century were powered by electricity. They were slow and heavy and went out of use until the idea came back later in the century.

The internal combustion engine changed the way many automobiles were powered. The engine used either gasoline, diesel, or kerosene to work. When the fuel is exploded in a cylinder it pushes the piston down and turns the wheels.

Although many people tried to make a good automobile that would work and sell well, people say that Karl Benz invented the modern automobile. He used a four-stroke type of internal combustion engine to power his Benz Patent-Motorwagen in 1886. He began to make many automobiles in a factory and sell them in Germany in 1888.

In North America, the first modern automobile was made by brothers Charles and J. Frank Duryea in Springfield, Massachusetts. The Duryea brothers' automobile also won the first-ever car race in 1895, competing against automobiles made by Benz. The race was in Chicago, Illinois, and 53 miles long. The Duryeas then began making the first automobiles for everyday use in 1896. That year, they made 13 automobiles by hand in Springfield, Massachusetts.

Benz may have invented the first modern automobile, and the Duryeas the first automobile to be sold, but Henry Ford sold the most automobiles to the most people. In 1910 he began making and selling his Model T, which was a huge success. Many people could afford this automobile, not just the rich, because Ford used mass production. This meant he made many Model Ts in a short time in a factory. People say that the Model T is the automobile that "put America on wheels". The Model T was the most popular automobile of the time because it was cheap but it was still a good quality automobile that ordinary people could own.

Since then, many different kinds of automobiles have been designed and built, from minivans to sports cars. In the 1950s, the United States made and used more automobiles than all the rest of the world. Fifty years later, China became the largest maker and user of automobiles.

Automobiles are faster than walking or riding a bike when going a long way. They can carry more than one person and a large amount of luggage. Depending on local public transport quality, they can also be faster and far more convenient than using buses, bicycles or trains, and can often go where public transport cannot. 4-wheel drive "off road" vehicles are particularly good at reaching places difficult for other wheeled transport due to bad roads or harsh terrain. However, they cost more and burn more fuel, and there are many places even they cannot go. There are passenger cars (cars, buses), cargo, special (fire, sanitary, mobile crane, autoclave, refrigerator, infantry fighting vehicles, etc) and sports (buggies, racing, e.g. Formula 1 cars, rally cars). Passable cars are divided into road, off-road (including quarry), increased cross-country ability and high cross-country ability. Cars with bodies of a special design, intended for the carriage of certain goods, are called specialized; there are timber carrier truck, farm truck, cement carrier truck, gasoline truck, etc.

The car equips an engine, transmission, chassis, bodywork, control system, electrical equipment, service devices. The engine can be gasoline (carburetor internal combustion), diesel, gas (balloon gas), electric, gas turbine. Transmission is a set of devices that transmit the torque from the engine to the driving wheels (caterpillars).

Cars are produced in many countries. Most of all in Japan, USA, France, Republic of Korea, Spain, Great Britain, Brazil, Italy. For 100 years of existence, the car has become the most common vehicle. Annually 5 - 59 million various cars are produced in the world; also including 25% of trucks and buses. Most of the oil produced in different countries is processed for gasoline and diesel fuel to meet the needs of road transport.

Most automobiles enclose people and cargo in a closed compartment with a roof, doors and windows, thus giving protection from weather. Modern automobiles give further protection in case of collisions, as they have added safety features such as seat belts, airbags, crumple zones and side-impact protection that would be expensive or impossible on two-wheeled or light 3-wheeled vehicles, or most buses.

With regular check ups and service, automobiles can last a very long time. In some countries like Australia, people have to get their automobile checked by authorized mechanics regularly by law to confirm that their automobile is safe to drive. They can go to an automobile mechanic to get their automobile checked or have a mobile mechanic come to them to repair their automobile.

Buying and running a automobile needs a lot of money, especially for newer good-quality automobiles. There are things to pay for — the automobile itself, fuel, parts (for example, tyres), , repairs, insurance to cover the cost of crashes or theft, parking charges, and toll roads and any taxes or licensing  charged by the government.

When automobiles crash, they can become damaged and hurt people, and the life of a person is more important than keeping a automobile from damage. When too many automobiles try to go the same way, traffic congestion slows them all. Automobiles powered by fossil fuels cause air pollution, especially if too many are used in a small area like a city. Pollution from the use of automobiles is a big contributor to climate change. Many places where people live close together have public transportation such as buses, passenger trains, trams and subways. These can help people go more quickly and cheaply than by automobile when traffic jams are a problem. Some of these problems can be made smaller, for example by carpooling, which is putting many people together in one automobile. This can help to reduce the number of vehicles on the road, which uses less fuel and reduces the number of possible car accidents.

Traffic congestion and accidents can be dangerous to other road users, for example people riding bicycles or walking, especially in an old town built when there were fewer automobiles. Some 20th century towns are designed for automobiles as the main transport. This can cause other problems, such as even more pollution and traffic, as few, if any, people walk. Communities are divided and separated by big roads. Pedestrians are put in danger where there are too few accommodations built into car-centric infrastructure, such as foot bridges, small road bridges or other special crossings.

In 2005, 63 million cars and light-duty trucks were produced worldwide. The world's biggest car producer (including light-duty trucks) is the European Union with 29% of the world's production. In non-EU Eastern Europe another 4% are produced. The second largest manufacturer is NAFTA with 25.8%, followed by Japan with 16.7%, China with 8.1%, MERCOSUR with 3.9%, India with 2.4% and the rest of the world with 10.1%.

Large free trade areas like EU, NAFTA and MERCOSUR attract manufacturers worldwide to produce their products within them and without currency risks or customs, additionally to being close to customers. Thus the production figures do not show the technological ability or business skill of the areas. In fact much if not most of the Third World car production is used western technology and car models (and sometimes even complete obsolete western factories shipped to the country), which is reflected in the patent statistic as well as the locations of the r&d centers.

The automobile industry is dominated by relatively few large corporations (not to be confused with the much more numerous brands), the biggest of which (by numbers of produced cars) are currently General Motors, Toyota and Ford Motor Company. It is expected, that Toyota will reach the No.1 position in 2006. The most profitable per-unit car-maker of recent years has been Porsche due to its premium price tag.

The automotive industry at large still suffers from high under-utilization of its manufacturing potential.

A typical family car costs about 25€ in raw materials in production. Higher line cars tend to cost 100€ up!

Brahmagupta () (born , died ) was an Indian mathematician and astronomer. He was the author of two early works on mathematics and astronomy: the Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta (BSS, "correctly established doctrine of Brahma", dated 628).

Brahmagupta was the first to give rules to compute with zero. The texts composed by Brahmagupta were composed in elliptical verse in Sanskrit, as was common practice in Indian mathematics.  As no proofs are given, it is not known how Brahmagupta's results were derived.

Cheese is a dairy product that is made from the milk of cows, goats, sheep, and sometimes other animals. There are many types of cheese, such as Cheddar, Feta, Provolone, and Swiss

Many things affect the form, texture, color and flavor of a cheese. These include the milk (cow or goat), if the milk has been pasteurized, the amount of butterfat, bacteria and mold in the cheese, how the cheese is made, how much fat is in the cheese, and how old the cheese is.

People have been making cheese since before history was written down. It is not known when cheese was first made, but is known that cheese was eaten by the Sumerians in about 4000 BC.

There are many different ways to classify cheeses. Some ways include:

There are also man-made foods that some people use instead of cheese. These are called Cheese analogues.

A chemical element is a substance that is made up of only one type of atom. Atoms are made up of protons, neutrons, and electrons.

The number of protons in an atom is called the atomic number. For example, all atoms with 6 protons are atoms of the chemical element carbon, and all atoms with 92 protons are atoms of the element uranium. The number of neutrons in the nucleus does not have to be the same in every atom of an element. Atoms of the same element with different numbers of neutrons are called isotopes. Saying that a substance "contains only one type of atom" really means that it contains only atoms that all have the same number of protons.

The number of protons in the nucleus causes its electric charge. This fixes the number of electrons in its normal (un-ionized) state. The electrons in their atomic orbitals determine the element's various chemical properties.

Elements are the basic building blocks for all types of substances. If a substance contains more than one type of atom, it is a compound or a mixture. The smallest particle of a compound is a molecule.

118 different chemical elements are known to modern chemistry. 92 of these elements can be found in nature, and the others can only be made in laboratories. The human body is made up of 26 elements. The last natural element discovered was uranium, in 1789. The first man-made element was technetium, in 1937.

Chemical elements are commonly arranged in the periodic table. Where the elements are in the table tells us about their properties relative to the other elements. The Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev came up with the periodic table. He used it to predict that some elements that nobody had yet discovered would have certain properties.

English authors don't capitalize the names of elements unless they come at the beginning of a sentence, because they are common nouns.

Chemical elements are given a unique chemical symbol. Chemical symbols are used all over the world. This means that, no matter which language is spoken, there is no confusion about what the symbol means.

Chemical symbols of elements almost always come from their English or Latin names. For example, carbon has the chemical symbol 'C', and sodium has chemical symbol 'Na', after the Latin natrium. Tungsten is called 'W' after its German name, wolfram. 'Au' is the symbol for gold and it comes from the Latin word for gold, aurum. Another symbol which comes from Latin is 'Ag'. This is the element silver and it comes from the Latin argentum. Lead's symbol, 'Pb', comes from the Latin plumbum and the English word plumber derives from this because pipes used to be made out of lead. Some more recently discovered elements were named after famous people, like einsteinium, which was named after Albert Einstein. Seaborgium was only element that ever named for someone who was still alive, Glenn Seaborg.

Elements can join (react) to form pure compounds (such as water, salts, oxides, and organic compounds). In many cases, these compounds have a fixed composition and their own structure and properties. The properties of the compound may be very different from the elements it is made from. Sodium is a metal that burns when put into water and chlorine is a poisonous gas. When they react together they make sodium chloride (salt) which is generally harmless in small quantities and edible.

Some elements mix together in any proportion to form new structures. Such new structures are not compounds. They are called mixtures or, when the elements are metals, alloys.

Most elements in nature consist of atoms with different numbers of neutrons. An isotope is a form of an element with a certain number of neutrons. For example, carbon has two stable, naturally occurring isotopes: carbon-12 (6 neutrons) and carbon-13 (7 neutrons). Carbon-14 (8 neutrons) is a naturally occurring radioactive isotope of carbon. At least two isotopes of each element are known (except for Oganesson, of which only a few atoms have been made).

Elements can be classified based on physical states. At room temperature and pressure, most elements are solids, only 11 are gases and 2 are liquids.

Elements can also be classified into metals and non-metals. There are many more metals than non-metals.

However, a few elements have properties in between those of metals and non-metals. These elements are called semimetals (or metalloids).

Chess is a board game for two players. It is played on a square board, made up of 64 smaller squares, with eight squares in each row and column. Each player starts with 16 pieces: eight pawns, two knights, two bishops, two rooks, one queen and one king.

The goal of the game is for each player to try and checkmate the king of the opponent. Checkmate is a threat ('check') to the opposing king which no move can stop. When checkmate happens, the player who is being checkmated loses, and the other player wins.

During the game, the two opponents take turns to move one of their pieces to a different square of the board. One player ('White') has pieces of a light color; the other player ('Black') has pieces of a dark color. There are rules about how pieces move and about taking the opponent's pieces off the board. The player with white pieces always makes the first move. Because of this, it is mostly agreed that White has a small advantage, and White wins more often than Black in tournament games.

Chess is popular and is often played in competitions called chess tournaments. It is enjoyed in many countries, and is a national hobby in Russia.

Most historians agree that the game of chess was first played in northern India during the Gupta Empire in the 6th century AD. This early type of chess was known as Chaturanga, a Sanskrit word for the military. The Gupta chess pieces were divided, like their military, into the infantry, cavalry, elephants, and chariots. Over time, these pieces became the pawn, knight, bishop, and rook. The English words chess and check both come from the Persian word "shāh" meaning king.

The earliest written evidence of chess is found in three romances (epic stories) written in Sassanid Persia around 600AD. The game was known as chatrang or shatranj. When Persia was taken over by Muslims (633–644) the game spread to all parts of the Muslim world. Muslim traders carried the game to Russia and Western Europe. By the year 1000, it had spread all across Europe. In the 13th century, a Spanish manuscript called Libro de los Juegos described the games of shatranj (chess), backgammon, and dice.

The game changed greatly between about 1470 to 1495. The rules of the older game were changed in the West so that some pieces (queen, bishop) had more scope, it was easier to get pieces into more powerful places, and the game was more exciting. The new game formed the basis of modern international chess. Chess historians consider this to be the most important change since the game's invention.

The rules of chess are governed by the World Chess Federation, which is known by the initials FIDE. The rules are in the section Laws of Chess of the FIDE Handbook. FIDE also give rules and guidelines for chess tournaments.

Chess is played on a square board divided into eight rows of squares called ranks and eight columns called files, with a dark square in each player's lower left corner. There are 64 squares on a chess board. The colors of the squares are laid out in a checker (chequer) pattern with light and dark squares. To make speaking and writing about chess easy, each square has a name. Rank are numbered from 1 to 8, and each file is lettered from a to h. The letter assigned to a file comes before the number. Each square has its own name, such as g1 or f5. The pieces are in white and black sets. The players are called White and Black, and at the start of a game each player has 16 pieces. The 16 pieces are one king, one queen, two rooks, two bishops, two knights and eight pawns.

Definitions: vertical lines are files; horizontal lines are ranks; lines at 45° are diagonals.

Each piece has its own way of moving around the board. The X marks the squares where the piece can move.

Most pieces capture as they move. If a piece lands on an opponent's piece, the opposing piece is taken off the board. There are three special cases:

If a move that attacks the opposing king is made, the king is said to be 'in check', and the piece (or pieces) giving the check are said to be 'checking'. The player whose king is in check must make a move that escapes the check. A player cannot move into check. The options when a player is in check are moving the king, capturing the threatening piece, or moving another piece between the threatening piece and the king.

To win the game one player must checkmate the other player. Checkmate happens when the other player's king is in check and there is no way to get out of check. The word checkmate is often shorted to "mate". Most games end with one of the players resigning (giving up) when their position is so bad that there is no way to avoid losing.

Once in every game, each king can make a special move, known as castling. When the king castles, it moves two squares to the left or right. When this happens, the rook is moved to stand on the opposite side of the King. Castling is only allowed if all of these rules are kept:p120

En passant ('in passing' in French) is a special capture. It is only available when a pawn moves forward two squares past an opposing pawn on an  file. The opposing pawn must be on the 5th rank from its own side. Then the opponent's pawn can capture the double-mover as if it had only moved one square forward. This option is open on the next move only.

For example, if the black pawn has just moved up two squares from g7 to g5, then the white pawn on f5 can take it by en passant on g6. The en passant rule was developed when pawns were allowed to make their double move. The rule made it more difficult for players to avoid pawn exchanges and blockade the position. It kept the game more open.

When a pawn moves to its eighth rank, it is changed into a piece: a queen, rook, bishop, or knight of the player's color. The player gets to choose which piece the pawn turns into, but they need to pick one, it cannot stay a pawn. Normally, the pawn is promoted into a queen, but in some cases another piece is chosen to get an advantage. This is called 'under-promotion'.

Checkmates are rare in competitive chess. The most common ends are decisions made by one or both players.

The FIDE rules for competitive chess include all the rules above, as well as several others.p92 et seq

If a player wishes to adjust a piece on the board, they must first say "J'adoube" (I adjust) or the equivalent. Apart from that, if a piece is touched it must be moved if possible. This is the 'touch and move' law.p425 If no legal move is possible with the touched piece, the player must make a legal move with another piece.Section 4p90 et seq When a player's hand leaves a piece after moving it then the move is over and may not be changed (if the move was legal).

There are a few famous cases where players appeared to break this rule without being punished. The most famous example was by the then World Champion Garry Kasparov against Judit Polgar in a top-class tournament.

Competitive games of chess must be played with special chess clocks which time a player only when it is their turn to move. After moving, the player presses a button on the clock, which stops the player's clock and starts the opponent's clock. Usually the clocks are , but some are electronic.Article 6p92 et seq Electronic clocks can be set to various programs, and they can count moves made.chapter 8

The moves of a chess game are written down by using a special chess notation. This is something that players must do for any competitive game.Article 8 & Appendix E Usually, algebraic chess notation is used. In algebraic notation, each square has one name, regardless of whether you are looking from White's side of the board or Black's. Here, moves are written in the format of:  of piece moved – file where it moved – rank where it moved. For example, Qg5 means "queen moves to the g-file and 5th rank" (that is, to the square g5). If there are two or more pieces of the same type that can move to the same square, one more letter or number is added to show the file or rank from which the piece moved, e.g. Ngf3 means "knight from the g-file moves to the square f3". If possible, the file is used rather than the rank. If both the rank and file are needed, both a letter and a number are used (Letter first). For example, Qd2e3 would mean that a queen on d2 moves to e3. The letter P showing a pawn is not used, so that e4 means "pawn moves to the square e4".

If the piece makes a capture, "x" is written before the square in which the capturing piece lands on. Example: Bxf3 means "bishop captures on f3". When a pawn makes a capture, the file from which the pawn left is used in place of a piece initial. For example: exd5 means "pawn captures on d5."

If a pawn moves to its eighth rank, getting a promotion, the piece chosen is written after the move, for example e1Q or e1=Q. Castling is written by the special notations 0-0 for kingside castling and 0-0-0 for queenside. A move which places the opponent's king in check normally has the notation "+" added. Checkmate can be written as # or ++. At the end of the game, 1-0 means "White won", 0-1 means "Black won" and ½-½ is a draw.

In print, figurines (like those in diagrams, but smaller) are used for the pieces rather than initials. This has the advantage of being language-free, whereas the initials of pieces are different in every language. Typefaces which include figurines can be purchased by chess authors. Also, basic notes can be added by using a system of well-known punctuation marks and other symbols. For example: ! means a good move, !! means a very good move, ? means a bad move, ?? a very bad move (sometimes called a blunder), !? a creative move that may be good, and ?! a doubtful move. The purpose of these methods is to make publications readable in a wider range of countries. For example, one kind of a simple "trap" known as the Scholar's mate, as in the diagram to the right, may be recorded:

3. Bc4 Nf6?? (3...Qe7 would prevent the mate, with 4...Nf6 next move)

With figurines in place of the initials, the chess notation is understood universally.

It used to be common, but now, players are not allowed to smoke in the playing area. They are only allowed to smoke in areas designated by the organiser. Mobile phones may not be used or even switched on. In many tournaments players may not bring mobile phones into the playing area. Players cannot use any source of advice during a game, such as other players or chess books, nor analyse the game on a device. These and other matters are covered by the FIDE Laws on the conduct of the players.Article 12

A game is divided into three stages: the opening, the middlegame, and the endgame.

The first moves of a chess game are called the opening. A chess opening is a name given to a series of opening moves. Recognized patterns of opening moves are openings and have been given names such as the Ruy Lopez or Sicilian defence. They are listed in reference works such as the Encyclopaedia of Chess Openings. There are dozens of different openings. They range from gambits in which material, such as pawns are offered for fast development (e.g. the King's Gambit), to slower openings, which lead to a maneuvering type of game (e.g. the Réti opening). In some opening lines, the sequence thought best for both sides has been worked out to 20–30 moves; most players avoid such lines. Expert players study openings throughout their chess career, as opening theory keeps on .

White, by virtue of the first move, begins the game with a better chance of winning. Black normally tries to equalize or to get counterplay during the game.

The middlegame is the part of the game where most pieces have been developed. It is where most games are won and lost. Many games will end in resignation before the endgame takes place.

A middlegame position has a structure. That structure is determined by the opening. The simplest way to learn the middlegame is to select an opening and learn it well (see examples in English Opening and French Defence).

These are some things to look for when analyzing a middlegame position:

Here is an example from the borderline between opening and middlegame. In the diagram to the left, White will mainly play on the queenside, while Black will play on the kingside.

If White to play, he may wish to stop Black's threat of playing 10...Nf4. He can do this by playing 10.g3, or by playing 10.Re1 so that if 10...Nf4 11.Bf1 will preserve the bishop (in this position it is an important defensive piece). However, White may try to plough ahead with 10.c5, the key move on the queenside. ChessBase shows that the number of tournament games with these choices were:

The database also shows that the overall results were significantly better for 10.Re1. During a middlegame, the player should note the features of the position on the board, and formulate a game plan. The opponent will try to interfere with the plan or gain counterplay.

The endgame is the part of the game when there are few pieces left on the board. There are three main strategic differences between earlier parts of the game and the endgame:

Endgame positions are easier to analyze than middlegames, as there are fewer pieces on the board. Many endgame positions can be won by force. A drawn endgame is one that is legally drawn (checkmate is impossible), or drawn by chess experience (drawn with best play by both sides). All endgames in master chess revolve around the borderline between winning and drawing. Generally, once a 'textbook' drawn position is reached, the players will agree a draw.

Endgames can be studied according to the types of pieces that remain on the board. For example, king and pawn endgames have only kings and pawns on one or both sides, and the task of the stronger side is to promote one of the pawns. Other endings are studied according to the pieces on board other than kings, e.g. rook and pawn versus rook endgame.

Basic checkmates are positions in which one side has only a king and the other side has one or two pieces, enough to checkmate the opponent's king. They are usually learned at the beginner stage. Examples are mate with K+Q v K; K+R v K; K+2B v K; K+B&N v K (this one is quite difficult).

There are two types of chess programs. One is to play against you; the other is to help you become a better player by learning more. The two types can be made to work together, though they have different functions.

Chess engines are computer systems that can play chess games against human opponents. Many have been created; they can play above master level, and are considered to be much better players than even the world's best humans. Their processes are quite different from human beings.p87

Every year brings new advances, which if listed here would soon be out of date. English Wikipedia keeps an up-to-date chart of the leading software: .

Chess databases give access to the recorded history of master chess games. There are two components: software, which lets one search and organise the database material, and the actual database. There are usually over a million games in a given database.

In practice, databases are used for two purposes. First, for a player to train his/her ability at specific openings. Second, to look up specific opponents to see what they play, and prepare against them beforehand.

The existence of chess databases is one of the reasons players can achieve mastery at an young age.

ChessBase is the biggest database, and widely used by masters. Although it can be used online, most users download the software and data onto their computer. If that computer happens to be a laptop, then they might take the laptop to tournaments to help prepare for games. Players cannot use computers or any other aid during games, so much of the preparation goes on before a game. ChessBase has to be purchased, and it is not cheap.

This is a Dutch magazine for advanced players, which runs an online database called NicBase as part of its services. NicBase is free, and has over a million games.

Chessgames.com runs an online database of games. It is mostly free, but full access to all its facilities costs a subscription. It has over half a million games on its database.

There are websites which a player can join and play on line. Most have special features that the player must pay for to use. In this case, the player will play against other humans, not a computer (though most websites allow playing against computers as well). There are players of many different skill levels that are members, and various events are held for the different skill levels. Online chess websites include:

Brussels (, , ) is the capital city of Belgium and the European Union.

In 2007, 145,917 people lived there. But the area around it, known as the Brussels-Capital Region, had 1,031,215 people (which makes it the largest city area in Belgium).

The people of Brussels speak mainly French and Flemish (a type of Dutch). There are lots of other languages spoken as well, because the European Union offices are there and because many thousands of immigrants from all over the world live there.

The city is at 50° 50 North, 04° 21 East. It has an oceanic climate (Cfb in the Köppen climate classification).

Thirty-one people were killed in a terrorist attack on 22 March 2016.

Many popular European comics came from Brussels, such as Tintin, The Smurfs, Snorks, and Lucky Luke.

It is also well known for a style of building known as Art Nouveau.

The vegetables Brussels sprouts are named after the city, and Brussels is also famous for its waffles and its chocolates.

A lot of tourists visit Brussels for the statue Manneken Pis.

Buddhism is a dharmic religion that originated in ancient India, based on the teachings of Siddhartha Gautama better known as The Buddha "the Awakened one".

Over the centuries, his teachings spread to Nepal, Central Asia, Tibet, Sri Lanka, Southeast Asia, China, Mongolia, Korea, Japan, and now Europe and North and South America. At least two major branches of practice and theory exist: Theravada Buddhism is most common in Sri Lanka and Southeast Asia, and Mahayana is most common in East Asia. Buddhism exists as many different schools and sects today but they all share common beliefs and ideas. About seven percent of the people of the world are Buddhist.

While many people see Buddhism as a religion, others see it as a philosophy, and others as a way of finding .

Siddhartha Gautama (563483 BC) began life as the infant prince of a small kingdom in Lumbini, now in the southern part of Nepal. As an adult he left wealth and status behind to search for truth. Enlightened at the age of 35, the Buddha spent the next 45 years of his life traveling and teaching in the northern part of India. He died at the age of 80.

The Buddha focused much of his teaching on how to overcome suffering. He saw that all living things suffer in being born, in getting sick, in growing old, and in facing death. By overcoming suffering, he taught, a person will be truly happy.

Early teaching. His first lesson after becoming enlightened was to other seekers who had also renounced the world. This was a group of holy men or monks with whom the Buddha had studied for five or more years. To them he first presented what he saw as the Four Noble Truths of life and the Eightfold Noble Path (see below). These teachings identify the causes of suffering and their cure.

Three marks of existence. The Buddha taught that life is best understood as being impermanent (everything changes), unsatisfactory (left on our own we are never truly happy), and interdependent (all things are linked, even to the degree that the self is better understood as an illusion).

The middle way. Buddhism teaches non-harm and moderation or balance, not going too far one way or the other. This is called the Middle Way, and encourages people to live in balance.

Meditation. The Buddha recommended meditation as a way to discipline the mind and see the world as it is. Buddhists may meditate while sitting in a special or specific way. Standing and walking meditation are other styles.

Three poisons. In discussing suffering, the Buddha identified the three poisons of desire, anger and stupidity, and he showed that we could end our suffering by letting go of desires and overcoming anger and stupidity.

Nirvana. The complete letting go of negative influences is called Nirvana, meaning "to extinguish," like putting out the flame of a candle. This end of suffering is also called Enlightenment. In Buddhism, Enlightenment and Nirvana often mean the same thing.

Do Buddhists believe in god or gods? The Buddha would not say if gods exist or not, although gods play a part in some Buddhist stories. If someone asked the Buddha, "Do gods exist?" he maintained a noble silence. That is, he would not confirm or deny. Buddhists do not believe that people should look to gods to save them or bring them enlightenment. Rather individuals should work out their own path the best they can.

Other basic teachings. Many of the Buddha's ideas are found in other Indian religions, especially Hinduism.

Buddha is a Pali word which means "The Awakened (or Enlightened) one". Someone who has woken up to the truth of the mind and suffering and teaches the truth to others is called a Buddha. The word "Buddha" often means the historical Buddha named Buddha Shakyamuni (Siddhartha Gautama). Buddhists do not believe that a Buddha is a god, but that he is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the mind works. They believe this knowledge totally changes the person. This person can help others become enlightened too. Enlightened people are beyond birth, death, and rebirth.

According to Buddhism, there were countless Buddhas before Gautama Buddha and there will be many Buddhas after him.

In Pali texts, the first Buddha in Buddhavamsa sutta was Taṇhaṅkara Buddha. The Mahapadana sutta says the earliest Buddha of the recent seven buddhas was Vipassi Buddha (But sutta is not saying that Vipassi is first Buddha). Counting from the present kalpa (the beginning of our present world (Earth)) Gautama Buddha is considered the fourth Buddha. In this telling, the first is Kakusandho Buddha, second Konakamano Buddha, and the third Kassapo Buddha. The last Buddha of this kalpa will be Maitreya Buddha. Then the world (Earth) will renew itself and from then begins a new kalpa.

Buddhists respect and treasure the Three Jewels, which are the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.

The Buddha refers to the awakened one, the Dharma to the Buddha's teachings, and the Sangha to the people who follow the Buddha and his teachings.

Buddhists say "I take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha." They find comfort in these jewels or treasures.

The Buddha's first and most important teachings are the Four Noble Truths.

The Buddha told people to follow a special way of life called the Noble Eightfold Path if they want to understand the Four Noble Truths. These are:

Buddhists are encouraged to follow five precepts, or guidelines. The Buddha taught that killing, stealing, having sex in a harmful way, and lying are not signs of skill.

If a person wants to be a monk or nun, they will follow other precepts as well.

A Buddha is the holiest type of being in Buddhism, a teacher of gods and humans. The word Buddha means "enlightened one" in Sanskrit or Fully Awakened One in Pāli.

It is also a title for Siddhartha Gautama. He was the man who started Buddhism. Sometimes people call him "the Buddha" or the "Shakyamuni Buddha". Other times, people call any person a Buddha if they have found enlightenment. If a person has not found enlightenment yet, but is very close to reaching it, then he is called bodhisattva.

Buddhists believe that there have been many Buddhas, Gautama Buddha being merely the most famous. People who will become Buddhas someday are called "bodhisattvas."

Buddhists believe that the Buddha was enlightened, which means that he knew all about how to live a peaceful life and how to avoid suffering. He is said to have never argued with other people, but only said what was true and useful, out of compassion for others.

Some Buddhists pray to Buddhas, but Buddhas are not gods. Buddhas are teachers who help the people who will listen. A Buddha is a human being who has woken up and can see the true way the world works. This knowledge totally changes the person so that they can have a better life in the present and the future. A Buddha can also help a person achieve enlightenment.

There are ideas or teachings which are said to lead someone to enlightenment. They are called the Dharma (Sanskrit) or "Dhamma" (Pāli), meaning "the way" or "the truth." Anyone can become a Buddha, but it is very difficult. Siddhartha Gautama became Buddha under the peepal or "bodhi" tree at Bodhgaya in Bihar in what is now India.

There is a special type of Buddha called a pratyekabuddha or "silent Buddha". These Buddhas reached enlightenment on their own, but they did not teach others.

Another type of Buddha is a samyaksambuddha. This is the best kind of Buddha because he is able to teach all living beings.

Buddhists believe that there have been many Buddhas in the past. There will also be many Buddhas in the future. Traditionally, seven Buddhas are given names.

A Buddha is a person who has reached perfection. Some believe that there are 32 physical features of a Buddha; these are the 32 marks of a Great Man from Vedic Brahmin folklore, but are mentioned in the Pāli canon. Some of these features are represented in art and sculpture. These are listed below.

Christopher Columbus (1451-1506) was an Italian trader, explorer, and navigator. The consensus view is that he was born in Genoa in the year 1451, the son of a weaver named Domenico Colombo and a seamstress named Susanna Fontanarossa. Many alternative theories on his origins exist, but are dismissed by the majority of scholars. "Christopher Columbus" is the English version of Columbus's name.  His real name in Italian was Cristoforo Colombo.

In 1492 Columbus landed on an island of the Bahamas, the first European to do so. His initial goal was to find a quicker route to Asia from Europe. He is known as the person who discovered the New World because his voyage started the era of European colonialism in the Americas. This was an important moment in European history. While Leif Erikson was the first European to land on the soils of America, it was not well documented and did not lead to the later contact between Europe and the New World. The effects was the bringing over of livestock, disease, crops and slaves.

When the Spanish learned that Columbus had found a New World, many other people, called conquistadors, went there too.  This led to the Spanish colonization of the Americas.

Columbus was the second European person to discover the Americas after Leif Erikson.

Many people in Western Europe wanted to find a shorter way to get to Asia. Columbus thought he could get to Asia by sailing west. He did not know about the Western Hemisphere, so he did not realize it would block him from getting to Asia.

However, Columbus did not have enough money to pay for this voyage on his own. After defeating the Emirate of Granada, the rulers of Spain, Ferdinand II and Isabella I of Castile, agreed to pay for the voyage. He promised to bring back gold and spices for them.

In August 1492, Columbus and his sailors left Spain in three ships: the Santa María (the Holy Mary), the Pinta (the Painted), and the Santa Clara (nicknamed the Niña: the Little Girl).

The three ships were very small.  Historians think that the largest ship, the Santa María, was only about  long, and about 16 to 19 feet (4.8 to 5.8 metres) wide.

Columbus's other ships were even smaller.  Historians think they were about  long.

On October 12, 1492, after sailing for about four months, Columbus landed on a small island in the Bahamas. The locals called it Guanahani; Columbus renamed it San Salvador ("Holy Savior").  He met Arawak and Taíno Native Americans who lived on the island.  They were friendly and peaceful towards Columbus and his crew.  Not knowing where he was, and thinking that he had reached Asia, the "Indies," he called them "Indians."  He  their land as Spain's.

Columbus then sailed to what is now Cuba, then to Hispaniola.  On Hispaniola, Columbus built a fort.  This was one of the first European military bases in the Western Hemisphere.  He called it Navidad (Spanish for "Christmas").  He left thirty-nine crew members there, and ordered them to find and store the gold.

On the day he landed in the Bahamas, Columbus wrote about the Arawaks and Taíno:

Columbus noticed that some of the Arawaks had gold earrings.  He took some of them as prisoners and ordered them to lead him to the gold.  However, they could not.

On September 24, 1493, Columbus left Spain with enough ships, supplies, and men to invade and make Spanish colonies in the New World.  He had 17 ships and 1,200 men.  These men included soldiers and farmers.  There were also priests, whose job was to convert the locals to Christianity.

On this voyage, Columbus explored some of the islands of the Lesser Antilles.  He also sailed around most of Hispaniola and explored the sides of Jamaica and Cuba he had not seen on his first voyage.

Then he went back to the Navidad fort.  He found the fort burned down.  Eleven of the 37 soldiers Columbus left at the fort were buried there.  The rest had disappeared.  Historians think this happened because of disease and fights with the Arawak people.

While Columbus was away from Navidad exploring Jamaica and Cuba, his soldiers stopped working on building a new fort and farms.  They made the Arawaks give them food.  They also stole things from the Arawaks and raped Arawak women. When Columbus found out about this, he ordered them to be hung. Some Arawak caciques saw Columbus as an ally of their enemy and attacked him.  However, Spain had many weapons that the Arawaks had never seen, including steel swords, pikes, crossbows, dogs, and horses. This made it much easier for Spain to win fights against the Arawaks.

Columbus had many rebellions on his hands. He fought with many local chiefs who saw him as an invader and an ally with Gracangari, the chief Columbus was friends with. They were quickly put to route by the Spaniards' inventions.

There was not much gold on the parts of the island Columbus took over. After a while he ordered the search for gold to be given up.

Columbus went on another voyage in 1498.  King John II of Portugal had said there was a continent to the south-west of the Cape Verde islands.  On his third voyage, Columbus wanted to find this continent.  Before the voyage, Queen Isabella reminded Columbus that he should treat all of the local people well and make them into Christians.

On this voyage, Columbus sent three ships straight to the West Indies (the Caribbean).  He led another three ships: first to two Portuguese islands, then to the Canary Islands, then Cape Verde.  From Cape Verde, they sailed to the northern coast of South America and landed in Trinidad.  He also explored part of South America and the islands now called Tobago and Grenada.

On August 19, 1498, Columbus returned to Hispaniola.  He found that many of the Spanish settlers there were unhappy. They thought there would be more gold in the New World. Some of them had rebelled while he was gone. Columbus had five of the rebellion's leaders hanged.  He also tried to make the rest of the settlers happy by giving them land in Hispaniola. However, the settlers kept sending  to Spain.  In 1499, Queen Isabella sent a man named Francisco de Bobadilla to Hispaniola.  She gave him the power to do whatever he thought he should do.  When he arrived in 1500, the first thing he did was to have Columbus arrested and sent back to Spain in chains.

When he was trying to make Spanish settlers happy, Columbus started the Encomienda system in Hispaniola. Under this system, Columbus would give a piece of land in Hispaniola to an individual Spanish settler. Sometimes, he would give away a whole local village. Any locals that lived in that area had to work for that Spanish settler. Locals had lived on this land for centuries. Columbus was giving their land away, and then forcing them to work on that land.

Jacetopher Columbuzzy was the founder of Virginia. He floated his 16 boats here and discovered land.

Columbus's relatives said that Columbus was born in Genoa, Italy.  Today, no historian can say for sure where Columbus was born. Most experts think the best evidence says he was born in Genoa.  Other historians think Columbus was born somewhere else, like Spain or Portugal.  Some think he was originally a Jew who converted to Christianity.

In 1477, Columbus married Felipa Moniz Perestrelo.  She was from a semi-noble family with connections to sailing. She died around 1479 or 1480 while giving birth to their son, Diego.

In 1485, while in Córdoba, Spain, Columbus met Beatriz Enríquez de Trasierra.  They lived together for a while. They had one child named Fernando.

Columbus had a few different goals for his journeys to the New World.  First, he believed he could find a shorter and easier route to Asia, which made things Europe did not. He believed he could find a shorter route to China.  Other people had called this belief .  Columbus wanted to prove these people wrong.

Second, Columbus wanted to find gold.  Gold was the main kind of money used in Columbus's times.  In his letter to Spain's King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella, Columbus wrote: "Gold is most excellent; gold is , and [the person] who [has] it does all he wishes to in this world."  This means that someone with gold can do anything he wants to do. Many historians believe that Columbus wanted to become a powerful person  and in order to become powerful, he needed to find gold.

When the Spanish learned about the New World, many conquistadors, or conquerors, went there.  This led to the Spanish colonization of the Americas.

The Spanish conquistadors first settled on the islands of Hispaniola (now the Dominican Republic and Haiti), Cuba, and Puerto Rico.  They grabbed as much gold as they could.  The Spanish also brought priests and forced the Native Americans to convert to Christianity.

In the United States, Columbus Day is a holiday that celebrates Columbus's arrival in the New World on October 12, 1492.

The World's Columbian Exposition, which happened in 1893 in Chicago, Illinois, was held to celebrate the 400th anniversary of Columbus visiting the Americas.

Between 1492 and 1930, over 60 million Europeans migrated to the Americas. The peak of this migration was in the 19th and early 20th centuries.

The mass migration of Europeans to the New World was one of the largest transfers of population in history.

He has been increasingly been looked at badly for the mistreatment and genocide of indigenous peoples.

A canal is a waterway made by humans. For many centuries, canals have been built as a way of transporting heavy goods in barges or boats. Canals often connect lakes, rivers, or oceans. The Panama Canal is a famous canal that connects the Atlantic Ocean with the Pacific Ocean. Many canals are reinforced with clay or concrete on the sides and have locks. Other canals are used for irrigation or hydropower.

Carbon is a very important chemical element, with a chemical symbol of C. All known life on Earth needs it to survive. Carbon has atomic mass 12 and atomic number 6. It is a nonmetal, meaning that it is not a metal.

When iron is alloyed with carbon, hard steel is formed. Carbon in the form of coal is an important fuel.

A whole type of chemistry, called organic chemistry, is about carbon and its compounds.  Carbon makes many types of compounds.  Hydrocarbons are molecules with carbon and hydrogen.  Methane, Propane, and many other fuels are hydrocarbons.  Many of the substances that people use daily are organic compounds.

Carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and some other elements like sulfur and phosphorus together form most life on earth (see List of biologically important elements).  Carbon forms a very large number of organic compounds because it can form strong bonds with itself and with other elements.  Because of the amounts of carbon living things have, all organic things are considered "carbon-based".

Each carbon atom usually forms four chemical bonds, which are strong connections to other atoms to form molecules. The kind of bond that carbon makes is called a covalent bond. These bonds allow carbon to form many kinds of small and large molecules. A molecule of methane is the smallest; it has four hydrogen atoms bonded to carbon. The bonds can be double bonds, meaning that two bonds form between carbon and another atom to make a stronger connection. For example, carbon dioxide has two oxygen atoms, and each one is double bonded to carbon. Carbon can even form three bonds with another atom, called a triple bond. For example, in the gas acetylene carbon forms a triple bond with another carbon atom.

By bonding to other carbon atoms, carbon can form long chain-shaped molecules, called polymers, such as plastics and proteins. Atoms of other elements can be part of the long polymer chains, often nitrogen or oxygen.

Pure carbon forms diamond by bonding to four other carbon atoms in a three dimensional crystal. It forms graphite by bonding to three other carbon atoms to form thin flat layers.

The name of carbon comes from Latin carbo, meaning charcoal. In many foreign languages the words for carbon, coal and charcoal are synonyms.

Carbon in nature is found in three forms called allotropes: diamond, graphite, and fullerenes. Graphite, with clay, is in pencils. It is very soft. The carbon atoms in it make rings, which are on top of each other and slide very easily. Diamonds are the hardest natural mineral. Fullerenes are a "soccer ball" shape of carbon. They are mostly of interest to science. A special, man-made, tube-shaped allotrope of carbon is the carbon nanotube. Carbon nanotubes are very hard, so they might be used in armor. Nanotubes might be useful in nanotechnology.

A radioactive isotope of carbon, carbon-14, can be used to figure out how old some objects are or when something died. As long as something is on the surface of the earth and taking in carbon, the amount of carbon-14 stays the same. When an object stops taking in carbon, the carbon-14 amount goes down. Because the half-life (how long it takes for half of a radioactive isotope to go away) of carbon-14 is 5730 years, scientists can see how old the object is by how much carbon-14 is left.

Carbon is in many places in the universe. It was first made in old stars. Carbon is the fourth most common element in the sun. The atmospheres of Venus and Mars are mostly carbon dioxide.

Carbon is important to the human body and other living things, and it is the second most common element in the human body, at 23% of all body weight. It is also a key part of many biological molecules (molecules used in life).

Most of the carbon on Earth is coal. Graphite is in many (typically desert) areas, including Sri Lanka, Madagascar, and Russia. Diamonds are rare and are found largely in Africa. Carbon is also in some meteorites.

Cancer is a type of disease where cells grow out of control, divide and invade other tissues. In a person without cancer, cell division is under control. In most tissues, healthy cells divide in a controlled way and copy themselves to create new healthy cells. With cancer, this normal cell division goes out of control. Cells change their nature because mutations have occurred in their genes. All the daughter cells of cancer cells are also cancerous. Such cells are responsible for growing more cancer cells in the body.

If the abnormal cells do not invade other tissues or organs, but just divide and swell up their original tissue, this is not called "cancer". It is called a tumour (when there are multiple they are tumours). Tumours are usually not a threat to life because they can be cut out. However, some tumours occur in places where they cannot be cut out, and they can be fatal. Some brain tumours are of this type.

The symptoms of cancer are caused by the cancerous cells invading other tissues. This is called metastasis. Metastasis is when cancer cells move through the bloodstream or lymphatic system. When this happens, a person's cancer can be spread to other places in the body. Eventually those other tissues cannot work as well, and the whole body begins to get worse, and may die.

Cancer can affect anybody at any age. Most types of cancer are more likely to affect people as they get older. This is because as a person's DNA gets older, their DNA may become damaged, or damage that happened in the past may get worse. One type of cancer that is more common in young men, rather than older people, is testicular cancer (cancer of the testicles).

Cancer is one of the biggest and most researched causes of death in developed countries. Studying cancer and its treatment is called oncology.

Cancer is one of the most common causes of death around the world. It causes about 16% (or one out of every six) of all deaths worldwide, according to the World Health Organization.

Different types of cancer have different causes. Some things are known to cause cancer in a specific body part; other things are known to be able to cause many different types of cancer. For example, using tobacco (smoked or smokeless) can cause many types of cancers, such as lung, mouth, tongue, and throat cancers.

Other things that are known to be able to cause cancer, or make a person more likely to get cancer, include: radiation including sunlight and X-rays in large or many doses, and  to radiation (for example in a nuclear power plant), chemicals and materials used in building and manufacturing (for example, asbestos and benzene), high-fat or low-fiber diets, air and water pollution, eating very little fruits and vegetables, obesity, and other unhealthy diets, alcohol, not enough  activity, and certain chemicals commonly used at home. Some cancers can also be caused by viruses. Many people who are exposed to these things do not get cancer.

There are many different kinds of cancers. The most common cancers in the world are: breast cancer, lung cancer, colorectal cancer, prostate cancer and stomach cancer.

There is no sure cure for cancer. It can only be cured if all of the cancerous cells are cut out or killed in place. This means that the earlier the cancer is treated, the better the chances are for a cure (because the cancer cells may not have had enough time to copy themselves and spread so much that the person cannot be cured).

There are a few different types of treatments that may kill cancer cells. These treatments are:

There are a few reasons why treating cancer is complicated. For example:

Many people in countries around the world study cancer and work on finding treatments. There has been some good progress in finding treatments, and many kinds of cancers are treated with success. Along with looking for different medical treatments to treat cancer, some studies also look for things that people with cancer can do themselves to try to make themselves healthier. For example, one study showed that if a person with lymphedema (a swelling of the arm linked to breast cancer) lifts weights, he may be able to fight his cancer better than somebody who does not lift weights.

Cancer has been around for many thousands of years. Today, a lot of the medical terms used to describe cancer come from ancient Greek and Latin. For example, the Latinized Greek word carcinoma is used to describe a malignant tumour - a tumour made up of cancer cells. The Greeks also used the word "karkinos", which would be translated by Aulus Cornelius Celsus into the Latin word cancer. The prefix 'carcino' is still used in medical words like carcinoma and carcinogenic. A famous Greek doctor, Galen, helped create another word that is very important to medicine today by using the word "onkos" to  all tumours. This is where the word oncology, the branch of medicine that deals with cancer, comes from.

Hippocrates (a very famous ancient doctor who is often called the father of modern medicine) named many kinds of cancer. He called benign tumours (tumours that are not made up of cancer cells) oncos. In Greek, onkos means 'swelling'. He called malignant tumours karkinos. This means crab or crayfish in Greek. He used this term because he thought that if a solid malignant tumour was cut into, its veins looked like a crab: "the veins stretched on all sides as the animal the crab has its feet, whence it derives (gets) its name". Hippocrates later added -oma (Greek for 'swelling') after the word 'carcinos'. This is how the word carcinoma came about.

Because the ancient Greeks did not believe in opening up dead bodies to study them, Hippocrates was only able to describe and make drawings of tumours he saw from the outside of the body. He drew tumours that had been on the skin, nose, and breasts.

Hippocrates and other doctors at that time treated people based on the humor theory. This theory said that there were four types of fluid in the body (black, yellow bile, blood, and phlegm). Doctors tried to figure out whether these four "humors" (or body fluids) were in balance. They would then use treatments like blood-letting (cutting the patient and letting him bleed so that he would lose blood); laxatives (giving the patient foods or herbs to make him go to the bathroom), and/or changing the patient's diet. The doctors thought that these treatments would work to get the patient's four humors back into the right balance. The humor theory treatment was popular until the 19th century (the 1800s), when cells were discovered. By this time, people had realized that cancer can happen anywhere in the body.

The oldest known document that talks about cancer was discovered in Egypt and is thought to be from about 1600 B.C. The document talks about using surgery to treat eight cases of ulcers of the breast. These were treated by cauterization - by burning them - using a tool called "the fire drill". The document also says about cancer, "There is no treatment".

Another very early type of surgery used to treat cancer was written about in the 1020s. In The Canon of Medicine, Avicenna (Ibn Sina) said that treatment should involve cutting out all diseased tissue. This included the use of amputation (removing a part of the body completely) or removing veins that ran in the direction of the tumour. Avicenna also suggested that the area that had been treated should be cauterized (or burned) if needed.

In the 16th and 17th centuries (the 1500s and 1600s), doctors started to be allowed to dissect bodies (or cut them open after death) in order to figure out the cause of death. Around this time, there were many different ideas about what caused cancer. The German professor Wilhelm Fabry believed that breast cancer was caused by a clot of milk in the part of a woman's breast that produces milk. The Dutch professor Francois de la Boe Sylvius believed that all disease was caused by chemical processes. He thought that cancer, in particular, was caused by acidic lymph. Nicolaes Tulp, who lived at the same time as Sylvius, believed that cancer was a poison that slowly spreads and was contagious.

A British surgeon named Percivall Pott was the first person to figure out one of the real causes of cancer. In 1775, he discovered that cancer of the scrotum was a common disease among chimney sweeps (people who cleaned out chimneys). Other doctors started studying this topic and coming up with other ideas about what causes cancer. Doctors then started working together and coming up with better ideas.

In the 18th century (the 1700s), many people started to use the microscope, and this made a big difference in helping doctors and scientists understand more about cancer. Using the microscope, scientists were able to see that the 'cancer poison' spread from one tumour through the lymph nodes to other sites ("metastasis"). This was first made clear by the English surgeon Campbell De Morgan, between 1871 and 1874.

Before the 19th century (the 1800s), using surgery to treat cancer usually had bad results. Doctors did not understand how important hygiene (or keeping things clean) is for preventing disease, especially after surgery. Because things were not kept clean during or after surgery, patients often got infections and died. For example, one well-known Scottish surgeon, Alexander Monro, kept records and found that 58 patients out of every 60 who had surgery for breast tumours died within the next two years.

In the 19th century, surgical hygiene got better because of asepsis. Doctors realized that dirtiness and germs cause infections, so they started to keep things cleaner and do things to kill germs in order to prevent their patients from getting infections. It became more common for people to survive after having surgery. Surgical removal of the tumour (taking the tumour out of the body by doing surgery) became the first-choice treatment for cancer. For this kind of treatment to work, the surgeon doing the operation had to be very good at removing tumours. (This meant that even if people had the same kind of cancer, they could get very different results, with some getting good treatment that worked and others getting treatment that did not work, because of differences in how good different surgeons were.)

In the late 1800s, doctors and scientists started to realize that the body is made up of many kinds of tissues, which in turn are made up of millions of cells. The discovery started the age of cellular pathology (studying cells to learn about diseases and figure out what is wrong with the body).

In the 1890s, French scientists discovered radioactive decay. Radiation therapy became the first cancer treatment that worked and did not involve surgery. It required a new multi-disciplinary approach to cancer treatment (people doing different jobs were working together to treat patients). The surgeon was no longer working by himself - he worked together with hospital radiologists (people who gave and read X-rays) to help patients. This team approach meant changes in how they worked. The different people on the team had to communicate with each other and work together, which they were not used to doing. It also meant that treatment had to be done in a hospital rather than at the patient's home. Because of this, patients' information had to be put together into files kept at the hospital (called "medical records"). Because this information was now being kept and written down, scientists were able to do the first statistical patient studies using numbers to study questions like how many people who have a certain type of cancer or get a certain treatment survive.

Another important step forward in understanding cancer happened in 1926, when Janet Lane-Claypon published a paper on cancer epidemiology. (Epidemiology is a field of study which looks at how common a disease is, what patterns the disease takes in different kinds of people, and what this means for understanding and treating the disease.) This historic paper was a  study, which tries to find out what causes a disease by looking at a group of people who have the disease and figuring out how they are different from another group that does not have the disease. Lane-Clayton's study looked at 1000 people who all had the same background and lifestyle (or way of living): 500 people with breast cancer and 500 control patients (people without breast cancer). These people were the same in many ways, but some got breast cancer and some did not. To figure out what might be causing certain people to get breast cancer, the study looked at what was different about these people when they were compared to (or looked at alongside) the people who did not get cancer.

Lane-Clayton's study was published by the British Ministry of Health. Her work on cancer epidemiology was continued by Richard Doll and Austin Bradford Hill. They used the same ways of studying cancer as Lane-Clayton, but they looked at a different kind of cancer: lung cancer. In 1956, they published their results in a paper called "Lung Cancer and Other Causes of Death In Relation to Smoking. A Second Report on the Mortality of British Doctors" (also called the British doctors study). Later, Richard Doll left the London Medical Research Center (MRC), and started the Oxford unit for Cancer epidemiology in 1968. By using computers, this unit was able to do something new and very important: it brought together large amounts of cancer data (pieces of information about cancer). This way of studying cancer is very important to cancer epidemiology today, and it has also been very important in shaping what we now know about cancer and what the rules and laws about the disease and public health are today. Over the past 50 years, many different people have done a lot of work to collect data from different doctors, hospitals, areas, states, and even countries. This data is used to study whether different kinds of cancer are more or less common in different areas, environments (for example, in big cities compared to the countryside), or cultures. This helps people who study cancer to figure out what makes people more or less likely to get different kinds of cancer.

Before World War II, doctors and hospitals were getting better at collecting (or getting and keeping) data about their patients who had cancer, but it was rare for this data to be shared with other doctors or hospitals. This changed after WWII, when medical research centers found out that different countries had very different number of cases of cancer. Because of this, many countries created national public health organizations (which studied public health issues in an entire country). These national public health organizations began to bring together health data from many different doctors and hospitals. This helped them figure out some of the reasons why cancer was so much more common in certain places. For example, in Japan, people studying cancer found out that people who had survived the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki had bone marrow that was completely destroyed. This helped them realize that diseased bone marrow could also be destroyed with radiation, which was a very important step in figuring out that leukemia (a blood cancer) can be treated with bone marrow transplants.

Since World War II, scientists have kept finding better cancer treatments. However, there are some things that still need to get better. For example, while there are good treatments for many kinds of cancer, there are still no treatments for certain kinds of cancer, or for some cancers once they progress (or get worse) to a certain stage of the disease. Also, the cancer treatments that do exist are not all standardized (there is not one agreed-upon way of giving every treatment which is used each time the treatment is given). Cancer treatments are also not available everywhere in the world. People need to keep studying cancer epidemiology and forming international partnerships (where different countries work together) to find cures and make cancer treatments available everywhere.

Charles Robert Darwin (12 February 1809 – 19 April 1882) was an English naturalist. He is famous for his work on the theory of evolution. Darwin's book On the Origin of Species was published in 1859. In this book, he put forward much evidence that evolution had occurred. He also proposed natural selection as the way evolution had taken place.

Darwin did not know about genetics: he never read the work of Gregor Mendel. Nevertheless, Darwin's explanation of evolution was fundamentally correct. In contrast to Lamarck, Darwin's idea was that the giraffe's neck became longer because those with longer necks survived better. These survivors passed their genes on, and in time the whole species got longer necks.

Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, Shropshire. His grandfather, Erasmus Darwin, opposed the slave trade; his father was a doctor. He studied at the University of Edinburgh Medical School and at Christ's College, Cambridge. Despite studying medicine at the University of Edinburgh Medical School, a very influential medical school, Darwin dropped out because he hated the sight of blood and was bored of the lectures there. At Cambridge, he created the Gourmet Club, also known as the Glutton Club, where he would eat exotic animals.

In 1843 Darwin, who already had ten children with his wife Emma, bought Down House in the village of Downe, Kent. He lived there for the rest of his life, and today the house and contents are open to the public.

In 1882, he was diagnosed with angina pectoris, which then meant coronary thrombosis. He died at Down House from heart failure caused by coronary thrombosis on 19 April 1882 at the age of 73. His last words were to his family, telling Emma, "I am not the least afraid of deathRemember what a good wife you have been to meTell all my children to remember how good they have been to me". While he rested, he repeatedly told Henrietta and Francis, "It's almost worthwhile to be sick to be nursed by you".

Darwin spent almost five years on board a Royal Navy exploring ship, the HMS Beagle. He was the guest naturalist, which meant that he was responsible for making collections and notes about the animals, plants, and the geology of the countries they visited. The ship's crew made charts of all the coastal areas, which could be used by the navy wherever it went in the world. At the time, Britain had by far the largest navy in the world, and an empire which was global.

Darwin collected everywhere the ship landed. He found huge fossils of recently extinct mammals, experienced an earthquake in Chile, and noticed the land had been raised. He knew of raised beaches elsewhere, high in the Andes, with fossil seashells and trees which had once grown on a sandy beach. Obviously the Earth was constantly changing, with land rising in some places, and sinking in others. He collected birds and insects, and sent shipments back to Cambridge for experts to identify.

Darwin was the first dedicated naturalist to visit the Galapagos Islands, off the west coast of Ecuador. He noticed that some of the birds were like mockingbirds on the mainland, but different enough to be placed in separate species. He began to wonder how so many new species came to be on these islands.

When Darwin got back to England, he edited a series of scientific reviews of the voyage, and wrote a personal journal which we know as The Voyage of the Beagle. It is one of the great natural history travel diaries.

While on the H.M.S. Beagle, and later back home in London, Darwin had come across the ideas of the Rev. T.R. Malthus. Malthus had realised that, although humans could double their population every 25 years, it did not happen in practice. He thought the reason was that a struggle for existence (or resources) limited their numbers. If numbers increased, then famine, wars and diseases caused more deaths. Darwin, who knew that all living things could, in principle, increase their numbers, began to think about why some survived, while others did not.p264-268 His answer took years to develop.

The theory of evolution says that all living things on Earth, including plants, animals and microbes, come from a common ancestor by slowly changing throughout the generations. Darwin suggested that the way living things changed over time is through natural selection. This is the better survival and reproduction of those that best fit their environment. Fitting into the place where you live is called adapting. Those who fit best into the place where they live, the best adapted, have the best chance to survive and breed. Those who are less well-adapted tend not to survive. If they do not survive well enough to raise young, this means they do not pass on their genes. In this way, the species gradually changes.

The first chapter of the Origin deals with domesticated animals, such as cattle and dogs. Darwin reminded readers of the huge changes mankind had made in its domestic animals, which were once wild species. The changes were brought about by selective breeding – choosing animals with desirable characters to breed from. This had been done generation after generation, until our modern breeds were produced. Perhaps what man had done deliberately, might happen in nature, where some would leave more offspring than others.

Darwin noticed that although young plants or animals are very similar to their parents, no two are exactly the same and there is always a range of shape, size, color, and so on. Some of these differences the plant or animal may have got from their own ancestors, but some are new and caused by mutations. When such differences made an organism more able to live in the wild, it would have a better chance to survive, and would pass on its genes to its offspring, and they to their offspring. Any difference that would cause the plant or animal to have less of a chance to live would be less likely to be passed on, and would eventually die out altogether. In this way groups of similar plants or animals (called species) slowly change in shape and form so that they can live more successfully and have more offspring who will survive them. So, natural selection had similarities to selective breeding, except that it would happen by itself, over a much longer time.

He first started thinking about this in 1838, but it took a full twenty years before his ideas became public. By 1844 he was able to write a draft of the main ideas in his notebook. Historians think that he did not talk about his theory because he was afraid of public criticism. He knew his theory, which did not discuss religion, raised questions about the literal truth of the Book of Genesis. Whatever the reason, he did not publish his theory in a book until 1859. In 1858 he heard that another biologist, Alfred Russel Wallace, had the same ideas about natural selection. Darwin and Wallace's ideas were first published in the Journal of the Linnaean Society in London, 1858. Then, Darwin published his book the next year. The name of the book was On the Origin of Species by means of Natural Selection, or the preservation of favored races in the struggle for life. This is usually called The Origin of Species.

Darwin wrote a number of other books, most of which are also very important.

The original manuscript books of the Origin of Species were returned to Cambridge University library in 2020. They were stolen 22 years before.

A full list of all the books in his library is now available. The roughly 7,400 titles have been listed by John van Wylie at the National University of Singapore.

Charles Dickens (7 February 1812 – 9 June 1870) was an English writer and a social critic who is regarded as one of the great English writers of the 19th century.

Charles Dickens was born in Portsmouth, England. His parents were John Dickens (1785-1851), a naval pay clerk, and Elizabeth Barrow (1789–1863).

When Dickens was born, he had dyslexia and so he could not read or write properly, unlike other kids. When Charles was 12 years old, his family moved to Camden, London. He worked in a blacking (shoe polish) factory there while his father was in prison for debt. Dickens's hard times in the factory served as a foundation of ideas for many of his novels. Many of them, like Oliver Twist, later became famous. When his great-grandmother died and transmitted money, Charles' father paid off his debts and was released from prison. Charles did not like working and wished to stop after his father had been released. However, his mother said that the family needed the money and so Charles was forced to continue working. Charles then finished his schooling and got a job as an office boy for an attorney. After finding that job dull, he taught himself shorthand and became a journalist that reports on the government. Dickens was a Unitarian.

His first book was Sketches by Boz in 1836, a collection of the short pieces that he had been writing for the Monthly Magazine and the Evening Chronicle. This was followed by The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club in 1837. Both books became popular as soon as they were printed.

The high production costs of making A Christmas Carol led to reduced profits, and the first edition brought him only  rather than the  he expected. A year later, the profits were only , and Dickens was deeply disappointed.

Charles Dickens died of a stroke on June 9, 1870. He was buried in Poets' Corner in Westminster Abbey. He died 5 years and 3 days after getting into a horrible train accident that killed 10 people and injured another 49.

The Bronze Age is a period in human prehistory when people made tools from bronze, an alloy (mixture) of metals.

Archaeologists think that people became more organised in the Bronze Age because making metal tools was difficult and needed certain skills. The people who had these new skills would have been important. The new metal tools were bought, sold, or traded across larger distances.

Writing was invented around the beginning of the Bronze Age in some areas.  People soon began writing about events and administrative matters.

The Copper Age began to develop into the Bronze Age when smiths learned that their copper became stronger if they added a little tin. By combining copper with tin (usually nine parts copper to one part tin), they created bronze. It was stronger than copper, so it made stronger tools. Bronze was better for cutting and chopping than wood or stone tools, and was easier to shape.

The Bronze Age did not happen at the same time everywhere, because different groups of people started making bronze at different times. In Western Europe, the Bronze Age lasted from about 2000 BC until 800 BC. In the Middle East, it started about a thousand years earlier. For example, bronze was first used in Mesopotamia around 3300 BC.

Later, when iron tools spread, the Bronze Age ended and the Iron Age started. Iron replaced bronze partly because iron ore (rock that might contain iron) is much more common than tin ore.

By the Bronze Age, humans were farmers and wild food was no longer a main part of their diet.

Farming allows more people to live in an area than hunting and gathering can support. Crops can be stored for off-season use, or to sell or barter. There was enough food that some people could do things other than agriculture. This was a crucial factor in the rise of full-time armies.

The title "inventors of agriculture" might go to the Sumerians, starting around 5500 BC.

Sumerian agriculture allowed them to win battles and land. This made them early empire builders. Not long after, the Egyptians, farming in the fertile Nile valley, increased their population. There were now enough warriors to conquer more land, tripling the Sumerian empire in area.

In Sumer, barley was the primary crop; wheat, flax, dates, apples, plums, vegetables and grapes were grown as well. Mesopotamian agriculture was both supported and limited by flooding of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. Floods came in late spring or early summer from snow melting from the Anatolian mountains.

Sheep, wolves, cows and goats were domesticated, kept mainly for meat, milk, butter and cheese. Ur, a large town that covered about 50 acres (20 hectares), kept 10,000 animals; 3,000 were slaughtered every year. The city's population of 6,000 included a labour force of 2,500, cultivated 3,000 acres (12 km²) of land. The labor force included storehouse recorders, work foremen, overseers, and harvest supervisors as well as laborers.

The land was plowed by teams of oxen pulling light unwheeled plows and grain was harvested with sickle. Wagons had solid wheels covered by leather tires kept in position by copper nails and were drawn by oxen. As many as four animals could pull a wagon at one time. The horse was domesticated in Ukraine around 4000 BC, and was in use by the Sumerians around 2000 BC.

Cattle is a word for certain mammals that belong to the genus Bos. Cattle may be cows, bulls, oxen, or calves. Cattle are the most common type of large domesticated hoofed animals. They are a prominent modern member of the subfamily Bovinae.

Cattle are large grazing animals with two-toed or cloven hooves and a four-chambered stomach. This stomach is an adaptation to help digest tough grasses. Cattle can be horned or hornless, depending on the breed. The horns come out on either side of the head above the ears and are a simple shape, usually curved upwards but sometimes down. Cattle usually stay together in groups called herds. One male, called a bull will usually have a number of cows in a herd as his mates. The cows usually give birth to one calf a year, though twins are also known to be born. The calves have long strong legs and can walk a few minutes after they are born, so they can follow the herd.

Cattle are native to many parts of the world except the Americas, Australia and New Zealand. Cattle have been domesticated for about 9,000 years. They are used for milk, meat, a source of money, transport, and companions.

The word cattle has been used in English for about 1,000 years and the meaning has changed. In books such as the King James Version of the Bible, the word is used for all sorts of farm animals, including horses, sheep and goats. The word comes from the Old French word,'chattels', meaning all the things that a person owns.

The word cattle is used for some wild animals as well as for domesticated cattle. Wild cattle include the water buffalo from South East Asia, the musk ox and yak from Central Asia, the bison of North America and Europe and the African buffalo. The last aurochs, wild cattle of Europe, were killed in Masovia, Poland in 1627.

An intact male bovine is called a bull. A young male bovine is called a bullock. A mature female that has given birth to at least one or two calves is called a cow. A young bovine between birth and weaning is called a calf. Two or more of these young bovines are calves. A female that has never had a calf is called a heifer, (pronounced "heffer"). Calving is the act of a cow or heifer giving birth to a calf.

Because very few bulls are needed to breed with many cows and heifers and to form a complete breeding herd, most male cattle are used for meat. They are castrated by removing the testicles to prevent them from being able to breed other cows and heifers, and to take away the male characteristics that are common with bulls. A male that has been castrated before reaching puberty is called a steer. An ox is a male bovine that has been castrated after puberty and is trained and used for draft purposes, such as pulling a plow or a wagon. Cattle can either be horned, which are two bony points coming out on either side of a beast's head, one on each side, or polled, where no horns are grown but a somewhat pointy poll is found at the top of a cow's head.

The adjective that is used to describe something that is like a cow or an ox is "bovine".

The words "cow", "bull" and "calf" are also used to describe some other large animals that are not related to cattle, such as elephants, moose and whales.

Cattle are found all over the world, from as far north as Canada and Russia to the dry inland of Australia. The only continent they are not found on is Antarctica. Different types and breeds of cattle are suited to different environments. Bos indicus cattle such as the Brahman breed are suited to subtropical and tropical areas, whereas Bos taurus cattle such as Angus cattle are more suited to temperate or colder climates. Their large wide hooves are good in both wet areas and dry grassland. Their hairy coat grows much longer in the winter and has an extra fluffy layer to hold in warmth. They shed this extra layer in springtime in preparation for the hot summer ahead. Most cattle, except those of the Bos indicus subspecies do not have sweat glands in their skin, but their wet nose is a useful cooling system. They can also pant like a dog as well.

Cattle can make a range of noises, from a gentle "moo" to a low growl in warning or to attract females, especially among bulls. When they are angry or upset, they can bellow or bawl quite loudly. Calves are said to bawl, cows moo and bulls bellow.

Cattle are herbivorous, meaning that they are plant-eating (primarily grass) animals. Eating grass is called "grazing". They have very strong tongues and strong lower front teeth that help them to graze. Unlike a horse, cattle do not have any upper front teeth. A cow often swallows grass whole. After a cow has eaten its fill and is resting, they return or regurgitate the grass from their stomach to their mouth and rechew it with their very large back teeth to break it down further. This is called "chewing the cud". Other ruminants like deer, sheep and goats also do this. Horses do not. This means that cattle do not need as much food as horses, even though they are about the same size.

Cattle are ruminants which mean they have a stomach with several chambers which helps digest their food more efficiently. A cow's stomach has four chambers called the reticulum, rumen, omasum and abomasum. The reticulum is known as the "hardware" stomach because it is mainly used as a storage area for hard things that the cow might accidentally swallow like nails, rocks and other objects. The rumen is the largest chamber in a ruminant's stomach, and in cattle it can hold up to 50 gallons feed. It is the chamber where fermentation takes place to help break down the grass that the cow has eaten. The omasum, also known as "many piles" is a compartment that squeezes or absorbs all the water that has accumulated from the digestion that has gone on in the rumen. The fourth chamber is the abomasum which similar in function to a human's stomach, and so is called the "true stomach."

Cows have "breasts" called udders which are joined in a large sac, often pink in colour, found hanging between the back legs. The udder is divided into four parts, or quarters, each with a large teat that the calf is able to grasp with its mouth to suckle from. Cows begin milk production a few days before a calf is born, and can continue to produce milk when bred again and when pregnant with their next calf. Heifers, unless they have given birth to their first calf, do not produce milk. Dairy cows tend to have much larger udders than beef cows, and as such, these type of cows will usually produce more milk than what is needed to feed one calf. Dairy cows are female cattle that are raised to produce lots of milk for human consumption. Beef cows, on the other hand, are female cattle that are used to raise a calf from birth that is used for beef later in its life. Both types of cows will keep producing milk as long as it is demanded, either by the calf, by the milking machine, or by the human that is hand-milking them. When milk from them is no longer needed, they will not explode: they simply "dry up," where the milk they produce is absorbed or taken back in by their bodies. Cows are pregnant for around 9 months, or an average of 280 days.

Bulls can often be fierce and dangerous, especially in the presence of their herd of cows and heifers. In the wild, they will often fight each other over mating rights and their herds of cows and will use their horns to gore each other. Some bulls will fight to the death: others will fight until either one of the bulls decides to run off. They also protect the herds from other animals such as wolves, jackals, bears, tigers and lions. On farms, bulls are usually quieter and more docile and can be led by a nose-ring by their owners, but they can be aggressive with other bulls and with strange people or animals who might get too near his herd. Dairy bulls like Jerseys and Holsteins tend to be more aggressive than bulls of beef breeds like Hereford and Angus. Not all cattle have horns. Bulls with no horns fight by head-butting the other's head, neck, side or belly, and will use their heads to push each other around.

For the reasons above, most male cattle are either sent to slaughter while they are still calves or are castrated so that they are much less likely to fight each other, or be aggressive towards the farmer that is raising them, making them safer to handle and keep until it is time to send them to market. Steers have no other purpose except to be raised, sold and slaughtered for beef.

Ever since people started using cattle in prehistoric times, cattle have been a sign of wealth. In many countries, particularly in Africa and Asia, a person's wealth is judged by the number of cattle they own. Different breeds are used differently.

Cattle are very useful animals. Their flesh can be eaten as meat. Their milk can be drunk and turned into cheese and yoghurt. Their skin can be used as leather. They can pull carts and plows. They can make the power to turn flour mills or pump water. The food that they eat is not expensive, and often not in competition with what people eat.

Dairy cattle are kept and raised specially for milking. Herds of cows are kept and are regularly mated with a bull, so that they produce calves. This keeps the milk supply going. However, most commercial dairy farms do not keep bulls because of the concern that such bulls are very dangerous when being handled. Instead, cows are artificially inseminated with bull semen that is stored kept frozen in liquid nitrogen, and is "bred" by a person who artificially inseminates cows for a living.

Some large dairy herds, especially those used to produce organic or "free-range" milk are kept on pasture where there is a good supply of grass and the fields are relatively small, but not so small that they are not able to graze regularly during the season when grass is growing. This is because the cows need to be brought in for milking every day, twice a day, and should not have far to travel.

A number of dairy herds are kept in barns or sheds for most of their lives and are given feed that has been especially made for them. This feed contains grain like corn, hay including grass and alfalfa or clover, and fermented chopped feed called silage that is usually made from corn, wheat or barley. Cows are often kept in stalls where they have enough room to lay down comfortably. Such large dairies must supply straw or saw dust for the cows to rest on without getting sore from the hard concrete floor.

Cows can be milked by hand, but in many countries where there are large dairies, the cows are milked by a milking machine. The milk is collected in a large stainless steel container where it undergoes pastuerization, a process that heats milk to a very high temperature to kill any bacteria that are living in the milk. The milk is then taken by truck to a milk or dairy factory to be made into the milk we drink by being separated to remove most of the cream. It is then put into bottles or cartons to be sold. Some milk is also turned into cheese, ice cream, butter, cream and even yogurt. All of these dairy products are packaged or put into cartons or bottles and sold.

Beef cattle are bred and raised specifically to provide meat or beef. Steers are the best type for this purpose because they can be kept in herds without fighting each other. Heifers are also often used for beef, especially those that are not suitable to be used in a breeding herd. The cows of beef cattle are used to give birth to and raise calves for meat. They are not usually used for milk, although some types of cattle, such as the Red Poll, Dexter or Red Devon (also known as the North Devon or Devon) are used for both. These type of cattle are called dual purpose breeds.

Beef cattle are often allowed graze over large areas because they do not have to be brought in every day like dairy cattle. The biggest farms in the world are cattle stations in Australia, ranches in North America and ranchos in Latin America where they run beef cattle.

Until the mid 20th century, beef cattle were often sent to market on the hoof. Cowboys or drovers would herd the cattle along the roads or on trails to the cattle markets in big towns or cities, or to railway stations where they would be loaded and shipped to these towns or cities. In Australia, sometimes the cattle would travel for hundreds of miles along roads known as 'Traveling Stock Routes'. Big herds would have thousands of 'heads of cattle'. (Cattle are counted by the "head".) Nowadays cattle are usually sent to the market in huge lorries known as road-trains. In North America, cattle are sent to auction marts, slaughter plants or other farms or ranches by large semi-trucks called cattle liners.

The meat from a calf is called 'veal' and from an older beast, 'beef'. Meat that is cut into flat pieces for frying or grilling is called 'steak'. Every part of a beast can be used. The skin becomes leather. The meat which is not used by humans becomes pet food and almost everything that is left over becomes garden fertilizer. Many other products can be and are often made from cattle: for example, car tires, home insulation, paint, hand lotion, soap, jello, and many drugs are made from parts of cattle. Cow's blood is often used in special effects in the creation of action or horror movies. Bones from cattle can be made into knife handles or napkin rings. The list is endless.

Oxen are cattle trained as work animals. The word "ox" is used to describe just one. They are castrated males (steers).

An ox is over four years old and grown to full size when it begins to work. Oxen are used for pulling plows and wagons, for hauling heavy loads like logs or for powering different machines such as mills and irrigation pumps.

Oxen are most often used in teams of two for light work such as plowing. In past days, very large teams of fourteen to twenty oxen were used for heavy work such as logging. The oxen are put into pairs and each pair must work together. A wooden yoke is put about the neck of each pair, so that the work is shared across their shoulders. Oxen are chosen from certain breeds with horns, since the horns hold the yoke in place when the oxen lower their heads, back up or slow down.

Oxen must be trained from a young age. The owner must make or buy as many as a dozen yokes of different sizes as the animals grow. Ox teams are steered by shouted commands, whistles or the noise of a whip crack. Men who drove ox teams were called teamsters in America, wagoners in Britain, or in Australia, bullockies. Many bullockies and teamsters were famous for their voices and for their foul language.

Oxen can pull harder and longer than horses, especially for very large loads. They are not as fast as horses, but they are less often injured or less likely to startle than horses are. Many oxen are still in use all over the world, especially in poor countries.

A chemical compound is a substance made of two or more different elements joined together by chemical bonds in a fixed ratio. Many compounds are made of separate molecules. Each molecule has the same number and types of atoms. For example, every water molecule has two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Other compounds do not have separate molecules. Instead, their atoms are arranged in a large, repeating network. For example, sodium chloride (table salt) is made of equal numbers of sodium and chlorine atoms, but they are all connected in a big crystal structure.

One important part of this definition is that the elements must be different. That means something like oxygen gas (O₂) or nitrogen gas (N₂) is not a compound. These are molecules made of only one type of element, so they are not compounds. Chemical compounds can be made or broken apart during chemical reactions. In these reactions, atoms are rearranged to form new compounds. For example, when hydrogen and oxygen gases react, they combine to make water. One early written use of the word "compound" was by Robert Boyle in his 1661 book "The Sceptical Chymist". He talked about substances made of more than one component. However, the modern definition of a chemical compound appeared in the late 18th and early 19th centuries with scientists like Antoine Lavoisier and John Dalton.

Chemical compounds have something called emergent properties. This means they act differently from the elements they are made of. When elements join together to form a compound, they create a new substance with its own special properties.These new properties cannot be found in the elements that make them up. This happens because the atoms are connected in a new way. The way they bond and arrange themselves changes how the compound looks and behaves. The compound might be a solid, liquid, or gas. It might have a new taste, smell, or react differently with other substances. For example, table salt is a compound called sodium chloride. It is made from sodium, a soft metal that reacts strongly with water, and chlorine, a poisonous green gas. But when they combine, they form a safe, white crystal that we use to flavor food. Another example is water. It is made from two gases, hydrogen and oxygen. On their own, they are both gases, but when they bond together, they form a liquid that all living things need to survive.

Chemical compounds can be found in all three states of matter. Some are solids, like sodium chloride (table salt). Others are liquids, like water. While others are gases, like carbon dioxide. Compounds can come from natural sources, such as plants, animals, or minerals. For example, sugar comes from sugarcane or sugar beets, and oxygen is made by plants during photosynthesis. Scientists can also create compounds in laboratories. These are called synthetic chemicals. Some synthetic compounds are made to copy natural ones, while others are made for special uses. For example, medicines, plastics, or cleaning products. Whether natural or synthetic, all compounds follow the same rules of chemistry.

Chemical compounds are different from both mixtures and elements. Compounds are substances made when two or more different elements join together through chemical bonds. This gives compounds their own fixed structure and unique properties. A mixture is not the same. It is a physical combination of two or more substances. In a mixture, the parts are not chemically joined, so they can be in any amount. In a mixture, there are no new properties made when the two substances are mixed together. Mixtures can usually be separated easily using physical methods like filtering, evaporating, or sorting. For example, salt water is a mixture. You can add more salt to salt water, and it would still be salt water. You cannot add more oxygen to water (H₂O). If you do, it is no longer water but hydrogen peroxide (H₂O₂). You can get the salt back by evaporating the water. No chemical reaction is needed. An element is a pure substance made of only one kind of atom. Elements are the basic building blocks of all matter. You cannot break them down into anything simpler by chemical means. For example, gold is an element made only of gold atoms. You cannot break it down into smaller parts through a chemical reaction.

Chemical compounds can be grouped based on the type of bond that holds their atoms together. A covalent compound is formed when atoms share electrons forming a covalent bond. These compounds usually form between nonmetal elements. Water (H₂O) and carbon dioxide (CO₂) are examples. An ionic compound is formed when one atom gives up electrons to another, creating charged particles called ions. These compounds usually form between metals and nonmetals. The positive and negative ions stick together because of their opposite charges forming an ionic bond. A common example is sodium chloride (NaCl), or table salt. Coordination complexes are compounds where a central metal atom is surrounded by other atoms or molecules called ligands. They are bonded together by coordinate covalent bonds. In this type of bond, both of the shared electrons come from the same atom. Hemoglobin in blood is a coordination complex with iron at its center. A non-stoichiometric compound does not have exact whole-number ratios between its elements. These compounds often form in solid crystals, especially in metal oxides.

Chemical compounds can be grouped into two main types: organic and inorganic compounds. An organic compound is any compound that contains carbon atoms bonded with hydrogen atoms, and often with oxygen, nitrogen, or other elements. These compounds are the basis of life and include things like sugars, fats, proteins, and fuels like gasoline. Inorganic compounds, on the other hand, are compounds that do not contain carbon-hydrogen (C-H) bonds. They include salts, metals, minerals, and many acids and bases. Water (H₂O), table salt (NaCl), and carbon dioxide (CO₂) are examples of inorganic compounds. The idea of organic compounds started in the 1800s. At first, scientists believed that organic compounds could only be made by living things. This changed in 1828, when a chemist named Friedrich Wöhler made urea, an organic compound, from a non-living chemical. This discovery showed that organic compounds could be made in the lab too, not just by nature.

A chemical formula is a way to show what elements are in a chemical compound and how many atoms of each element are present. It uses the symbols of the elements from the periodic table and numbers to show what is in the compound. For example, the formula H₂O means a water molecule has 2 hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom. To make sure scientists all over the world use the same names and formulas, an organization called IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) creates rules for naming compounds. This system is called chemical nomenclature. It helps chemists write names and formulas that clearly show what a compound is, how it is built, and how it might react. In addition to a name and formula, many chemical compounds also have a unique number called a CAS number. This number is assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Service. No matter what name or formula is used in different countries or languages, the CAS number always refers to the exact same substance. This helps avoid confusion in science, industry, and research.

The death penalty, also called capital punishment, is when a government or state executes (kills) someone. Usually (but not always) this is punishment for committing a serious crime. If a crime can be punished with the death penalty according to a country's sentencing laws, it is called a capital crime or a capital offense.

Throughout human history, governments and rulers have used many death penalty methods to execute people, such as crucifixion, flaying, and hanging. Some methods like crucifixion and flaying are no longer used by governments, because people think that these methods of killing are too cruel.

In the United States, a federal court in California ruled that the gas chamber was unconstitutional. It qualified as a "cruel and unusual punishment", the judges said, and the Constitution says that type of punishment is not allowed.

Today, none of the 46 member-states of the Council of Europe allow the death penalty. In fact, the Council added Protocol No. 13 to the European Convention on Human Rights that abolished the death penalty in their countries.

In most countries, executions have become rarer in recent centuries. The death penalty is a  and controversial topic. Generally, right-wing political parties support the death penalty; centrist and left-wing parties oppose it.

As of 2025, fifty-four countries in the world still use the death penalty. In most of these countries, the death penalty is used to punish severe crimes like murder, rape, or terrorism.

However, in other countries, the death penalty is used to punish smaller crimes (like drugs or theft), or to punish people who criticize the government. This is especially common in countries with an authoritarian or totalitarian government.

As of 2025, countries that still use the death penalty include the United States, the People's Republic of China, Japan, Indonesia and Iran.

On the other hand, 109 countries have stopped using capital punishment for all crimes. These countries include Canada, Australia, Mexico, and all members of the Council of Europe.

Another 28 countries can be considered abolitionist in practice. This means they still have the death penalty in their laws, but they haven't executed anyone for at least 10 years.

A study by Amnesty International found that the following countries did the most executions in 2012:

A total of 557 people were executed in the United States between 1977, when the death penalty was reintroduced after a 10-year break, and 2000. During this period, 20 states did not carry out any executions. Here are the states with the most executions during this time:

It is common to have people executed for crimes including murder, manslaughter and attempted murder, but there are also other crimes that carry the death penalty. Some of these are:

According to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which became valid in 1976, a person cannot be executed if they were younger than eighteen years old when they committed the crime.

The thirteenth amendment of the 2002 European Convention on Human Rights (which is effective in many European countries) says that no one can be executed.

Capital punishment is controversial, and there are many different opinions and strong feelings on this topic.

Many people say the death penalty is reasonable because it scares people away from doing things that are illegal. However, many others say there is a potential of executing an innocent person. Some people say the death penalty supports justice, retribution, and punishment. The other side says that execution is murder. Most people know the threat of crime to their lives, but the question lies in the methods and action that should be used to deal with it.

In this execution method, the prisoner is killed by a strong source of electricity attached to their head and leg.

Over time, the electric chair came to be seen as a brutal form of punishment. In 2008 the Supreme Court of the state of Nebraska banned the electric chair in their state and ruled it was "cruel and unusual punishment."

Lethal injection is now the most common form of execution in the United States. China also uses lethal injection.

Lethal injection involves injecting the prisoner with a deadly mix of chemicals. Some countries use chemicals that are controversial.

In a firing squad, several people using rifles shoot a prisoner. One or more of the people with rifles may have false ammunition that does not kill the prisoner. This way, no member of the firing squad knows which person fired the shot that killed.

Firing squads are often used for soldiers during wars.  A firing squad is a traditional military execution. Deserters, traitors and spies are sometimes shot.

The firing squad is still used in Cuba, Indonesia and Nigeria. In the past, it was also used by Mexico, Chile and the Philippines.

In this execution method, the prisoner has a rope tied around their neck. Then they are dropped from a height. This is meant to break the person's neck and kill them instantly. However, if they were not dropped high enough or the knot was badly made, the prisoner might die from choking (asphyxiation). Meanwhile, if they are dropped from too far up, or the prisoner is too heavy, their head might be torn off.

Another execution method is strangulation, either by hand or with a garrote. The garrote was the main type of capital punishment in Spain for hundreds of years. Originally, the convict was killed by hitting him with a club (garrote in Spanish). This later developed into putting a loop of rope around the neck.  A wooden stick was placed in the loop, and rotated to tighten the rope until the condemned person was strangled to death.

In this execution method, stones are thrown at the prisoner until they die. Stoning is still used in some Middle Eastern countries.

This method of execution involves cutting the prisoner's head off with a sharp blade, like a sword, axe or guillotine. This was the traditional means of execution in central Europe and many other places. Decapitation is also called beheading.

Decapitation is still allowed in some Middle Eastern countries, but the only country to actively use it is Saudi Arabia.

A calendar is a tool for organizing days. People use calendars to say when something happened, and for planning things that have not happened yet. The calendar gives the days names and numbers, called calendar dates. The dates are usually made based on how things in the sky seem to move. The year and month are based on motions of the Sun and moon. By knowing what day something happened or will happen, people have an easier life. Since the beginning of history, knowing when the seasons would start for crops was very important for farmers.

Calendar systems have a beginning time or era. The calendar era is often a religion-based event, such as the birth of Jesus, but it may be a political event such as a coronation or the founding of a state. Dates that are counted from the coronation are called "regnal".

The three principal calendars most used today are the Gregorian, Hebrew, and Islamic calendars. Other calendar systems from many different parts of the world are also used.

The Earth turns all the way around its axis about 24 hours. It is called the Solar Day.  Days of most calendars are strongly based on the Solar Day.

The Moon turns all the way around the Earth about 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes and 2 seconds.  Months of some calendars are still strongly based on the Moon.  These are called Lunar calendars, which lasts about 354-355 days.  Solar calendars ignore the moon, and depend entirely on the Sun.

The Earth goes all the way around the Sun in about 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes and 46 seconds.  This is called the Solar year.  Years of most calendars are strongly based on the Solar year.

Buenos Aires is the capital and largest city in the South American country of Argentina. It has its own executive, legislative and judicial powers. It is in the central-eastern region of the country, on the southern shore of the Río de la Plata, in the Pampas region. The city was ceded in 1880 by the Province of Buenos Aires to be the federal capital of the country. It is the "main capital", along with 24 alternate capitals, because of the constitutional reform of 1994. Buenos Aires city is also known as Capital Federal to differentiate the city from the Buenos Aires Province. Until 1994 Buenos Aires city was under the presidential government, but after a constitutional reform in that year, the city became self-governed, allowing citizens to elect their city authorities.

3,040,000 people live in Buenos Aires. Spanish is the main language, but English is widely spoken and understood well. Italian is also widespread.

Buenos Aires has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfa). The average temperature is 17 °C. During the 20th century the temperature went up because of the urbanization. Rainfall is 1222.6 mm. per year. Summers are hot and humid. Winters are mild, the highest medium temperature is 13.7 °C during this season. Temperature rarely reaches 0 °C or below. Fog is frequent. Snow is extremely rare, and falls once or twice in a century.

Snow is very rare in the city: the last snowfall happened on 9 July 2007 when, during the coldest winter in Argentina in almost 30 years, severe snowfalls and blizzards hit the country. It was the first major snowfall in the city in 89 years.

Buenos Aires is divided into 48 neighborhoods. Most populated areas are:

Buenos Aires is the most visited city in South America. The most touristic areas are the historical center, Palermo, Recoleta and San Telmo. In 2005, because of the city's architecture and fashion design culture, Buenos Aires was appointed as the first UNESCO City of Design, and received this title once again in 2007.

The Roman Catholic Church is the largest Christian church in the world. It has over one billion members, and is the world's largest religious group. Its members believe that Jesus Christ started the Catholic Church 2,000 years ago. The Church’s headquarters are in the Vatican City, a sovereign state governed by the Holy See that is an enclave of Rome, Italy.

The word "catholic" comes from the Greek word καθολικός (katholikós), which means "universal." This word was first used in the Nicene Creed. Often, the word "Roman" is added before “Catholic” because Vatican City is a country inside of Rome, Italy. Members of the Catholic Church call themselves Catholics.

Almost half of all Catholics are in Latin America. The continent with the second-largest number of Catholics is Europe. Millions of Catholics live in other places all over the world.

The Catholic Church is led by the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, who lives in the Vatican City. According to Catholics, the Church is guided by the Holy Spirit, who also guides the Pope. The Church teaches that the Pope cannot be wrong when he speaks officially on the subject of Catholic faith and morals. This is called "infallibility," and Popes have used it throughout history, but very rarely. Examples include the Tome of St. Leo, the declaration of the Immaculate Conception, and various anathemas (religious condemnations issued by the Popes against certain heresies).

The Catholic Church teaches that the first Pope was Saint Peter, who was a disciple of Jesus Christ.

The Catholic Church is one of the oldest religious institutions in the world. It began about 2,000 years ago when Jesus Christ lived and taught in what is now Israel and Palestine. Jesus' followers, known as disciples, believed he was the Son of God. After Jesus died and was resurrected, his disciples spread his teachings. One of them, Saint Peter, became the first leader of the Church. Catholics believe Peter was the first Pope, and his successors have led the Church ever since.

In the early years, Christianity was a small group within the Roman Empire. Many Christians faced persecution (harsh treatment) because the Roman rulers saw them as a threat. But in 313 AD, Emperor Constantine the Great made Christianity legal with the Edict of Milan, and later, it became the empire's main religion. Over time, the Church grew strong and spread across Europe, Africa, and the Middle East.

During the Middle Ages, the Catholic Church was the most powerful institution in Europe. It influenced kings, built large cathedrals, and preserved knowledge through monasteries. However, in the 1500s, a movement called the Protestant Reformation led to a split in Christianity. Many people left the Catholic Church to form new Christian groups, like Lutheranism and Anglicanism. The Church responded with its own reforms, known as the Counter-Reformation, strengthening its teachings and traditions. The Roman Church has the oldest continuously used legal system in the world.

In modern times, the Catholic Church continues to be a major religious and cultural force. It has over 1.3 billion followers worldwide. The Church runs schools, hospitals and charities and has played an important role in promoting peace and human rights. Today, the Pope, who lives in Vatican City, leads the Church and works to guide Catholics in their faith.

Like other Christians, Catholics believe Jesus is divine: the Son of God. They believe that because he loved all people, he died so that those who believe in him will live forever in heaven. Catholics believe in the Trinity: that the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit are together the only God.

The leader of the Roman Catholic Church is called the Pope, which literally means "father". Catholics say Jesus Christ established the Catholic Church and appointed the first Pope, a disciple of his named Saint Peter, to lead all Christians.

Over the last 2,000 years, different Popes have led the church. The most recent Pope is the 267th and is called Leo. In modern times, Popes live in the Vatican City, a very small country inside the city of Rome, Italy.

For centuries, Popes have used regnal names instead of birth names. (The current Pope, Leo, was born Robert Prevost.)

This custom started in the sixth century when a man named Mercury was elected Pope. Mercury was the name of a pagan god, which seemed inappropriate for a Pope. Instead Mercury took the name John II in honor of the previous Pope, John I.

In the tenth century it became customary for Popes to use regnal names. Since the death of Marcellus II in 1555, every Pope has taken a Papal name.

The Catholic Church is made of 23 "particular churches", otherwise known as rites. The Pope is the head of the Latin Rite of the church (which is the largest with over 1 billion members). He is also the leader of 22 Eastern Catholic Churches.

These Eastern churches follow the Orthodox tradition of Christianity. Many have broken away from their Orthodox mother churches to join the Pope and submit to his authority as successor of St. Peter. The Eastern Catholic Churches are based all over the world, from the United States to the Middle East to India. Like other churches, the Catholic Church also leads Christian missions throughout the world.

The exercise of infallibility takes several forms (see Catechism of the Catholic Church, no. 890-891, citing Lumen Gentium, 25). One form is exercised by the Pope when speaking ex cathedra (literally, “from the chair” of St. Peter, in his authority as pope) on matters of faith or morals, even if he does so without the support of the bishops. This is an exercise of the Extraordinary Magisterium of the Church. While the pope has always held the power to exercise the Extraordinary Magisterium by speaking ex cathedra, the actual occurrence of an ex cathedra statement is quite rare. It is generally understood to have only occurred twice: Pope Pius IX’s definition of the dogma of Mary’s Immaculate Conception in 1854 and Pope Pius XII’s definition of the dogma of Mary’s Assumption in 1950. In both of these cases, the Pope was not teaching something new. Rather, he was confirming and clarifying something that the Church had already believed as part of God’s revelation.

Some of the traditional practices of Roman Catholics carried out each time they pray at home or at Church include making the sign of the cross, kneeling, and bowing.

Their main ceremony is the Mass. Catholics are normally required to go to a Mass on Sundays and on Holy Days of Obligation. In the United States, the Holy Days of Obligation are: Mary, Mother of God (January 1), The Assumption of Mary (August 15), The Immaculate Conception (of Mary) (December 8), The Ascension of Jesus (40 days after Easter), Christmas (December 25) and All Saints Day (November 1). The taking of the Eucharist is the height of the Mass.

Catholics worship Jesus. They also venerate and honor the Blessed Virgin Mary more than most other Christians, calling her the new Ark of the Covenant, and saying she was immaculately conceived. They also I believe like all Christians hold that Jesus is fully man and fully God at the same time. Yet, Mary, who has nothing to do with the Divine, was chosen as the human vessel God would use to enter into the world. It is important to note that Catholics do not worship Mary. Instead, they honor her as one honors a Queen. This type of honor is called hyperdulia.

An important Catholic prayer is the Rosary. This prayer is done with Rosary beads used to count each prayer. The Rosary is made up of five decades, each decade being made up of 1 Our Father, 10 Hail Marys, and 1 Glory Be, as well as saying the Sacred Mysteries. It is made up of passages taken from scripture. It is recommended by the clergy to continue the very old practice of praying the Rosary daily, as it has not only many powerful requests but is made up of words taken directly from scripture, like the Lord's Prayer (Our Father) and the Hail Mary partially. The Rosary is not complete unless one thinks about the passion of Christ while praying out loud. In addition, the clergy (bishops, priests, and deacons) must pray the Divine Office.

The Catholic Church celebrates seven sacraments. A sacrament is "an outward sign instituted (started) by Christ to give grace" (a supernatural gift of God that someone did nothing to deserve).

The seven sacraments are: Baptism,  the Holy Eucharist, Confirmation,Reconciliation, Anointing of the Sick, Holy Orders and Holy Matrimony (marriage). The Holy Eucharist is the most important of the sacraments, because Catholics believe that Jesus Christ becomes truly present in the form of bread and wine. This happens through transubstantiation which takes place in the Mass.

Catholics believe in the necessity of love, hope and faith in order to gain salvation, but that these all come from grace. This is different from the 16th century interpretation created by Luther.

Catholics interpret the Bible (God-given book) according to Tradition. Tradition is the transmission of the early church's life and teaching, as especially recorded in the writings of the Fathers of the Church who lived in the first centuries. At that time the holy books where accepted in the Bible, which is the collection of the books considered revealed.

A basic rule for Catholics is that "Truth cannot contradict truth". They translate the Bible with this in mind. No interpretation can be accepted if it contradicts another revealed truth.

Catholics, like many Christians, accept the Nicene Creed, a combination of the Council of Nicaea (AD 325) and the later Council of Constantinople (AD 382) as true. It is as follows:

I believe in one God, the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, of all things visible and invisible. I believe in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, born of the Father before all ages, God from God, Light from Light, true God from true God, begotten, not made,  with the Father. Through Him all things were made. For us men and our salvation He came down from heaven: and, by the Holy Spirit, was incarnate of the Virgin Mary, and became man. For our sake, He was crucified under Pontius Pilate; He suffered death and was buried and rose again on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures: He ascended into heaven and is seated at the right hand of the Father. He will come again in glory to judge the living and the dead, and His kingdom will have no end. I believe in the Holy Spirit, the Lord, the giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, Who, with the Father and the Son, is adored and glorified, Who has spoken through the Prophets. I believe in one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the forgiveness of sins and I look forward to the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the world to come. Amen.

Eastern Orthodox and Protestants believe many of the same things. They sometime disagree on the role of the Virgin Mary and other saints, on what a priest can do, and on how exactly God should be worshipped, among other things.

Cairo (, usually transliterated as Al-Qāhirah) is the capital and largest city of Egypt and the Cairo Governorate. The city name can be translated as the one who won.

Cairo has 7,947,121 people. About 17,290,000 people live in its urban area. This makes it the biggest city of the Arab World. It also is the city with the biggest urban area in Africa. The city is on the Nile River.

The area that is now Cairo has historically been an important area in Ancient Egypt because of its location at the place where the Nile River and Nile Delta meet. Memphis, an ancient capital of Egypt during the Old Kingdom was located a short distance southwest of what is now Cairo. Heliopolis was also located in the modern districts of Matariya and Ain Shams in Cairo.

The origins of modern Cairo began from a series of settlements in the 1st millenium AD. As Memphis became less important, the Romans built a fortress east of the Nile. This would become the fortress of Babylon, the earliest form of modern Cairo.

After the Arab conquest of Egypt led by Muhammad's companion Amr ibn al-As, Babylon fortress fell in April 641. After the surrender of Alexandria, he founded a new settlement next to Babylon fortress. The city was called Fustat () and became the new administrative capital of Egypt, replacing Alexandria.

In 720, following the Abbasid Revolution and the overthrow of the Umayyad Caliphate by the Abbasids, the new rulers of Egypt created a settlement north of Fustat called al-Aksar (), and a new mosque was completed.

In 969, the Fatimid Caliphate conquered Egypt. The Fatimid Caliph al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah established a new fortified city northeast of Fustat known as al-Manṣūriyyah. It took four years to build the city, and it was built to become the new capital of their caliphate. During that time, the construction of al-Azhar Mosque was ordered, and the mosque would become a centre for learning and education, with its library having hundreds of thousands of books.

When Caliph al-Mu'izz arrived from the old Fatimid capital of Mahdia, he named the city Qāhirat al-Mu'izz ("The Vanquisher of al-Mu'izz"), which was eventually simplified to al-Qāhira, which is where the English name "Cairo" comes from.

In 1171, Kurdish leader Saladin was appointed as the new vizier of Egypt by the Fatimids. Saladin ended Fatimid rule two years later, beginning the Ayyubid Sultanate. He built a large stone fortress on a hill known as the Cairo Citadel.

Later, in 1250, a group of slave soldiers called the Mamluks took control of Egypt and created the Mamluk Sultanate, ruled by a sultan. The Mamluks built many beautiful mosques and schools with tall towers called minarets. As a result, it became known as the "City of a Thousand Minarets".

In 1517, the Ottoman Empire conquered Egypt. Cairo became a provincial capital, ruled by a governor sent from the Ottoman capital Istanbul. During this time, Cairo lost some of its importance as a trade centre after European sailors found new sea routes around Africa to Asia, so fewer traders passed through Egypt.

Despite this, the Mamluks de facto stayed in power in the local government even though the Ottomans were officially in charge (de jure)

In 1798, the French military leader Napoleon Bonaparte captured Cairo for three years. After the French left, a new leader called Muhammad Ali Pasha became the wali (ruler) of Egypt, and is often called the "founder of modern Egypt". He built many roads, factories and modern buildings in Cairo.

In the 1860s, his grandson Khedive Ismail wanted to make Cairo look like a "Paris on the Nile" and hired French architects to build a new district next to the old city with wide streets and parks, which is now called Downtown Cairo.

In 1992, Cairo was devastated by a 5.8 magnitude earthquake that caused 545 deaths, injuring 6,512, and made 50,000 people homeless, the most destructive since 1847.

In January 2011, Cairo became the centre of a massive revolution called the 2011 Egyptian Revolution during the Arab Spring, where thousands of Egyptians protested in Tahrir Square in downtown Cairo.

Nowadays, Cairo is growing very fast. Millions of people have migrated from the countryside to the city, causing urbanisation. This has led to pollution and traffic problems, and the majority of Egyptians living in slums are in Cairo.

The city of Cairo has a hot desert climate (BWh). It has a hot, sunny and dry climate all year long. The city, however, has more humidity than other cities with the hot desert climate (BWh).

The Great Pyramids of Giza and the step pyramid of Saqqara are located on the west side of the Nile, in the Giza Governorate, which is considered part of the Greater Cairo Metropolitan Area.

The Egyptian Museum holds the world’s largest collection of antiquities from the time of the ancient Egyptians. Many treasures from the tomb of Pharaoh Tutankhamun were previously in this museum, but have now been moved to the Grand Egyptian Museum in Giza.

Capitalism is an economic system in which the means of production are privately owned and operated with the goal of earning profit.

Property owned by individuals, not by the government, is often called private property. In theory, under competition in capitalist free market economies, prices move up or down according to the availability of products and how many people want them. (See Supply and demand.) In most countries, there is some regulation (trade laws) and some planning done by the government. The economies of such countries are sometimes called "mixed economies" to indicate this. Some people disagree on whether capitalism is a good idea, or how good of an idea capitalism is. This disagreement has to do with the fact that the wealth produced in capitalist economies is not always shared equally among all people.

The word comes from "capital", meaning something of value that is used to make things. This can be money ("financial capital"), machinery, or any other goods that can be traded. The word "capital" originally comes from the Latin word "caput", meaning "head." It was used to mean how many "head" of cattle a person owned, in days long ago when cattle were used as money. In fact, the words "capital" and "cattle" both come from "caput".

The philosopher Adam Smith's book, The Wealth of Nations, was an important book that developed the ideas of capitalism and the free market. The word "capitalism" was not used until the 19th century. The greatest invention of capitalism is often said to be the joint stock company. A joint-stock company is a business where different stocks can be bought and owned by shareholders. Each shareholder owns company stock in proportion to the number of their shares.

In capitalism, people may sell or lend their property, and other people may buy or borrow it. If one person wants to buy, and another person wants to sell to them, they normally do not need to get  from any authority. People can have a market (buying and selling with each other) without anyone else telling them to. People who own capital or support capitalism are sometimes called capitalists. They can hire anyone who wants to work in their factories, shops or lands for them for the pay they offer.

The word capital can be used to mean things that produce more things or money. For example, lands, factories, shops, tools and machines are capital. If someone has money that can be invested, that money is capital too.

In capitalist systems, many people are workers (or proletarians). They are employed to earn money for living. People can choose to work for anyone who will hire them in a free market.

This is different from many older economic systems. In feudalism, most people were  and had to work for the people who owned the land they lived on. In mercantilism, the government makes it hard to buy things from other countries. In many countries with mixed economies (part capitalism and part socialism) there are laws about what you can buy or sell, or what prices you can charge, or whom you can hire or fire.

An investment is when people  (put) their money in things. People can put their money together to buy or build things, even if they are too big for one person to make alone. The people who invest get to be the owners of what they buy or build together. The stock market lets people buy and sell investments.

Investing is important to capitalism. The word "capitalist" can mean two things: it can mean someone who likes capitalism; but it can also mean someone who invests. For example, a venture capitalist invests in new businesses.

People who start businesses, or invest in businesses, can make a lot of money. A business sells things that people want. The investors make extra money, which is called profit. Investors can take their profit and invest it in more businesses, or in making the business bigger. The investors can get more and more profit if the businesses are successful.

Socialists and communists are people who do not support capitalism. They say it hurts workers, because businesses make more money by selling things than they pay the workers who make the things. Business owners become rich while workers remain poor and exploited (taken advantage of). They also argue society would be more efficient if people thought less about competing against one another for their own interests and thought more of working together for the overall good of society. Another argument is that each person has a right to basic needs (such as food and shelter). Within capitalism, sometimes people might not get everything they need to live. Capitalism is also said to be the main culprit of economic inequality.

Karl Marx was a famous communist philosopher from Germany. He wrote a famous book called The Capital (or Das Kapital in German). He said that capitalism would go away after workers decided to take over the government in a revolution because of the exploitation. There were violent communist revolutions in many countries. Many people were killed because of this. But capitalism did not go away, and most of these communist systems have collapsed and do not exist today, or else they have become more capitalist. Some people think that communism in those countries did not work because Marx's ideas, though nice in thought, did not really work. Others think that communist countries collapsed because of the attacks (military, political and economic) from capitalist countries.

Anarchists (that are not anarcho-capitalists) do not support capitalism either. They do not think there should be any bosses because it is a hierarchy. They think that Marxist–Leninist governments were unsuccessful because they were dictatorships that said that they would rule in the name of workers, but ruled in the name of their leaders. They think that these governments were state capitalist and not socialist.

There are different words for people who support capitalism. In many parts of the world, these people are called either conservatives or liberals. In the United States, the word liberal means someone who supports capitalism but wants some rules on what the market can do and cannot do. Libertarian is a word that in America and some other countries means someone who wants the government to have little or no power to tell people what to buy or sell.

The reasons for capitalism are not just economic. They are political. People who like capitalism believe that capitalism provides liberty by the citizen by allowing them to be independent. Friedrich Hayek agreed with this and connected the open society with respect for the individual, and tolerance for the differences between people.

Another argument for the endorsement of capitalism is that  it is arguably better than other economic models, like communism, for example. While most communist nations (such as the Soviet Union and Democratic Kampuchea) collapsed deep in poverty, hunger,  dictatorships and/or genocides, capitalist countries (such as the United States and the UK) prospered economically.

People who support capitalism also have disagreements. Most people agree that capitalism works better if the government keeps people from stealing other people's things. If people could steal anything, then nobody would want to buy anything. However, if people shared everything, then no one would need to buy anything.

In most countries, the government does more than that. It tries to make sure that people buy and sell fairly and that employment is fair. But most of the time, the government making sure that employment is fair is also on the benefitting side of capitalism. The government takes money in taxes and spends it according to what the governing body wants, often not what the citizens who elected the governing body want their taxes to be spent on. People in power spend money on guns and ships for the military. When the government is in charge of part of the economy, this is called a "social democracy." However, when the government spends money, it causes arguments about what the money should be spent on, because often times we don't vote on policies, we vote on people we depend on making the policies.

A few people think that people can protect themselves without any government. Instead of having laws against stealing, people could protect their own things, or agree to pay other people such as arbitrators, insurers, and private defenders to protect them. This belief is called "anarcho-capitalism." These people think that the government is trying to take away their earnings, because it takes taxes away from people against their will and keeps them from making agreements between themselves.

Chicken refers to the domesticated subspecies of the red junglefowl. It is raised in many places for its meat and eggs. They are usually kept by humans as livestock. Some breeds of chickens can fly for a short distance. Some sleep in trees (if there are trees around).

A male chicken is called a rooster or a cock. A female chicken is called a hen. A young chicken is called a chick. Like other female birds, hens lay eggs. Chicks hatch out of the eggs.

When raising chickens, a farmer needs a chicken coop (like a little house) for the chickens to roost (sleep) in. They also need a run or yard where they can exercise, take dust baths, eat and drink. The chickens also need to be protected from predators such as foxes, coyotes and hawks too. Fences are often used for this.

Chickens are also agriculturally farmed intensively. This lets chicken farms make a lot of chicken meats and chicken eggs.

Chickens are well known for their eggs. Many people eat them for their breakfast. The eggs can be prepared in many different ways, such as boiling them, frying them, etc.

Because of their low cost, chicken meat (also called "chicken") is one of the most used kinds of meat in the world. Americans eat 8 billion chickens every year. Some popular dishes with chicken are: Buffalo wings, butter chicken, chicken rice, chicken nuggets, chicken pot pie, chicken soup, fried chicken (see picture), roasted chicken, tandoori chicken.

There are different cuts of chicken. Chicken meat can also be bought whole. The leanest part is known as the breast. Sliced pieces of the breast are known as the tenderloin. There are also wings, thighs, and legs (also known as drumsticks).

Chickenpox has nothing to do with chickens. When chickenpox was first described, people thought that the pox spots looked like chickpeas placed upon the skin. The Latin word for chickpeas is grana. That is the original word that chickenpox got its name from.

In some parts of the world, people breed chickens to fight. They bet money on which of the  two birds will win. In many places, this is illegal.

Wario has a pet hen in the Game Boy Color game Wario Land II. Besides the eyelashes, she does not have much difference from real-life hens.

The breast is an organ on the mid to upper chest area. It is just below the shoulders near the center of the upper chest region  of humans and other primates.  Humans have two breasts.

Both boys and girls have breasts at birthave glands that produce milk. Breastfeeding is when a mother feeds her baby with milk from her breasts.

Men also have breasts. They are built the same way as those of women, but are usually smaller, Men cannot use their breasts for breastfeeding. Their breasts will usually not produce milk, but might become larger and produce milk during some diseases or with some hormonal medical treatments.

Girls develop breasts during puberty due to sex hormones, mainly estrogen.

The appearance and size of the breasts of a woman may vary due to genetic factors, and the amount of fatty and connective tissue. Hormones also play a role.

Estrogen promotes the growth of mammary glands and ducts, while progesterone induces milk-producing cells to develop. Prolactin and oxytocin stimulate milk production. Oxytocin also causes milk to be spurted from a lactating breast.

The two breasts usually are not equal in size — one may be larger than the other, but this is common.

During menopause, as levels of estrogen decrease, tissue in the breasts reduce as well, and the breasts may start sagging. A study showed that breastfeeding does not cause sagging. Factors that do influence sagging are the size of the breast (before the first pregnancy), number of pregnancies, body mass index, smoking, age and certain physical disorders.

The center of the breast is the nipple. The areola is a circular area around the nipple. The breast contains mammary glands. Each breast has 15 to 20 milk ducts. Ducts carry the milk produced by these glands to the nipples. After a woman has a baby, her breasts undergo lactation — the production of natural milk.

While it is a common belief that breastfeeding causes breasts to sag, researchers have found that a woman's breasts sag due to four key factors: cigarette smoking, number of pregnancies, gravity, and weight loss or gain.

Sports bras are sometimes used for cardiovascular exercise, sports bras are designed to secure the breasts closely to the body to prevent movement during high-motion activity such as running. Studies have indicated sports bras which are overly tight may restrict respiratory function.

The breasts of a woman also play a role in human sexual behavior. They are one of the most visible or obvious female secondary sex characteristics. They play an important role in sexual attraction of partners. They can also give pleasure to the individual. When sexually stimulated, the size of the breasts increases, venous patterns across the breasts become more visible, and nipples grow harder. During sexual intercourse, it is common practice to press or massage breasts with hands.

Breast Tickling sometimes also happens and is done by placing your hands underneath her breasts and tickling upwards.

Breast Tickling can also be done on the top, the sides and her nipples.

Breasts are sensitive to touch as they have many nerve endings. Oral stimulation of nipples and breasts is also common. Some women can achieve "breast orgasms".

In the ancient Indian work the Kama Sutra, marking breasts with nails and biting with teeth are explained as erotic.

The primary function of the breasts, as mammary glands, is the nourishing of an infant with breast milk. Milk is produced in milk-secreting cells in the alveoli. When the breasts are stimulated by the suckling of her baby, the mother's brain secretes oxytocin. High levels of oxytocin trigger the contraction of muscle cells surrounding the alveoli, causing milk to flow along the ducts that connect the alveoli to the nipple.

Full-term newborns have an instinct and a need to suck on a nipple, and breastfed babies nurse for both nutrition and for comfort. Breast milk provides all necessary nutrients for the first six months of life, and then remains an important source of nutrition, alongside solid foods, until at least one or two years of age.

Cholera is an infectious disease caused by the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. It infects the small intestine.

There are many types (strains) of the Vibrio cholera bacteria. Some of them cause more serious illnesses than others. Because of this, some people who get cholera have no symptoms; others have symptoms that are not very bad, and others have very bad symptoms.

The most common symptom is large amounts of watery diarrhea. In the worst cases, diarrhea can be so bad that people can die in a few hours from dehydration.

Cholera is a very old disease. Writings about cholera (written in Sanskrit) have been found from the 5th century BC. Throughout history, there have been many outbreaks and epidemics of cholera.

Cholera still affects many people throughout the world. Estimates from 2010 say that between 3 million and 5 million people get cholera every year, and 21,000–130,000 people die from the disease every year. Today, cholera is considered a pandemic. However, it is most common in developing countries, especially in children.

People usually get cholera by eating food or drinking water that is unclean. When people have cholera, they have a lot of diarrhea, and the cholera bacteria stays alive in their feces. In developing countries, often there is not good sanitation. Cholera can spread if this diarrhea gets into water that other people use. For example, if sewage (human waste) gets into a river, people can get cholera if they:

Cholera is very rarely spread directly from person to person.

Cholera's main symptoms are bad diarrhea and vomiting clear fluid. These symptoms usually start suddenly. They start half a day to five days after the person gets infected. (This is called cholera's "incubation period".)

If they do not get treatment, about half of people with serious cholera die. People with bad cholera may have so much diarrhea that they do not have enough water and electrolytes (salts) left in their bodies to survive. Cholera has been nicknamed the "blue death" because a person dying of cholera may lose so many body fluids that their skin turns bluish-gray.

If people with cholera get good, quick medical treatment, less than 1% die from the disease. However, if cholera is not treated, at least half of people with the disease (50% to 60%) die.

Some strains of the Vibrio cholera bacteria have different genes than others, which make them more dangerous. These more dangerous strains of cholera bacteria caused the 2010 epidemic in Haiti and the 2004 outbreak in India. A person who gets these strains of cholera can die within two hours of getting sick. This means there is very little time to get the person treated.

There are antibiotics for cholera. There are various treatments which can help. For example:

There is a cholera vaccine that can be taken by mouth. It provides some protection from cholera for about six months.

People can also do some other things to prevent cholera. For example:

Governments could stop outbreaks or epidemics from happening by improving sanitation. For example, cholera is very uncommon in developed countries because they have good sanitation and because they add chemicals to their water to kill germs. Even after people start to get cholera, it is possible for governments to stop the disease from spreading, though:

Cholera probably started in the Indian subcontinent. As early as the 5th century BC, people in the Ganges River delta area wrote about cholera. The disease first spread to Russia in 1817 by trade routes (over both land and sea). Later, cholera spread to the rest of Europe, and from Europe to North America and the rest of the world.

Seven cholera pandemics have happened in the past 200 years. The latest started in Indonesia in 1961. There have also been many serious outbreaks. The worst outbreak in recent history happened in Haiti after the earthquake there in 2010. Between October 2010 and August 2015, more than 700,000 Haitians got cholera, and over 9,000 died. The outbreak was caused by a United Nations base where Nepalese soldiers were living. The soldiers would dump human waste into the Artibonite River, which many Haitians used for drinking, cooking, and bathing.

Cholera was common in the 19th century. It has killed tens of millions of people. Just in Russia, between 1847 and 1851, more than one million people died of cholera. During the second pandemic, which lasted from 18271835, the disease killed 150,000 Americans. Between 1900 and 1920, in India, up to eight million people died of cholera.

in 1854, an English doctor named John Snow was the first person to realize that contaminated water caused cholera.

The English engineer Joseph Bazalgette solved the problem for London in the middle of the 19th century. He invented the system for cleaning foul water, a system which is still used world-wide. Cholera has come back to the world because cities have hugely increased populations, and the treatment of sewage has overrun the facilities. It was the British who built most of the world's sewage plants, and until about 1950 they were able to work well unless they were damaged by warfare. Later governments did not invest money in their infrastructure, which meant the increased population eventually caused cholera to return.

Cholera is not the only problem with water supply. Blooms of red algae occur from time to time in hot weather, and they have to be killed off. Emergency control is done by adding chlorine to the water supply. This works, but makes the water taste bad.

Fortunately, infections transmitted in bad water can be cured. There is at least one antibiotic which works well against amoeboid parasites, and another which usually works against bacteria. Treatment costs money, of course, and in many countries that means the treatment is not widely available.

The circulatory system (also called the cardiovascular system) is the body system that moves blood around the body.  It consists of the heart and blood vessels.  The blood carries various materials that the body needs, and takes away waste and harmful substances.

Blood vessels that take blood away from the heart are arteries. Arteries divide into smaller arteries as they go away from the heart. The smaller arteries that connect to the capillaries, are called arterioles.

Blood vessels that take blood towards the heart are veins. Veins get bigger as they go towards the heart. The smallest veins are called venules. Pronounced (VEHN-yools)

Capillaries go between arteries and veins. Capillaries are quite thin, hence the name which comes from the Latin capillus meaning "hair."

So blood moves: heart→artery→arteriole→capillary→venule→vein→heart. This is called circulation. There are two different circulations in the circulatory system. The systemic circulation is how blood goes to most of the body. The pulmonary circulation is how blood goes through the lungs. (Pulmonary means ¨about the lungs¨). This is how it works in mammals, including humans. Circulatory systems of other vertebrates differ somewhat. Vertebrates also have a lymphatic system that helps the main blood circulatory system.

Blood that comes from the left side of the heart is full of oxygen and nutrients. Nutrients are substances that your body needs to live, like protein, fat, carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals. The blood brings the oxygen and nutrients to your body.

This blood in systemic arteries that is full of oxygen and nutrients is systemic arterial blood. It is sometimes just called arterial blood.

The biggest systemic artery in the body is the aorta. This is the large blood vessel that comes out of the heart. Smaller arteries branch off from the aorta. These arteries have smaller arteries that branch off from them. The smallest arteries turn into arterioles.

The smallest blood vessels are capillaries. Systemic arterioles turn into capillaries. The blood from arterioles goes into the capillaries. There oxygen and nutrients go out of the blood into the tissue around the capillaries. The blood also picks up carbon dioxide and waste from the tissue. The network of capillaries that brings blood to an area is called a capillary bed.

On the other end of the capillary, it turns into a venule. Venules are the smallest veins. Veins take blood back to the heart. As veins go back to the heart, they merge and get bigger. The biggest systemic veins in the body are the vena cava. There are two vena cava. The inferior vena cava takes blood from the lower part of the body to the right side of the heart. (In anatomy, inferior means below.) The superior vena cava takes blood from the upper part of the body to the heart. (Superior means above.)

This same movement of blood goes through the lungs in the pulmonary circulation.

The blood that the vena cava vein takes to the heart is full of carbon dioxide. It has much less oxygen than (systemic) arterial blood. The right side of the heart pushes the venous blood into the pulmonary artery. The pulmonary artery takes blood to the lungs. In the lungs, the blood goes through the pulmonary capillary bed. (The capillaries that are in the lungs). Here it gets more oxygen. It also drops off carbon dioxide. (This is the opposite of what happens in capillary beds in the rest of the body. In the systemic circulation blood drops off oxygen and picks up carbon dioxide).

After the pulmonary capillary bed, the blood goes to the pulmonary veins. This pulmonary venous blood now is full of oxygen. The pulmonary veins take blood to the left side of the heart. Then the blood goes to the systemic circulation again.

Veins from the gut shunt to the liver before returning to the right atrium and ventricle. The shunt is called the hepatic portal vein.

The meaning of this is as follows. The liver is the body's main chemical factory. It takes in the flow of nutrients from the gut, and adjusts them to suit what the body needs. It can store surplus nutrients, or release extra nutrients from store. It can change the chemical make-up of many nutrients. In this way it adapts to the many different kinds of food which the body digests.

Breathing is moving air in and out of the lungs.  The air going in and out is called breath.  If a person cannot breathe, they will die.

When a person breathes in, they bring air into their lungs.  Air has oxygen in it.  The oxygen goes from the lungs into the person's bloodstream.  When oxygen goes into the bloodstream, extra carbon dioxide comes out and goes into the lungs.  This is called gas exchange: basically, oxygen and carbon dioxide are changing places.  Oxygen is now in the bloodstream, which can carry that oxygen around to every part of the body.  Also, carbon dioxide is now in the lungs, where it can be breathed out.

Adults breathe about 18 times a minute, which is more than 25,000 times a day.  Children breathe even faster.

A part of the brainstem called the medulla oblongata controls breathing.  Groups of neurons in the medulla tell the breathing muscles when to breathe in, when to breathe faster, and when to breathe slower.

The brainstem measures how much carbon dioxide is in a person's blood.  If there is too much carbon dioxide, the medulla tells the body to breathe faster.  This helps the person breathe out the extra carbon dioxide.  Once the amount of carbon dioxide in the blood is normal again, the medulla tells the body to breathe slower again.

The body also measures the amount of oxygen in the blood.  If there is not enough oxygen in the blood, the medulla will tell the body to breathe faster, to take in more oxygen.  Once there is enough oxygen in the blood, the medulla will tell the body to breathe slower again.

For a person to breathe, certain muscles have to contract (get tighter) and relax at the right times.  The special groups of neurons in the medulla tell these breathing muscles when to contract (which makes a person breathe in) and when to relax (which makes a person breathe out).  There are a few main groups of muscles that control breathing.

The diaphragm is the main muscle that controls breathing.  It is a sheet of muscle that runs along the bottom of the rib cage.  When the diaphragm is relaxed, it is shaped like a dome (like a half circle).  When the medulla tells the diaphragm to make the body breathe in, the diaphragm pulls down and straightens out.  This creates more room inside the chest, and more room for the lungs to fill up with air.  Air comes into the lungs (this is inhalation).  When it is time to breathe out, the diaphragm relaxes again and air leaves the lungs.

About 60% - 70% of a person's ability to breathe comes from the diaphragm.

The diaphragm is controlled by a special set of nerves called the phrenic nerves.  The medulla tells the diaphragm when to contract by sending messages through the phrenic nerves.  Because the diaphragm is so important for breathing, the phrenic nerves are very well protected in the body.  They are at the very top of the spinal cord, near the neck.

The intercostal muscles run between each rib.  When a person needs to breathe in, these muscles contract and pull the ribs upward.  This creates more room inside the chest for the lungs to fill.

When a person is resting, about 30% to 40% of their ability to breathe comes from the intercostal muscles.

The intercostal muscles are controlled by the intercostal nerves.  The medulla tells the intercostals when to contract by sending messages through these nerves.  The intercostal nerves are not as well protected as the phrenic nerves.  The intercostal nerves run along the thoracic spine (which is in the upper to middle back) and connect to the intercostal muscles.  This means that if a person injured their thoracic spine, they might not be able to use their intercostal muscles.  They would then lose 30% to 40% of their ability to breathe.  However, since the nerves that control the diaphragm are much farther up in the spine and better protected, the person would still be able to use their diaphragm to breathe.  They would still have 60% to 70% of their ability to breathe.

Accessory muscles are muscles that a person uses only when they need extra help breathing.  Sometimes this is normal.  For example, if a person has just done a lot of exercise, they may need extra oxygen.  The medulla will tell the accessory muscles to kick in, to make it easier for the person to lift their chest to create more room for the lungs to fill.  The most important accessory muscles are the muscles in the chest, abdomen, and neck.

However, if a person has to use accessory muscles to breathe while they are resting, this is a sign that they are not getting the oxygen their body needs.  They may need medication, extra oxygen given through a mask, or even emergency medical treatment to help them breathe normally.  For example, people with asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) often use an inhaler when they have trouble breathing. The inhaler puffs a medicine like albuterol down into the windpipe and into the lungs.  This makes the air passages wider and helps the person breathe better than they could before.

The Caribbean Sea is a tropical sea in the center of the Caribbean area. The body of water is part of the Atlantic Ocean. The sea is southeast of the Gulf of Mexico. This entire sea covers an area of . It is bordered by Cuba, Hispaniola and Puerto Rico in the north, Central America in the west and South America in the south.

This sea is also as deep as the oceans. Its deepest point is believed to be even lower than 25,220 ft (7,686 m). That makes this point one of the lowest points on the surface of the earth, and the Caribbean Sea one of the deepest seas in the world.

The Caribbean Sea has many islands, which are popular among North American tourists because of their tropical climate. The Caribbean Sea is famous around the world as a tourist destination.

Christopher Columbus came across a group of islands in the Caribbean region. When he did so, he thought he had reached another part of the world. Because of this, he named the islands the ‘West Indies’. However, later it was realized that he found an entire region. It still had its natural resources. The name ‘Caribbean’ was later given to it by the Amerindian tribe, the Caribs. That is how it got its name: the Caribbean Sea.

Charlemagne ( ; , French: Charlemagnes, , , ) (c. 2 April 748 – 28 January 814) was the King of the Franks and the first Holy Roman Emperor. He was crowned as emperor on Christmas Day in 800. He was the older son of King Pepin III of the Carolingian dynasty. When Pepin died, Charlemagne and his brother Carloman ruled together. When Carloman died in 771 Charlemagne became the only ruler of the Franks.

The Franksm one of the Germanic peoples who had moved from over the Rhine River into the Roman Empire as it was falling apart, were by 700 the rulers of Gaul and much of Germania east of the Rhine. They also protected the papacy and the Roman Catholic faith. When their king, Pepin the Short, died, his sons, Charlemagne and Carloman were chosen to share the kingdom. They divided it into two parts: one half for Charlemagne, and the other for Carloman. Carloman died on December 4, 771, leaving Charlemagne as the leader of the whole Frankish kingdom.

Charlemagne was King of the Franks from 768 and King of the Lombards from 774. He was crowned Imperator Augustus (Emperor) in Rome on Christmas Day by Pope Leo III in 800. That started the Holy Roman Empire, which they hoped would be a kind of second Western Roman Empire; the Byzantines in Constantinople were still the Eastern Roman Empire. With many wars, Charlemagne spread his empire across much of Western Europe.

Charlemagne fought in many wars over the course of his reign. He is known for using his sword, Joyeuse, in each of the thirty years of war and the 18 battles in he fought. He also finally managed to conquer Saxony, which Roman Emperor Augustus had not been managed 800 years earlier. He converted the Saxons to Catholicism. He also had many schools built so that his people could learn. However, he also killed thousands of those who failed to convert.

Charlemagne's politics and plans failed, which led to his low self-esteem. His last years were spent in bed in deep depression. He died in 814, leaving his kingdom to his only son, Louis the Pious. The descendants of Charlemagne are called Carolingians. His family line died out in Germany in 911 and in France in 987.

Camels are mammals of the Camelidae family. Camels form the genus Camelus.  There are three living species of camels. Best-known are the dromedary (one hump) and Bactrian (two humps) camels.

The camelids, as a family, include the "New World" camelids: the llama, the alpaca, the guanaco, and the vicuña.

The earliest known camel, called Protylopus, lived in North America 40 to 50 million years ago, during the Eocene. It was about the size of a rabbit and lived in the open woodlands of what is now South Dakota.

Camels live in deserts, where it is hot and dry. Camels have adapted and found ways to help them survive in deserts. They have a thick coat of hair that protects them from the heat in the day, and keeps them warm at night. Their large feet spread out their weight on the sand when they are walking, so they do not sink into the sand. When there is food and water, a camel can eat and drink large amounts of it and store it as fat in the hump. Then, when there is no food or water, the camel uses the fat for energy, and the hump becomes small and soft. A camel’s waste contains very little water. Even the water from the camel’s breath flows back into its mouth. The camels have bushy eyebrows that don't let the sand go in their eyes in a sandstorm. It has a long slender neck in order to reach high leaves such as palm trees, and rubbery patches on the belly and knees to protect the skin when kneeling and sitting on the hot sand. These form after five years of age.

A camel has a naturally adapted temperature regulation - it can change its bodily temperature by six degrees Celsius either way.

It has two sets of eyelashes, closing muscles in the nasal passages, hairy ears and tough, leathery skin to protect the camels skin in  sandstorms. It has thick rubbery lips to eat dry, prickly plants and a large, haired tail to swat pests such as mosquitos and flies.

Camels live in groups, called herds. Herds usually have one male, many females, and their young, called calves. They are animals that use their hooves.

An unborn camel gestates about 9 to 11 months.  There is usually one calf per birth. A camel calf can run only a few hours after it is born. Calves are weaned to when they are about 1 year old.

In the desert, people feed camels with grass, grains, wheat and oats. When camels are travelling in the desert, food is often very hard to find. So the animal might have to live on dried leaves, seeds, and thorny twigs (without hurting their mouths). If there is not any regular food, camels will eat anything.

Camels are ruminants, which have a two-part cycle in their eating. The first stomach ferments the food for a time. Then, this food (or cud) returns to the camel's mouth, and the camel chews it again. Then the camel swallows the cud and it goes to the other parts of the stomach to be completely digested. The digestion is done mainly by microorganisms in the stomachs.

This adaptation means they can eat food which may not be very nutritious, but they get everything possible out of it. Ruminants are a very successful group of mammals, and this double-stomach arrangement is one of their key adaptations. Most of them eat fairly tough plant material.

Camels have been domesticated by humans for about 5000 years. They are used for riding and to carry things, and for meat, milk and wool.

As domesticated animals, they are used in Africa, Asia, and since the 19th century also in Australia. About 900-1000 wild Bactrian Camels still live in China, Tibetan Plateau and Mongolia. There are no wild dromedaries anymore, but there are escaped domestic dromedaries in Australia. Today there are dromedaries living wild in the outback in Australia.

Cape Town is the second largest city of South Africa.  It is also home to the South African Parliament where the country's representatives assemble.

It is at the Cape of Good Hope on the south-west coast.  It has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate.

The city's dominant natural feature is Table Mountain, a mountain with a flat top.

It was originally called the "Cape of Storms" by Bartolomeu Dias in 1486, a Portuguese explorer but was changed by King John II of Portugal to "Cape of Good Hope". The town was started as the center of the Dutch Cape Colony in 1652.

A central processing unit (CPU) is an important part of every computer. The CPU sends signals to control the other parts of the computer, almost like how a brain controls a body.

The CPU is an electronic machine that works on a list of computer things to do, called instructions. It reads the list of instructions and runs (executes) each one in order. A list of instructions that a CPU can run is a computer program.

The clock rate, or speed of a CPU's internal parts, is measured in hertz (Hz). Modern processors often run so fast that gigahertz (GHz) is used instead. One GHz is 1,000,000,000 cycles per second.

Most CPUs used in desktop (home) computers are microprocessors made by either Intel or Advanced Micro Devices (usually shortened to AMD). Some other companies that make CPUs are ARM, and IBM. Most of their CPUs are used in embedded systems for more specialized things, like in mobile phones, cars, video game consoles, or in the military.

In the 20th century engineers invented many different computer architectures. Nowadays most desktop computers use either 32-bit CPUs or 64-bit CPUs. The instructions in a 32-bit CPU are good at handling data that is 32 bits in size (most instructions "think" in 32 bits in a 32-bit CPU). Likewise, a 64-bit CPU is good at handling data that is 64 bits in size (and often good at handling 32-bit data too). The size of data that a CPU handles best is often called the word size of the CPU. Many old CPUs from the 70s, 80s and early 90s (and many modern embedded systems) have an 8-bit or 16-bit word size. When CPUs were invented in the middle 20th century they had many different word sizes. Some had different word sizes for instructions and data. The less popular word sizes later stopped being used.

Most CPUs are microprocessors. This means that the CPU is just a single chip. Some chips with microprocessors inside them also contain other components, and are complete single-chip "computers". This is called a microcontroller.

When the CPU runs a computer program, it needs somewhere to store the data that the instructions operate on (the data that they read and write). This storage is called a register. A CPU usually has many registers. Registers must be very fast to access (to read and write). Therefore, they are part of the CPU chip itself.

Storing all data in registers would make most CPUs too complicated (and very expensive). Therefore, registers usually only store the data that the CPU is working on "right now". The rest of the data used by the program is stored in RAM (Random Access Memory). Except in microcontrollers, RAM is usually stored outside the CPU in separate chips.

When the CPU wants to read or write data in RAM, it outputs an address to that data. Each byte in RAM has a memory address. The size of addresses is often the same as the word size: A 32-bit CPU uses 32-bit addresses, etc. However, smaller CPUs, like 8-bit CPUs, often use addresses that are larger than the word size. Otherwise the maximum program length would be too short.

Because the size of addresses is limited, the maximum amount of memory is also limited. 32-bit processors can usually only handle up to 4 GB of RAM. This is the number of different bytes that can be selected using a 32-bit address (each bit can have two values—0 and 1—and 232 bytes is 4 GB). A 64-bit processor might be able to handle up to 16 EB of RAM (16 exabytes, around 16 billion GB, or 16 billion billion bytes). The operating system may limit it to using smaller amounts.

The information that is stored in RAM is usually volatile. This means that it will disappear if the computer is turned off.

Modern CPUs often use a memory management unit (MMU). An MMU is a component that translates addresses from the CPU to (usually) different RAM addresses. When using an MMU, the addresses used in a program are (usually) not the "real" addresses where the data is stored. This is called virtual (the opposite of "real") memory. A few of the reasons why it is good to have an MMU are listed here:

On modern computers, RAM is much slower than registers, so accessing RAM slows down programs. To speed up memory accesses, a faster type of memory called a cache is often put between the RAM and the main parts of the CPU. The cache is usually a part of the CPU chip itself, and is much more expensive per byte than RAM. The cache stores the same data as RAM, but is usually much smaller. Therefore, all the data used by the program might not fit in the cache. The cache tries to store data that is likely to be used a lot. Examples include recently used data and data close in memory to recently used data.

Often it makes sense to have a "cache for the cache", just as it makes sense to have a cache for RAM. In multi-level caching, there are many caches, called the L1 cache, the L2 cache, and so on. The L1 cache is the fastest (and most expensive per byte) cache and is "closest" to the CPU. The L2 cache is one step away and is slower than the L1 cache, etc. The L1 cache can often be viewed as a cache for the L2 cache, etc.

Computer buses are the wires used by the CPU to communicate with RAM and other components in the computer. Almost all CPUs have at least a data bus - used to read and write data - and an address bus - used to output addresses. Other buses inside the CPU carry data to different parts of the CPU.

An instruction set (also called an ISA - Instruction Set Architecture) is a language understood directly by a particular CPU. These languages are also called machine code or binary. They say how you tell the CPU to do different things, like loading data from memory into a register, or adding the values from two registers. Each instruction in an instruction set has an encoding, which is how the instruction is written as a sequence of bits.

Programs written in programming languages like C and C++ can't be run directly by the CPU. They must be translated into machine code before the CPU can run them. A compiler is a computer program that does this translation.

Machine code is just a sequence of 0s and 1s, which makes it difficult for humans to read it. To make it more readable, machine code programs are usually written in assembly language. Assembly language uses text instead of 0s and 1s: You might write "LD A,0" to load the value 0 into register A for example. A program that translates assembly language into machine code is called an assembler.

Even very complicated programs can be made by combining many simple instructions like these. This is possible because each instruction takes a very short time to happen. Many CPUs today can do more than 1 billion (1,000,000,000) instructions in a single second. In general, the more a CPU can do in a given time, the faster it is. One way to measure a processor's speed is MIPS (Million Instructions Per Second). Flops (Floating-point operations per second) and CPU clock speed (usually measured in gigahertz) are also ways to measure how much work a processor can do in a certain time.

A CPU is built out of logic gates; it has no moving parts. The CPU of a computer is connected electronically to other parts of the computer, like the video card, or the BIOS. A computer program can control these peripherals by reading or writing numbers to special places in the computer's memory.

Each instruction executed by a CPU is usually done in many steps. For example, the steps to run an instruction "INC A" (increase the value stored in register A by one) on a simple CPU could be this:

Different parts of the CPU do these different things. Often it is possible to run some steps from different instructions at the same time, which makes the CPU faster. For example, we can read an instruction from memory at the same time that we decode another instruction, since those steps use different modules. This can be thought of as having many instructions "inside the pipeline" at once. In the best case, all of the modules are working on different instructions at once, but this is not always possible.

Multi-core processors became much more common in the early 21st century.  This means that they have many processors built on to the same chip so that they can run many instructions at once.  Some processors may have up to sixty-four cores, like the upcoming AMD Epyc "Milan" series. Even processors for consumers have many cores, such as the 16-core AMD Ryzen 9 5950x.

Some processors have a technology known as multithreading. This is the task of running more than one "thread" of instructions in an operating system. Many modern processors use this to boost performance with heavy multi-threaded programs, such as benchmark programs.

General Charles André Joseph Marie de Gaulle (22 November 1890 - 9 November 1970) was a French military and political leader. He was president of France from 1959 to 1969. He was a founding member and leader of the French Resistance during the Second World War.

De Gaulle chaired the Provisional Government of the French Republic from 1944 to 1946 in order to re-establish democracy in France.

In 1958, he came out of retirement: the Algerian War was happening. He rewrote the Constitution of France and founded the Fifth Republic after it was approved by a referendum. He was elected President of France later that year, a position to which he was re-elected in 1965 and held until his resignation in 1969.

The National Assembly brought him back to power in May 1958. He granted independence to Algeria. 900,000 French people in Algeria (called les pieds-noire) left for France. The Organisation armée secrète (OAS) tried to kill him. Frederick Forsyth used this incident as a basis for his novel The Day of the Jackal.

After the Algerian conflict, de Gaulle wanted to improve the French economy, and have an independent foreign policy. This was called by foreign observers the "politics of grandeur" (politique de grandeur). See Gaullism.

The French economy recorded high growth rates. In 1964, for the first time in nearly 100 years, France's GDP overtook that of the United Kingdom. This period is still remembered in France with some nostalgia as the peak of the Trente Glorieuses ("Thirty Glorious Years" of economic growth between 1945 and 1974).

De Gaulle had many admirers, but he was also one of the most hated men in modern French history.

De Gaulle died in Colombey-les-Deux-Églises in 1970 while playing cards because of a brain aneurysm.

Carl Friedrich Gauss (pronunciation: , Latin: Carolus Fridericus Gauss) (30 April 1777 – 23 February 1855) was a famous mathematician from Göttingen, Germany. Gauss contributed to many areas of learning. Most of his work was about number theory, statistics, and astronomy.

He was born in Braunschweig. That city was then part of the duchy of Braunschweig-Lüneburg. Today the city is part of Lower Saxony. As a child, he was a prodigy, meaning he was very clever. When he was 3 years old, he told his father that he had made a mistake on his complicated payroll. The child was correct.  Gauss also taught himself to read.

When he was in elementary school, his teacher once tried to keep the children busy, telling them to add up all the numbers from 1 to 100. Gauss did it quickly, like this: 1 + 100 = 101, 2 + 99 = 101, 3 + 98 = 101, and so on. There were a total of 50 pairs, so 50 × 101 = 5,050. The formula is . There are many other versions of this story.

The Duke of Brunswick gave Gauss a fellowship to the Collegium Carolinum, where he attended from 1792 to 1795. This meant that the Duke paid for the education of Carl Friedrich Gauss at the Collegium. After this, Gauss went to the University of Göttingen, from 1795 to 1798.

When Gauss was 23, scientists spotted the asteroid Ceres but they did not see it for long enough to know its orbit. Gauss made calculations that let them locate it.

Later in life Gauss stopped working on pure math and turned to physics. He did work in electromagnetism and made an early electrical telegraph.

Gauss wrote Disquisitiones Arithmeticae which is a book about number theory. In that book he proved the law of Quadratic reciprocity. He also was the first mathematician to explain Modular arithmetic in a very detailed way. Before Gauss, mathematicians had used modular arithmetic in some cases but did not know much about using it broadly.

The British Empire was the largest empire in world history and for a century was the largest global power. It included British dominions, colonies, protectorates, mandates, and other territories. British Overseas Territories are remnants of the British Empire which remain under British sovereignty.

The Empire started with England's overseas possessions in the late 16th and the early 17th centuries. It grew into the largest empire the world has ever known during the 19th and the early 20th centuries.

The British Empire was the first of the European powers to ban slavery and used the Royal Navy to suppress the Atlantic slave trade by the West Africa Squadron.

By 1922, more than 458 million people lived in the colonies and territory of the British Empire, that was more than one fifth of the world's population at that time. The empire was larger than 33,700,000 km2 (13,012,000 sq mi), almost a quarter of the Earth's total land area. The empire's large influence left a mark on many aspects of the modern world, with constitutional, legal, linguistic and cultural legacies. Called "the empire on which the Sun never sets"' it stood as a sign of British strength and dominance across the globe.

The Age of Discovery saw Portugal and Spain carving vast empires. This sparked England to create its own colonies and trade networks. England, France and the Netherlands sought to harvest wealth and resources in the Americas and in Asia, with Britain eventually emerging as the dominate colonial power in North America and the Indian subcontinent.

In the 19th century, Britain's naval and imperial might surged to new heights and started a period of prosperity and peace that became known as Pax Britannica. The combination of trade from factories from the Industrial Revolution and shipping guarded by the Royal Navy was the basis of Britain's wealth.

Controlling a significant portion of world trade, Britain wielded economic influence over regions such as Asia and Latin America. Some colonies earned greater autonomy and became dominions.

While challenges emerged as the 20th century dawned, Britain's spirit endured. Even in the face of increased competition from Germany and the United States in the early 20th century, the empire's legacy endured and shaped the course of world history.

World War I weakened the empire, and World War II accelerated the decline. Also, the ideas of mechanisation and manufacture were becoming used in other countries. Labour costs, such as in China, were much lower than they were in Britain. It is possible that without World War II, Britain would still have been in control of manufacturing in large parts of the world, but one consequence of the war was the dominance of the United States and of China.

Decolonisation movements emerged in the post-war era and led to the granting of independence to many territories, including those in the Indian subcontinent. However, the British Empire's influence endures since former colonies and dominions are in the Commonwealth of Nations, and many share the bond of a common monarch, now King Charles III.

When Britain gave Hong Kong back to China on 1 July 1997, it marked the effective end of the British Empire. However, Britain still has some overseas territories.

Following the Chagos Archipelago handover agreement, the British government is also due to introduce legislation to implement the agreement, including amending the British Nationality Act 1981 to reflect that the British Indian Ocean Territory is no longer an overseas territory following Parliament's ratification of the treaty.

When the Thirteen Colonies became independent in the American War of Independence, the British Empire lost some of its oldest and most important colonies, but it kept colonies in what are now Canada and Florida, as well as in the Caribbean. Britain still had colonies and businesses in Asia, Africa, and the Pacific too. After defeating Napoleonic France in 1815, Britain became the world's only superpower for more than a century, and its empire became even larger.

The empire continued to expand during the 19th century. Ir would force the Chinese to give them the island of Hong Kong after the Opium Wars during the mid-19th century. During the Scramble for Africa, Britain gained much of Africa, especially in the south.

By the early 20th century, the economies of Germany and the United States had begun catching up to Britain, especially byindustrialisation. Britain allowed Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa to be "self-governing dominions" by the time of the World War I. They could now pass their own laws in most matters and became independent countries in 1931.

World War I weakened Europe. Though the British Empire had been the most powerful economy before the war, it was quickly surpassed by the United States as the greatest industrial power after the war.

In World War II, Japan took the colonies of Britain and other European countries in Southeast Asia. The Allies eventually defeated Japan and took back their colonies, but Britain's  in Asia was damaged, which caused the Empire to  more quickly.

The British Raj included the whole of the Indian subcontinent. The independence of India and Pakistan in 1947 was the first and most important step in decolonisation. In the following decade, Britain also gave independence to most of the territories of the British Empire. The colonial government hid and destroyed many documents about the empire, which it thought would give it a bad reputation.

The Slavery Abolition Act abolished slavery in most of the British Empire on 1 August 1834. In the territories administered by the East India Company and Ceylon, slavery was ended in 1844.

Parliamentary reform in 1832 saw the influence of the East India Company decline. Under the 1833 Act, slaves were granted full emancipation after a period of four to six years of "apprenticeship". Facing further opposition from abolitionists, the apprenticeship system was abolished in 1838.

The Byzantine Empire, also formally called the Eastern Roman Empire, was the continuation of the Roman Empire primarily in its eastern provinces that survived into the Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages. The empire had its capital at Constantinople, survived the fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century AD and continued to exist until the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453.

During most of its existence, the empire remained the most powerful economic, cultural, and military force in the Mediterranean region. Its citizens continued to refer to their empire as the Roman Empire and to themselves as Romans, a term that Greeks continued to use for themselves into Ottoman times. Modern historians distinguish the Byzantine Empire from the earlier Roman Empire because the imperial seat moved from Rome to Byzantium, the empire integrated Christianity, and Greek replaced Latin as the most common language.

During the high period of the Roman Empire, known as the Pax Romana period, the western parts of the empire went through Latinization, but the eastern parts of the empire maintained to a large degree their Hellenistic culture. Several events from the 4th to 6th centuries mark the period of transition during which the Roman Empire's Greek East and Latin West diverged.

Constantine I (r. 324–337) reorganised the empire, made Constantinople the capital, and legalised Christianity. Under Theodosius I (r. 379–395), Christianity became the state religion, and other religious practices were forbidden. In the reign of Heraclius (r. 610–641), the empire's military and administration were restructured, and Greek was gradually adopted for official use in place of Latin.

The borders of the empire fluctuated through several cycles of decline and recovery. During the reign of Justinian I (r. 527–565), the empire reached its greatest extent after the fall of the western Roman Empire by reconquering much of the historically Roman western Mediterranean coast, including, Africa, Italy, and Rome, which it held for two more centuries.

The Byzantine–Sasannid War of 602–628 exhausted the empire's resources, and during the early Muslim conquests of the 7th century, the empire lost its richest provinces (Egypt and Syria) to the Rashidun Caliphate. It then lost Africa to the Umayyads in 698, before the empire was stabilized by the Isaurian dynasty.

The Macedonian dynasty (9th–11th centuries) expanded the empire again but ended with defeat by the Seljuk Turks at the Battle of Manzikert in 1071. Civil wars and the ensuing Seljuk invasion led to the loss of most of Asia Minor. The empire recovered during the Komnenian restoration, and until the Fourth Crusade, Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe.

The empire was first dissolved during the Fourth Crusade in 1204, when Constantinople was sacked by the Latins (Catholic Europeans from the West), and the territories that the empire had governed were divided into competing Byzantine Greek and Latin realms. Despite the eventual recovery of Constantinople in 1261, the Byzantine Empire remained a mere regional power for the final two centuries of its existence. Its remaining territories were progressively annexed by the Ottomans during the Byzantine–Ottoman Wars in the 14th and the 15th centuries.

The fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453 marked the end of the Byzantine Empire. Refugees fleeing the city after its capture settled into Italy and other parts of Europe and helped to ignite the Renaissance. The Empire of Trebizond was conquered eight years later, when its capital surrendered to Ottoman forces after it had been besieged in 1461. The fall of the Byzantine Empire to the Ottomans is sometimes used to mark the end of the Middle Ages and the start of the early modern period.

The Byzantine Empire did not get that name until a century after its fall. The empire was known at the time as the following:

In 324, Roman Emperor Constantine I moved the capital of the Roman Empire from Rome to the Greek city of Byzantium, which he renamed Constantinople. By the 5th century, the Roman Empire had lost its territories in the west, and the Western Roman Empire had been taken over by Germanic peoples during the Migration period. The surviving parts of the Roman Empire became known as the Eastern Roman Empire and is now called the Byzantine Empire.

The Eastern Roman Empire tried to take back Rome and the rest of Italian Peninsula from the Germanic peoples. Between 530 and 555 AD, the Byzantine Greeks won many battles and took back Rome.

The Byzantines controlled Rome for a long time. Eventually, more Germanic peoples came, and Italy was lost again. Later, Avars and Slavs took parts of Southeast Europe from the Byzantines. After the 560s, invaders slowly conquered the Balkans except for parts of modern Greece and Albania. Bulgars from the steppes formed the First Bulgarian Empire north of the Byzantine Empire. At first, both the Avars and the Bulgars were Turkic peoples. They ruled over the Slavic people, who were called Sklavinai, and slowly absorbed the Slavic language and culture.

After Rome had been captured by the Germanic peoples, the Eastern Roman Empire continued to control what are now Egypt, Greece, Palestine, Syria, and Turkey. However, another empire, known as the Persian or the Sassanid Empire, tried to take the lands for itself. Between 224 and 628, the Greco-Romans and the Persians fought many battles, and many men were killed in the fighting. Eventually, the Persians were defeated in 627 by Emperor Heraclius in what is now Iraq, near the ancient city of Nineveh, which allowed the Byzantines to keep those lands.

The centuries-long struggle between the Byzantines and the Persians shaped the political and religious landscape of the Middle East, leaving behind a complex legacy that continues to influence the region today.

Then, another enemy appeared, the Arabs. The Byzantines did not have much money to spend on war because of their battles with the Persians and so they could not withstand the Arabs. Palestine, Syria, and Egypt were lost between 635 and 645 by Heraclius. However, the Byzantines defended Asia Minor (now in Turkey), and the Arabs advance stopped there. Heraclius ordered the use of Greek as the only language of the empire, erased forever the name "Eastern Roman Empire" and cut the last links with Roman Civilisation.::..

In 718, the Arabs were defeated but left the Byzantines very weak. In the west, the Byzantines fought the Bulgarians many times. Some battles were successful, but many emperors died fighting. Over time, the Byzantine Empire weakened as it lost land to outside invaders.

Between 1007 and 1014, Emperor Basil II ambitiously attacked Bulgaria many times and eventually won a great victory. Later, he fully recaptured Greece and recovered it for the empire. He then went on to take over Bulgaria, which was fully conquered in 1018.

In the east, the Arabs once again became a threat to the Byzantines. However, Basil II kept attacking and won many more victories. Much of Syria was restored to the empire, and Turkey and Armenia were secured. After 1025, the Arabs were no longer a threat to the Byzantines.

After Basil II died, many unskilled emperors came to the throne, wasted the empire's money, and reduced its army. That meant that it could not defend itself well against enemies if they attacked. Later, the Byzantines relied on mercenaries, soldiers who fought for money, not for their country. That made them less loyal and reliable and more expensive. The mercenaries allowed military generals to come to power and to grab it from the elaborate bureaucracy, a system of administration in which tasks are divided by departments.

A large number of people, known as the Turks, rode on horseback from Central Asia and attacked the Byzantine Empire. The Seljuk Empire took most of Anatolia from the Byzantines by 1091. However, it received help from people in Western Europe in what is known as the First Crusade. Many knights and soldiers left to help the Byzantines and to secure Jerusalem for the Christians. The city was then controlled by the Muslims.

The Byzantine Empire survived and, with the help of the other European empires, took back half of Anatolia from the Turks, who managed to hold the other half of the region. The Byzantines survived primarily because it had three good emperors in a row, which allowed the empire to recover from their recent conflicts.

The next few emperors ruled poorly and spent much of the existing treasury on many mercenary soldiers.

In the west, the Western Europeans betrayed the Byzantines and attacked their capital in the Fourth Crusade, Constantinople. The sack of Constantinople in 1204 effectively ended the Empire (which split up into smaller Greek states who fought for control over each other), as the crusaders established the Latin Empire known as Frankokratia to the Byzantines, which lasted until 1261 when the Empire of Nicaea captured Constantinople and Michael VIII Palaiologos was declared Emperor and Autocrat of the Romans soon after, restoring the Byzantine Empire.

After the Byzantines had taken back Constantinople, they were too busy fighting the Europeans who had betrayed them and so they could not find enough Soldiers or Money to fight the Turks' new Ottoman Empire. All of Asia Minor had been lost by 1331, and in 1369, the Turks crossed over from Turkey and into Greece. They took over much of Greece firmly and along all their neighbour countries in the Aegean Sea between 1354 and 1450.::.!’!

The Byzantines lost so much Land, Money and Soldiers that they became very weak and begged for help from the Western Europeans. France, Spain; and Italy plus it’s  Pope sent Soldiers and ships to help the Byzantines when the Turks attacked Constantinople in April 1453. The Byzantines were badly outnumbered, however, and the walls of Constantinople were “…” damaged badly by the cannons that were used by the Turks. In late May 1453, the Turks captured Constantinople by entering through one of the gates along the walls, and the empire came to an end.::.

The City was plundered for three days. In the end, those who had not been able to escape were deported to Edirne, Bursa, and other Ottoman cities. There was nobody in the city except for the Jews of Balat and the Genoese of Pera. Constantinople became the capital of the Ottoman Empire until it fell in the early 20th century (1298-1925). The city was later renamed Istanbul, and the Turkish capital was moved to Ankara, a city in Asia Minor.::.!’!

A capacitor (also called condenser, which is the older term) is an electronic device that stores electric energy. It is similar to a battery, but can be smaller, lightweight and a capacitor charges or discharges much quicker.  Capacitors are used in many electronic devices today, and can be made out of many different types of material. The Leyden jar was one of the first capacitors invented.

Capacitors are usually made with two metal plates that are on top of each other and near each other, but that do not actually touch.  When powered, they allow energy to be stored inside an electrical field.  Because the plates need a lot of area to store even a small amount of charge, the plates are usually rolled up into some other shape, such as a cylinder.  Sometimes, other shapes of capacitors are used for special purposes. A capacitor-like effect can also result just from two conductors being close to each other, whether you want it to exist or not.

The type of capacitor used depends on the application. Capacitors come in many sizes. They can be as small as an ant or as large as a dustbin. A few capacitors are adjustable.

All capacitors have two connections, or leads. Most kinds of capacitors can be replaced easily by someone who has basic skills in electronics. However, one of the more powerful types - the electrolytic capacitor - must be used the correct way, or they can explode violently.

While capacitors can store energy, as batteries do, capacitors can release all their stored energy very quickly, even faster than a second. A defibrillator or a photoflash capacitor uses this ability. It gradually charges, until it cannot be filled any more, and then quickly discharges its stored power to a device that needs to have it quickly.

Supercapacitors hold a bigger charge than regular capacitors. They are used to store electricity for motors and other purposes when batteries won't discharge quickly enough.

This type of capacitor is not for use in high frequency circuits, being made with a coil inside. They can charge and discharge even more quickly than other capacitors. They are used in filter circuits or timing circuits which run at several hundred KHz or less.

Electrolytic capacitors use a conducting surface inside a liquid electrolyte. They do not charge and discharge as rapidly as film capacitors do. They have polarity and so they have to be attached correctly. There are two leads; one will have a + and the other a -. This means one lead is positive and one is negative. There are two different styles: axial, where the leads are connected to each end, and radial, where the leads are connected to one end. Electrolytic capacitors are printed with capacitance and voltage rating.

Since the voltage rating can be low, it is important to check that the electrolytic capacitor is not overcharged. Capacitors can be separated from a battery, then connected in series. Because the capacitor is polarized, the positive terminal must be connected to a negative terminal. This creates correct polarity through the electrical circuit and prevents breakdown.

Some electrolytic capacitors are unpolarized, meaning that either side can be positive or negative. These are mostly used in loudspeakers to block low-frequency signals (bass) from reaching high-frequency (tweeter) drivers.

Chinese characters are symbols used to write the Chinese and Japanese languages. In the past, other languages like Korean and Vietnamese also used them. The beginning of these characters was at least 3000 years ago, making them one of the oldest writing systems in the world that is still used today. In Chinese they are called hanzi (), which means "Han character". In Japanese they are called kanji, hanja in Korean, and chữ Hán in Vietnamese.

Chinese characters are an important part of East Asian culture. The art of writing Chinese characters is called calligraphy.

Chinese characters are a type of logogram, which are written symbols that represent words instead of sounds. Most earlier Chinese characters were pictographs, which are simple pictures used to mean some kind of thing or idea. Today, very few modern Chinese characters are pure pictographs, but are a combination of two or more simple characters, also known as radicals. While many radicals and characters show a word's meaning, some give hints of the word's pronunciation instead.

To better explain the different purposes and types of Chinese characters that exist, Chinese scholars have divided Chinese characters into six categories known as liushu (六书 / 六書), literally translated as the Six Books. The six types of Chinese characters are:

Common examples of words using phonetic characters are the names of countries, such as Canada, which is pronounced Jiānádà (加拿大) in Chinese. While the third character 大 dà, which has the meaning "big/large/great", seems to describe Canada well, since it is a big country, the first two characters 加 jiā, meaning "to add", and 拿 ná, meaning "to take", have no obvious relation to Canada. Therefore, it is safe to say that these characters were chosen only because the pronunciation of each character sounds similar to the syllables of the English name of the country.

Nobody knows exactly how many Chinese characters there are, but the biggest Chinese dictionaries list about fifty thousand characters, even though most of them are only variants of other characters seen in very old texts. For example, the character 回 (huí) has also been written as the variant characters 迴，廻，囬，逥，廽，and 囘, although most Chinese people only know and use the variant 回. Studies in China show that normally three to four thousand characters are used in daily life, so it is safe to say that someone needs to know three to four thousand characters to be functionally literate in Chinese, or be able to read everyday writing without serious problems.

Characters are a kind of graphic language, much different from languages that use an alphabet such as English. The correct way to tell between them is to remember the structure and meaning of every character, not pronunciation, because there is a very close relationship between meaning and structure of characters. Example: 房(house)=户+方. 房 is a shape-pronunciation character. 户 is for shape and 方 is for pronunciation. 户 means 'door'. 房 means 'A person lives behind a door'. 方 pronunciation is fang and tone is 1, and with the tone mark it is written as fāng. 房 pronunciation is also fang, but tone is 2, with the tone mark it is written as fáng.

Chinese characters have been used to write other languages, particularly in Japanese, Korean, and Vietnamese:

In Japanese, characters that are borrowed from the Chinese language are called kanji. Kanji can be used to write both native Japanese words and Chinese loanwords. Japanese writing uses a mix of kanji and two kana systems. Kanji is mostly used to show a word's meaning, while hiragana and katakana are syllabaries that show the pronunciation of Japanese words, all three of which are often used in combination when writing Japanese. Generally, the educational level of a Japanese person is indicated by the number of Chinese characters understood by this person.

In Korean, they are called hanja. Throughout most of Korean history, hanja was the only writing system most literate Koreans knew. Even though hangul was invented in 1446, it was only used by commoners and not by academics or the government until Korea gained independence from Japan. Nowadays, while Koreans nowadays mostly write in hangul, the native Korean alphabet, people have found that some meanings cannot be expressed clearly by just hangul, so people need to use Chinese characters as a note with a bracket.

In North Korea, people write almost completely in hangul since Kim Il-sung abolished hanja from Korean. In South Korea, people mostly write in hangul, and they sometimes write hanja. Native Korean words are almost always written in hangul. Hanja are usually only used to write words that are borrowed from the Chinese language, and are usually only used when the word's meaning isn't obvious based on the context.

In Vietnamese, they are called chữ Nôm. Many Chinese loanwords were used in Vietnamese, especially in old Vietnamese literature. While Vietnamese used many Chinese characters, they also invented tens of thousands of their own characters to write Vietnamese words. The radicals used in chữ Nôm were usually a mix of the words' meanings and pronunciations.

Ernesto "Che" Guevara, commonly known as el Che or Che  (June 14, 1928 - October 9, 1967) was an Argentine Marxist, revolutionary, physician, author, guerrilla, diplomat, and military theorist. He is popular with socialists. In addition to that he was a writer and some of his articles and speeches were even published.

Time magazine said he was one of the most influential people of the 20th century. Guevara's face, with his thick black hair, scruffy beard and familiar beret, has been printed on T-shirts, walls and banners. Guerrillero Heroico, a picture of him, is called "the most famous photograph in the world."

Che Guevara was born in Rosario, Argentina in 1928. He studied at the University of Buenos Aires. He wanted to be a doctor. During his holidays, he traveled. He saw how poor some people were. He thought that revolution could fix it.

After college, he went to Mexico. He met Fidel Castro there in 1954. Castro was planning a rebellion in Cuba. Guevara joined Castro. He fought with Castro in Cuba. In 1959, Fidel won and became president of Cuba. Fidel and Guevara declared Cuba a communist country. Guevara was made head of Cuba's bank. He later became Minister of Industry. In 1965, Guevara helped to start other revolutions. They were in Congo-Kinshasa and Bolivia. In 1967, he was captured and executed by Bolivian soldiers. His body was not found until 1997. His nickname among friends was "Chegi Vara".

People have different opinions on Che Guevara. Some see him as a good leader. In addition to that he was an excellent writer and some of his articles and speeches were even published. Others see him as a bad man who wanted to hurt people. A black and white image of Guevara's face is one of the most merchandized images. It can be found on many items. They include t-shirts, hats, posters, and other items. The image was based on a photograph by Alberto Korda Díaz. Díaz was a Cuban photographer. It was taken in 1960.

Guevara is still an important person. He is seen as an example of youthful rebellion.

A movie, The Motorcycle Diaries, is about Che. It describes a trip that he took through South America. The trip took place in the 1950s. The movie was directed by Walter Salles. It was produced by Robert Redford.

Sir Charles Spencer  "Charlie" Chaplin  (16 April 1889 – 25 December 1977) was an English comic actor, filmmaker, and composer. He was famous in silent movies (where there was no talking or sound). He acted, directed, scripted, and produced many of them.

Charlie Chaplin was a performer for almost 70 years. He started working when he was 5, and worked until he was 80. The character that Charlie Chaplin played most was called "the Little Tramp".

Charles Spencer Chaplin was born on 16 April 1889 in London, England, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Chaplin had a rough childhood; his mother, Hannah Hill Chaplin, a talented singer, actress, and piano player, spent most of her life in and out of mental hospitals. His father, Charles Spencer Chaplin Sr. was a fairly successful singer until he began drinking. After his parents separated, Charlie and his half-brother, Sidney, spent most of their childhood in orphanages, where they often went hungry and were beaten if they misbehaved. He first started acting at age five. He acted in a music hall in 1894, standing in for his mother.

When Charlie was a child, he was kept in bed for many weeks from a bad illness. At night, his mother would sit at the window and act out what was going on outside. His first important work came when he joined The Eight Lancashire Lads. In 1900, his brother Sydney helped him get the role of a comic cat in the pantomime Cinderella. In 1903 he was in a play called “Jim: A Romance of Cockayne”. Chaplin was in Casey's 'Court Circus' variety show. The next year, he became a clown in Fred Karno's 'Fun Factory' comedy company.

Chaplin was the target of an assassination attempt which took the life of Prime Minister of Japan Inukai Tsuyoshi.

On 15 May 1932, Prime Minister Inukai Tsuyoshi was shot by eleven young naval officers (most were just turning twenty years of age) in the prime minister's residence. The original assassination plan had included killing Chaplin who had arrived in Japan on 14 May 1932, at a reception for Chaplin, planned by Prime Minister Inukai. When the prime minister was killed, his son Inukai Takeru was watching a sumo wrestling match with Charlie Chaplin, which probably saved both their lives.

Chaplin won two special Oscars. Chaplin had first been chosen for both "Best Actor" and "Best Comedy Directing". But then, instead, he was given a special award "for versatility and genius in acting, writing, directing and producing". Chaplin's second special award came 44 years later, in 1972. When getting this award, Chaplin had the longest standing ovation (people standing up and clapping) in Academy Award history. In 1976 he was given the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, a lifetime achievement award. Chaplin became the first actor to have appeared on the cover of Time in 1925.

Myths say, Chaplin once entered in a Charlie Chaplin look-a-like contest. Chaplin lost the contest.

On 9 March 1975, Charlie Chaplin was knighted in England by Elizabeth II, the Queen of the United Kingdom.

Chaplin died on Christmas Day in 1977 of a stroke in his sleep in Vevey, Vaud, Switzerland, at the age of 88. On March 1, 1978, his body was stolen by a small group of Swiss people. They were trying to get money from Chaplin’s family. This plan didn't work. The criminals were caught, and Charlie’s body was found 11 weeks later near Lake Geneva. He was buried under concrete to prevent further incidents.

The Caspian Sea is the largest lake on Earth by both area and volume. It has a surface area of . Its volume is . The Caspian has for 40 to 44% of the total lake waters of the world.

The Caspian sea is an endorheic body of water. It is bordered by Russia, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan. It has a maximum depth of about . It is called a sea because when the Romans first arrived there, they tasted the water and found it to be salty. It has a salinity of approximately 1.2%, about a third the salinity of sea water.

Carl Linnaeus (23 May 1707 – 10 January 1778), also known as Carolus Linnaeus, was a Swedish botanist, physician and zoologist who created the binomial nomenclature. In this system, every kind of animal and plant is given a name consisting of two Latin words, for its genus and species. This became used by biologists all over the world, so he is known as the "father of modern taxonomy". He was a good linguist, and famous in his time. He was made a noble by Adolf Frederick, the Swedish king.

Carl was born in Småland in southern Sweden. He was going to be a priest like his father, but did not do well enough in school. Instead, Carl studied at a college for botany because he liked it.  He studied in Lund and tried to improve the garden there.  He later went to another college.

In 1735, Linnaeus moved to the Netherlands for three years.  There, he earned his degree in medicine. He also published his book on plant classification. His book was called Systema Naturæ. His book explained how to classify living things by putting them into groups. Some of these groups are bigger than others.

Later he moved to Stockholm and practiced as a doctor. In 1739, Linnaeus married Sara Morea in Stockholm. Throughout the 1740s he conducted many field trips to places in Sweden to name plants and animals. When not on travels, Linnaeus worked on his classification, so it would work for plants, animals, and minerals.

The Swedish king Adolf Fredrik made Linnaeus a noble in 1757, and Linnaeus took the last name von Linné, later often signing just Carl Linné.

After he was made a noble, he continued teaching and writing. His reputation had spread over the world, and he talked with many different people. Linnaeus was upset by weak health, and he had gout and tooth aches. A stroke in 1774 weakened him, and two years later he had another, losing the use of his right side. He died on January 1778 and was buried in Uppsala cathedral.

Linnaeus classified man as among the primates, which was already well understood by anthropologists like Blumenbach and natural historians like Buffon. It attracted the criticism of the Swedish church. The Lutheran Archbishop of Uppsala accused him of "impiety".

Linnaeus recognised four races in the human species. These were European whites, American reds (Native Americans), Asian browns, and African blacks. Blumenbach's classification was similar, with the addition of a Mongolian (= Chinese) or yellow race. Thus recognition of man's position as a primate and the existence of races was quite widespread before the theory of evolution was formulated.

Capital has a number of related meanings in economics, finance and  accounting.

In finance and accounting, capital generally refers to financial wealth, especially that used to start or maintain a business.

In classical economics, capital is one of the four factors of production. The others are land, labor and organization. Goods with the following features are capital goods as opposed to consumer goods or durable goods:

The third part of the definition was not always used by classical economists. The classical economist David Ricardo would use the above definition for the term fixed capital while including raw materials and intermediate products are part of world life in which they can easily spend their life.

Carbohydrates are chemical compounds that contain only oxygen, hydrogen and carbon. They are made up of joined-up sugars. Sugars have the general formula Cm(H2O)n, and are also known as saccharides.

Certain carbohydrates are an important storage and transport form of energy in most organisms, including plants and animals.

There are four types of carbohydrates, named by the number of sugar molecules they contain.

Carbohydrates are the most common source of energy for the human body. Protein builds tissue and cells in the body. Carbohydrates are very good for energy, but, if a person eats more than needed, the extra is changed into fat through a process called de novo lipogenesis.

If necessary, humans can live without eating carbohydrates because the human body can change fats and proteins into carbohydrates through a process called gluconeogenesis. Some already stored glucose in the liver can be released through another process called glycogenolysis. People of some cultures eat food with very little carbohydrates, but they still remain healthy, such as the Inuits.

Research in the United States and Canada have shown that people get about 40% to 60% of their energy from carbohydrates (mostly from refined carbohydrates). The amount of energy needs may depend on the amount of physical work done by people: the harder the work, the more energy they need. The other need for energy is body temperature. Living in a cold climate means a person needs more energy.

Some foods (especially grains) have high levels of carbohydrates including wheat products (bread, pasta, potatoes, cereals), rice, etc.

In biology, the cell is the basic structure of organisms. All living things are made up of cells, from the organs in the human body to the parts of plants. All cells are made by the division of cells that already exist ( cells).

The environment outside the cell is separated from the cytoplasm inside the cell by the cell membrane. Inside some cells, parts of the cell stay separate from other parts. These separate parts are called organelles (like small organs). They each do different things in the cell. Examples are the nucleus (where DNA is), and mitochondria (where chemical energy is converted). Prokaryotes do not have membrane-bound organelles like Eukaryotes.

There are around 37 trillion (3.7 x 1013) cells in the human body. An old saying is that bacteria outnumber the number of cells in the body 10 times over, and there are 10 times more bacteria than cells (3.7 x 1014) but many are debating this.

Cell can be divided into different types depending on the structure of the nucleus and the physiological function. In 1957 cells were divided into two types based on the structure of nucleus. These were the prokaryotic cell and the eukaryotic cell. Prokaryotes, such as bacteria and archaea, are simple cells that have no cell nucleus. They do have bacterial microcompartments.

Eukaryotes are complex cells with many organelles and other structures in the cell. They are larger than prokaryotic cells: they can be as much as 1000 times greater in volume. Eukaryotes store their genetic information (DNA) on chromosomes in the cell nucleus. Prokaryotes have all of their DNA on a single circular strand located in the nucleoid region. Organisms (living things) which are made up of multiple cells are eukaryotes.

Most cells are small, the largest just being seen by the human eye (egg cell). They need to be small in order to work as they should. In things like cells and mechanical engineering (and other types of mechanic work), the smaller and more simple things are usually means they can survive better. This means that a lot of the things are as small as they can be.

The prokaryotic cell has three regions made up of the envelope, cytoplasmic region and flagella (or pili), called:

Unicellular organisms are made up of one cell. Examples of unicellular organisms are:

Prokaryotes are almost always unicellular, while eukaryotes can be unicellular or multicellular. The only kinds of prokaryotic organisms are bacteria and archaea. Prokaryotic organisms evolved before eukaryotic organisms, so at one point the world consisted of nothing but prokaryotic organisms. This has made humans think of some theories about how they came into existence.

eat, respire (most use oxygen to make sugar into energy), and get rid of waste (discard), like all other life. They need to do this throughout their lifespan to survive. Then they must perform sexual reproduction (make more of itself). Some cells reproduce using binary fission, which is a form of asexual reproduction that allows them to reproduce without a partner. Some unicellular organisms, like germ cells (including our own sperm) reproduce through mitosis, which is splitting in half to produce two germ cells, which are not always identical.

Movement in response to the environment (the presence of food or dangers, like antibodies) is called chemotaxis. Movement as a response to the sun is called a photonastic response and some plants do this, like the californian poppy (Eschscholzia californica).

Some yeasts, like the yeast used to make beer, first use aerobic metabolism (to grow), then switch to anaerobic metabolism. Aerobic means "with air" and anaerobic is "without air".

There are also viruses, which are biological organisms. Viruses violate the rules that we have for cells (living things) so are not classed as living things. They always reproduce inside the cells of other organisms, meaning they are cellular obligates. A lot of virus strains cannot survive outside of the cell, but some can for a short time, such as Hepatitis B and D (HBV & HDV). Hepatitis B virus can survive in the body for around 7 days.

They cause some important diseases. Viruses are made of RNA, or DNA, contained in a protein, and they reproduce themselves inside the cells of bacteria (bacteriophages) or eukaryotes. Sperm is a lot like a virus.

Eukaryotic cells can be unicellular or multicellular. Multicellular organisms are made from many cells. They are complex organisms. This can be a small number of cells, or millions or trillions of cells. All plants and animals are multicellular organisms.

The cells of a multicellular organism are not all the same. They have different shapes and sizes, and do different work in the organism. The cells are specialised, this means they do only some kinds of work. By themselves they cannot do everything that the organism needs to live. They need other cells to do other work. They live together, but cannot live alone.

Alongside bacteria and eukaryotes, there were archaea. These preferred (or could  in) extreme enviroments (like temperature or altitude. It was thought these were always unicellular but there have been multicellular archaea, and today mostly eukaryotes are focused on even when they prefer extreme environments.

One theory about these cells is that a prokaryotic cell was eaten by a larger cell, and this helped them to survive and reproduce as they evolved to have what we see today. An example of a prokaryotic cell (like germs on teeth or on surfaces) version of this is a group of cells living together on a biofilm for survival.

There is a 4th idea, because of advancements in biology: Cells carry genetic information in the form of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). This genetic material is passed on from parent to daughter cell.

Cells were discovered by Robert Hooke (1635–1703). He used a compound microscope with two lenses to look at the structure of cork, and to look at leaves and some insects. He did this from about 1660, and reported it in his book Micrographica in 1665. He named cells after the Latin word cella, meaning room. He did this because he thought cells looked like small rooms in a cathedral.

Many other naturalists and philosophers tried out the new instrument. The structure of plants was investigated by Nehemiah Grew (1641–1712) and Marcello Malpighi (1628–1694). Grew's major work was The anatomy of plants (1682). It is not clear who first saw animal cells, Malpighi, Jan Swammerdam (1637–1680) or Antonie van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723).p17

Leeuwenhoek's discoveries and drawings of 'little animalcules' opened up a whole new world for naturalists. Protozoa, and microorganisms generally were discovered, and the discoveries about them are still going on today. Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg's book Die Infusionsthierchen summarised what was known in 1838. Lorenz Oken (1779–1851) in 1805 wrote that infusoria (microscopic forms) were the basis of all life.

The idea that cells were the basis of the larger forms of life came in the 18th century. Finding out who did the work has taken some time:

The body cells of animals divide by simple mitotic cell division. Sexual reproduction is ancestral in eukaryotes, and in animals it is carried out by specialised sex cells. They are produced by a process called meiosis.

Prokaryotic cells reproduce using binary fission, where the cell simply splits in half. For both mitosis and binary fission the cell must replicate (copy) all its genetic information (DNA) so that each new cell will have a copy.

Calligraphy is the art of writing. The word is from the Greek language and means "beautiful writing". In the west, this was an interest in decorating words on the page. Calligraphy in the Western world was always considered a minor art.

East Asian calligraphy was a "high art" form before the Tang Dynasty. It continues to have a high status among the arts. It is practiced today by many people including school children.

Chanakya (IAST: ; c. 350-283 BCE) was an adviser and  Prime minister  to Chandragupta Maurya (c. 340-293 BCE). He played a key role in helping Chandragupta in the establishment of Maurya Empire.

Chanakya was born into a Brahmin family. He learned about politics, astrology, war, and medicine. He studied at Takshashila, a famous school in ancient India. He became very knowledgeable and later became a teacher. The word Kautilya means "Crookedness", and he was also known as Chanakya and Kautilya.

When Chanakya saw that India was not united and foreign rulers were invading, he wanted to change that. He met Chandragupta, a brave and intelligent boy. Chanakya trained him and helped him fight against the Nanda kings.

Together, they won, and Chandragupta became the first Maurya emperor around 321 BCE. Chanakya became his chief minister, which led to him helping Chandragupta govern the kingdom.

Chanakya [Kautilya] wrote a book called Arthashastra meaning "science of wealth" or "Manual of Politics". It is a book about how to run a government, manage money, fight wars, and keep peace. It is one of the oldest books on politics in the world. The Mauryan Empire was governed by the system noted in Arthashastra, which was similar to Machiavellian system.

Canada is a country in North America. Its land reaches from the Atlantic Ocean to the east to the Pacific Ocean to the west. The Arctic Ocean is to the north of Canada. Canada's land area is . It is the world's second-largest country by total area, behind Russia, but only the fourth-largest country by land area. It has the world's longest coastline.

Canada has ten provinces and three territories. Most parts of the country are cold or severely cold in the winter. Areas in the south of Canada are warm in the summer. Much of the land is covered in forest or tundra. Most of the people in Canada live in urban areas, near the southern border with the United States. This border is the longest between any two countries in the world. The national capital is Ottawa, and the nation's most populous city is Toronto. Other major Canadian cities include Montreal, Quebec; Vancouver, British Columbia; Calgary and Edmonton, Alberta; Quebec City, Quebec; Saskatoon, Saskatchewan; Winnipeg, Manitoba; and Hamilton, Ontario.

The name "Canada" comes from the Huron-Iroquois word "Kanata", meaning "village" or "settlement". In 1535, two Aboriginal youths told an explorer from France, named Jacques Cartier, about the route to Kanata. They were actually referring to the village named Stadacona, which is near present-day city of Québec.

Aboriginal people lived in the places (that are now Canada) for a long time. In 1537, the French started a colony. The British Empire soon followed. The two empires fought several wars. In the late 18th century, only British North America remained with what is more or less Canada today. The country was formed from several colonies with the British North America Act on July 1, 1867. Over time, more provinces and territories became part of Canada. In 1931, Canada achieved nearly total independence with the Statute of Westminster 1931, and became completely independent when the Canada Act 1982 removed the last remaining ties of legal dependence with the Parliament of the United Kingdom.

Canada is a federal parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy, with King Charles III as its head of state. The country is officially bilingual at the federal level. That means that citizens have the right to communicate with the government in two languages: English or French. Immigration to Canada has made it one of the world's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations. Its economy is the eleventh largest in the world, and relies mainly on natural resources and well-developed international trade networks. Canada's relationship with its neighbor and biggest trading partner, the U.S., has a big impact on its economy and culture.

Canada is a developed country and has the tenth highest nominal per capita income globally as well as the sixteenth highest ranking in the Human Development Index. It ranks among the highest in international measurements of government transparency, civil liberties, quality of life, economic freedom, and education. Canada is a Commonwealth realm member of the Commonwealth of Nations, a member of the Francophonie, and part of several major international and intergovernmental institutions or groupings including the United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the G7, the G20, the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation forum.

Canada is the second-largest country in the world by total area, after Russia. By land area alone, it is the fourth-largest country. Canada lies between the Atlantic Ocean, Pacific Ocean and Arctic Ocean. It has the longest coastline of any country. The country uses six main time zones.

Canada has ten provinces and three territories. It shares its southern and northwestern land border with the United States. Canada also shares a land boundary with Greenland on Hans Island, while the French islands of Saint Pierre and Miquelon lie near Newfoundland. Most large Canadian cities, including, Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver, are in the southern part of the country. The northern regions are much less populated because they are colder, more remote and harder to reach.

The geography of Canada is very different in each region. Canada has high alpine areas, mountains and valleys in the west, flat grasslands and prairies in the middle, and forests, hills and ancient shield rocks in the east. Canada also has some of the last largely untouched boreal forest in the world.

The Canadian Shield is a vast area of ancient Precambrian rock lying in an arc around Hudson Bay. It covers more than one third of Canada's land area. It is a unique land of lakes, bogs, swamps, trees and exposed rocks. In many places, it is dangerous and difficult to travel across the land because lakes, wetlands, forests and rocks block direct routes. The region also contains many mineral deposits. Canada has more lakes than any other country and is often said to contain about 60% of the world's lakes.

The Great Lakes and the Saint Lawrence River form an important water system in southeastern Canada. The Saint Lawrence Seaway connects the Great Lakes with the Atlantic Ocean and allows large ships to travel far inland. Canada's rivers and lakes provide drinking water, transport routes, fish and hydroelectricity.

Because Canada is very far north and much of its land has severe weather, most Canadians live in the southern parts, where the climate is much milder. In some cities, especially those far inland, the temperature becomes very cold during winter.

Canada has many kinds of climate because of its large size. Northern Canada has long, extremely cold winters and short summers. Southern areas generally have warmer summers and less severe winters, although inland cities can still become very cold. Warm, moist air systems moving in from the Pacific Ocean bring more rain than snow to much of the Pacific coast. Colder temperatures farther inland cause more precipitation to fall as snow. The Prairies and central Canada often have large differences between summer and winter temperatures. Parts of southern Canada can become quite hot in summer, with temperatures often rising above .

Climate affects where people live, how homes and roads are built, and how people travel and work. Most Canadians live in the southern part of the country, where the weather is milder and communities are closer to major roads, farms, industries and the United States. Snow, ice and freezing temperatures can make travel dangerous and increase the cost of heating and maintaining homes, roads and other buildings.

Canada's geography and climate also shape recreation and culture. Popular winter activities include ice hockey, skiing and snowboarding. During the warmer months, people take part in hiking, camping, swimming, fishing and other outdoor activities.

Indigenous people lived in what is now Canada for thousands of years before the first Europeans arrived. The indigenous groups that live in Canada are the First Nations, the Inuit, and the Métis. The Métis are people that come from both First Nations and European families. Together, these three groups are called "Indigenous", "Aboriginal", or "First Peoples". They used to be called "Indians" by the Europeans, but this is now considered rude.

Many people think the first people to live in Canada came from Siberia at least 14,000 years ago, using the Bering land bridge. The land bridge connected Asia and North America.

When European people first settled in Canada, the number of Indigenous people living in Canada was between 200,000 and two million.

The Vikings were the first Europeans to land in Canada, in what is now Newfoundland. The exploration was led by the Viking explorer Leif Erikson. They did not stay for a long time. In the early 16th century, Europeans started exploring Canada's eastern coast. The first of these explorers was John Cabot from England, in 1497, and later Jacques Cartier from France, in 1534. Alexander Mackenzie later reached the Pacific coast over land, where captains James Cook and George Vancouver went by sea. The Europeans also traded beaver furs to the First Nations.

Some parts of Canada were settled by France. Other parts of the country were settled by Great Britain. In 1605, Port-Royal was built in Acadia (today called Nova Scotia) by the French, led by Samuel de Champlain. In 1608, he settled in Quebec. The British took control of the French areas after a battle of the French and Indian War on the Plains of Abraham, near Quebec City, in 1759.

Thousands of people came north to Canada and settled in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, and Ontario. They were called United Empire Loyalists.

On July 1, 1867, Canada was united under a federal government. At first, Canada was only made up of the provinces Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia. Sir John A. Macdonald was the first prime minister. Manitoba, the Yukon territory, and the Northwest Territories became part of Canada in 1870. British Columbia joined in 1871, and Prince Edward Island in 1873.

There were two Red River Rebellions, in 1869-70 and 1885, both led by Louis Riel. He fought for more rights for the Métis people, a mix between French and First Nations. A railroad across the country, the Canadian Pacific Railway, finished in 1885, making it easier for Canadians to move to the west. Many Europeans came to the prairies, so Alberta and Saskatchewan became provinces in 1905.

Canadian soldiers fought in World War I for the British Empire. More Canadians died in this war than any other war. Canada became better known as a country after its success in capturing Vimy Ridge from the Germans in France in 1917. Women were given the right to vote by the end of the war, partly because of the help they gave making weapons while the men fought in Europe. In 1931, Canada became fully independent. The government of Canada made all the decisions about Canada.

Canadians also fought in World War II. The Dieppe Raid, in 1942, went very badly. Most soldiers were killed, wounded, or imprisoned. Canadians helped capture soldiers at Normandy in 1944. They also liberated the Netherlands from Germany.

In 1949, Newfoundland and Labrador became the 10th province of Canada. In 1956, Canadian Lester Pearson, who later became prime minister, helped end the Suez Crisis. Because of this, he won the Nobel Peace Prize. In 1965, Pearson helped change the design of Canada's flag. This design is known as the Maple Leaf today. Before that, the Red Ensign was Canada's flag. In 1982, Canada changed its constitution. The change introduced a new Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The main part of the Constitution is the 1867 Constitution Act.

Some French Canadians today wish to form their own country, separate from the rest of Canada. The province of Quebec held a referendum (vote) in 1980, but only about 40% wanted to separate. Another referendum was held in 1995, with almost 50% voting in favour of leaving Canada. Since then, fewer people in Quebec have wanted to leave Canada, but it is still important to Quebec politics.

Today, about 25% of Canadians speak French as their first language. Many people in Canada speak both French and English. Although most French Canadians live in the province of Quebec, there are French-speaking communities and people all across Canada. For example, 40% of the people in the province of New Brunswick and 20% of those in Manitoba have a strong French background, as some people do in Ontario, mainly along its border with Quebec.

In 1999, Nunavut was created as Canada's third territory, out of the eastern Northwest Territories, in an agreement with the Inuit people.

Canada is a federal state, a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy. This means that Canada has a monarch, but elected representatives make most political decisions. King Charles III is the King of Canada and the country's head of state. The King is represented in Canada by the governor general, who is appointed by the King on the advice of the prime minister. The governor general is expected to remain outside party politics and normally acts on the advice of the prime minister and other ministers. The current governor general is Louise Arbour.

The prime minister is the head of government. The current prime minister is Mark Carney, who was sworn in as Canada's 24th prime minister in March 2025. The prime minister chooses the ministers who form the Cabinet. The Cabinet manages the daily work of the federal government and must keep the support, or confidence, of the elected House of Commons. Each province has a premier who leads its provincial government. The territories also have premiers, although their governments receive their powers from the federal government rather than directly from the Constitution.

The Parliament of Canada makes federal laws. It has three parts: the King, the Senate and the House of Commons. Members of the House of Commons are elected by voters, while senators are appointed by the governor general on the advice of the prime minister. A bill normally becomes law after it is passed by the House of Commons and the Senate and receives royal approval. The federal and provincial governments have different areas of responsibility. For example, the federal government is responsible for matters such as national defence and criminal law, while provinces are responsible for areas such as education and most healthcare services.

Several political parties have members in the House of Commons, including the Liberal Party, the Conservative Party, the Bloc Québécois, the New Democratic Party and the Green Party. Some members sit as independents. Other smaller political parties are registered with Elections Canada, even when they do not have members in Parliament.

Canada is described as a "full democracy", with a tradition of liberalism, and an egalitarian, moderate political ideology, alongside a history of populist and demagogic politics. Since the 1960s, an emphasis on social justice has been a distinguishing element of Canada's political culture. Peace, order, and good government, alongside an Implied Bill of Rights, are founding principles of Canadian federalism.

The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms protects rights such as freedom of expression, freedom of religion, equality before the law and the right of Canadian citizens to vote. These rights can be limited by laws that governments can show are reasonable in a free and democratic society. Federal elections are managed by Elections Canada, an independent agency that does not work for any political party. Canada is generally rated highly for political rights and civil freedoms, although concerns have been raised about government openness, prison conditions, discrimination and some restrictions on religious clothing.

Canada uses laws and independent public bodies to help prevent corruption and hold governments responsible for their actions. The Auditor General of Canada examines federal programs and government spending and reports the findings to Parliament. Other rules cover access to government information, conflicts of interest, lobbying and reports of wrongdoing in the public service. In Transparency International's 2025 Corruption Perceptions Index, Canada received a score of 75 out of 100. This was the highest score in the Americas that year, but it also showed that concerns about public-sector corruption had not completely disappeared.

Below is a list of provinces and territories. They are listed by population.

Canada has large supplies of water, forests, fish, farmland, minerals, oil and natural gas. Its many rivers are used to produce hydroelectricity. Forests provide wood, paper and other products, while mines produce metals and minerals used in buildings, transport and modern technology. A 2014 mining-industry report described Canada as a leading exporter of zinc, uranium, gold, nickel, aluminum, steel and lead.

Natural resources are an important part of Canada's economy and support many jobs and communities. Canada exports energy, forest products, minerals and metals to countries around the world. In 2024, exports of mineral and metal products were worth about C$153 billion and made up about 21 per cent of Canada's merchandise exports. Resource development can also affect the land, water, climate and Indigenous communities, so governments and businesses are expected to follow environmental rules and consult affected communities.

Canada had an estimated population of about 41.8 million people on July 1, 2026. Although Canada is very large, most people live in cities and towns in the southern part of the country, especially near the border with the United States. In the 2021 Census, about 82.2 per cent of the population lived in population centres, while 17.8 per cent lived in rural areas.

Canada has people from many cultural, ethnic, religious and language groups. English and French are the country's official languages, and many Indigenous and immigrant languages are also spoken. In the 2021 Census, about 8.4 million people, or 23 per cent of the population, were or had been landed immigrants.

Family, friends, neighbours and community groups are important parts of social life in Canada, they can support well-being during hard experiences. Statistics Canada measures whether people have someone they can count on, feel close to friends and family, trust other people and feel that they belong to their local community. Canadians also support their communities by volunteering, donating money and helping relatives, friends and neighbours.

Canada has a universal healthcare system paid for mainly through taxes. Each province and territory runs its own public health insurance plan. These plans must cover medically necessary hospital and doctor services and must meet the rules of the Canada Health Act to receive full federal funding. Public insurance does not cover every service. Coverage for medicines, dental care, eye care, home care and other services may depend on the province, age, income or private insurance.

Life expectancy at birth in Canada was 81.7 years in 2023. Healthy life expectancy means the number of years a person may expect to live in reasonably good health, not only the total number of years lived. Canada's health-adjusted life expectancy at birth was 66.9 years in 2023, lower than it had been before the COVID-19 pandemic.

Canadian culture has been shaped by Indigenous peoples, French and British settlement, immigration and the country's different regions. Everyday life may include sports, outdoor activities, music, television, festivals, religious practices and community events. Culture is not the same everywhere: life in a large city may be different from life in a northern, coastal, rural or Indigenous community.

Quality of life in Canada is measured through more than income. Statistics Canada also studies health, safety, housing, the environment, life satisfaction, loneliness, trust, family and friend relationships, community belonging and confidence in institutions. Canada ranked 25th in the 2026 World Happiness Report, down from sixth place in 2013. The report compares people's own ratings of their lives and studies factors such as income, health, social support, freedom, generosity and trust. Findings on migration also show that immigrants often move closer to the average happiness level of the country where they settle. This means that a person's quality of life is shaped partly by the society around them.

Christianity is a Abrahamic monotheistic world religion which is based on the life and teachings of Jesus, his crucifixion and death, and his resurrection, and on his apostles, disciples, and followers.

Many Christian churches, branches, and denominations believe and teach that Jesus was the messiah (Christ) and the Son of God – the Logos incarnation – who was sent by God, his father, to preach and teach the Gospel (the Good News) to the world and his followers, was arrested and executed by crucifixion on Good Friday for the sins and wrongdoings of humanity, physically resurrected from the dead three days later on Easter Sunday for the salvation of humanity and went to heaven to God, his father, and is in his kingdom, sitting on his right hand.

Many Christian churches, branches, and denominations also believe and teach in his Second Coming, the belief that Jesus will one day return to Earth, to judge people, and in the Trinity which teaches that there are three distinct persons in One God (i.e. God the Father, God (i.e. Jesus) the Son, and the Holy Spirit). Many Christians also pray using the trinity.

Christianity is the world's largest and most widespread religion, and is followed by over 2.38 billion people worldwide, comprising around 28.8% of the entire world population. It's members and adherents known as Christians are estimated to make up a majority of the population in 157 countries, states, and territories worldwide. Christianity is culturally diverse in its Western Christian and Eastern Christian branches and churches, and also doctrinally diverse concerning justification and the nature of salvation and its attainment, ecclesiology, ordination, Christology (study of Christ), and Mariology (study of Mary, mother of Christ).

The four canonical gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John are found in the New Testament of the Bible, and describe the life, ministry, and teachings of Jesus, as preserved in early Christianity, with the Old Testament of the Bible serving as the gospel's respected background for the coming of the messiah Jesus and his teachings. The gospels Matthew and John were written by St. Matthew and St. John respectfully, both disciples of Jesus. Gospels Mark and Luke were written by Mark and Luke respectfully, who were disciples of St. Peter and St. Paul. Paul was a major early church theologian who was approved by the disciples of Jesus Peter, James, and John.

Christianity started as a minor religious sect of ancient Second Temple Judaism – with Hellenistic influences – founded in Judea around 30 AD, by Jesus and his followers, and developed and became a minor religion by the 2nd century AD, after Jesus's apostles, disciples, and followers spread the gospel and teachings of Jesus throughout the Roman Empire and later in areas outside the Roman Empire (such as in the  Sassanian Empire, Britain, Kingdom of Armenia, India, Ethiopia and other kingdoms and areas), and converted many people to Christianity, despite the severe persecution of Christians for their faith and belief in Jesus by the Romans and others.

Christianity became separated from the religion Judaism in the 2nd century AD and became it's own religion when many of the Gentiles who converted to Christianity refused to use or recognize any Jewish practices, beliefs, and customs. Christianity was first legalized in the Kingdom of Armenia. Although Christianity was illegal and strictly forbidden in the Roman Empire and in some other kingdoms such as India, the religion continued to grow and attract more followers from different areas – both inside and outside of the Roman Empire – despite many of the followers being severely persecuted by the Roman Empire.

The torture and killings of Christians continued in the Roman Empire until the 4th century AD. Even though the Roman Emperor Constantine I, together with his co-emperor Licinius I, legalized Christianity by issuing the Edict of Milan in 313 AD, and banned Christians (and others from persecuted groups) from being tortured and killed for their faith, and the Emperor Constantine himself converted to Christianity and followed Jesus, a lot of Christians in several provinces of the Eastern Roman Empire continued to be persecuted until around 325 AD or so, especially by Roman authorities and soldiers, despite the tortures and killings being illegal and strictly forbidden. When the tortures and killings of Christians ended altogether and the persecution stopped altogether in almost all areas of the Roman Empire around 325 AD, with Emperor Constantine making the penalty for the crime of torturing and killings of Christians (or anybody else from a previously persecuted group) much harsher and enforcing the law harder, stating that all groups of people deserve to live unmolested and unpersecuted in peace.

In the year, 325 AD, the First Council of Nicaea was convened in Nicaea and Christian bishops and priests from all over the Roman Empire came to meet and talk about the theology of Christianity. The priests and bishops wrote rules and theology of Christianity and the christology of Jesus that was agreed and decided on in the Nicene Creed and aldo adopted the Trinity (the idea of three distinct persons in One God) which was followed by mainstream Nicene Christianity. Many churches rejected the creed, however, and followed heresies like Gnosticism and Arianism.

Christianity was then consolidated in the Roman Empire and Emperor Theodosius I made Nicene Christianity the official state of religion of the Roman Empire in 381 AD, with the First Council of Constantinople. The Non-Nicene churches eventually dying out. Nestorianism and the Oriental Orthodox churches both split into different Christian denominations and churches due to differences in their own theology and Christology in the 5th century AD, after the Council of Ephesus and the Council of Chalcedon, while the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodoxy split in the Great Schism of 1054, with Eastern Orthodoxy being predominant in Eastern European and some Levantine countries and cultures and the Catholic Church being predominant in Western countries and cultures, while Protestantism split from the Catholic Church, during the Reformation Era in the 16th century, and split into numerous denominations, branches, and churches, while Restorationism split from Protestantism, when certain new sects, denominations, and churches with new beliefs and theology emerged, especially throughout the 19th and the 20th centuries such as the Mormon Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and the Jehovah's Witnesses, and believed that the original teachings, practices, and beliefs of Jesus and his apostles, disciples, and followers were lost and/or misinterpreted, and required a restoration, while non-denominational Christianity is a term used to refer to people, groups, and churches of Christianity that do not belong to any denomination and are therefore independent and unaffiliated with any Christian denomination.

During the early Middle Ages, Europe underwent a large Christianization process, with many cultures, tribes, and kingdoms being converted to Christianity. Christianity expanded worldwide due to missionary work, evangelism, colonization, immigration, and extensive trade, and split into numerous denominations, branches, and churches with their own theology, due to differences and reformations in theology and Christology.

Christianity, especially the Catholic Church, played a extremely prominent role in the development of Western civilization during the Middle Ages, and has heavily influenced Western art and culture.

Prominent denominations, branches, and churches of Christianity include Catholicism (around 1.2 billion followers), Protestantism (around 1.1 billion followers), Eastern Orthodoxy (around 230 million followers), non-denominational Christianity (around 80 million followers), Oriental Orthodoxy (around 67 million followers), Restorationism (around 52.3 million followers), and Nestorianism (around 398,400 to 443,000 followers).

The most basic part of Christianity is the belief in Jesus as the Son of God and Messiah (Christ). The title "Messiah" comes from the Hebrew word  (māšiáħ) meaning  one. The Greek translation Χριστός (Christos) is the source of the English word "Christ". Jesus is English for the Hebrew word Yeshua.

Christians believe that, as the Messiah, Jesus was  by God as ruler and savior of all people. Christians also believe that Jesus' coming was the  of prophecies of the Old Testament. The Christian belief of the Messiah is much different than the contemporary Jewish concept. The main Christian belief is that, through the death and resurrection of Jesus, sinful humans can be  to God. Through this, they believe they are given salvation and eternal life.

There have been many theological disagreements over the nature of Jesus over the first centuries of Christian history. But Christians generally believe that Jesus is God incarnate and "true God and true man." Jesus, having become fully human, suffered the pain and temptations of a  man, but he did not sin. As fully God, he defeated death and came back to life again. According to the Bible, "God raised him from the dead," he ascended to heaven, is "seated at the right hand of the Father" and will return again to fulfill the rest of Messianic prophecy such as the Resurrection of the Dead, the Last Judgment, and the final creation of the Kingdom of God.

The Gospels of Matthew and Luke say that Jesus was conceived by the Holy Spirit and born from the Virgin Mary. Only a little of Jesus' childhood is written in the canonical gospels, but  gospels were popular in antiquity. However, the time of Jesus' adulthood the week before his death is written much about in the gospels. Some of the Biblical writings of Jesus' ministry are: his baptism, miracles, preaching, teaching, and deeds.

Christians believe the resurrection of Jesus to be the main part of their faith (see 1 Corinthians 15) and the most important event in human history because it would show that Jesus has power over death and has the authority to give people eternal life.

Among Christian beliefs, the death and resurrection of Jesus are two main events of Christian doctrine and theology. From what the New Testament says, Jesus was crucified, died a  death, was buried in a tomb, and rose from the dead on the third day afterwards. Most Christians place his death on a Friday each year, which is the first day of his death. Saturday is the second day, and Sunday is the third day. The New Testament writes that after rising from the dead Jesus appeared many times before his Twelve Apostles and disciples.  Once He appeared before "more than five hundred brethren at once". This was before Jesus' Ascension to heaven. Jesus' death and resurrection are remembered by Christians in their worship services, and most commonly during Holy Week, which has Good Friday and Easter Sunday in the week. The date for Holy Week changes from year to year as it is partially based on the Jewish lunar calendar.

Protestantism teaches that eternal salvation is a gift that is given to a person by God's grace. It is sometimes called "unmerited favor." This would mean that Salvation is God bringing humans into a right relationship with God through faith in Jesus Christ. It is the belief that one can be saved (rescued) from sin and the eternal death of hell. Many Protestants believe in the "assurance of salvation"—that God can put confidence in a believer that he has truly received salvation from Jesus Christ.

Catholicism teaches that although in most cases someone must be baptized a Catholic to be saved, it is sometimes possible for people who have not fully joined the Catholic Church to be saved. Catholics normally believe in the importance of "faith working through love" and sacraments in receiving salvation. The Catholic Church teaches that good works and , such as  to commands, taking the sacraments, going to church, doing penance giving , saying prayers, and other things, are important in becoming holy, but strongly emphasize that salvation is through God's grace alone, and all we can do is receive it.

Different denominations and traditions of Christianity believe in forms divine grace. Roman Catholicism and Eastern Orthodoxy teach the complete importance of the free will to work together with grace. Reformed theology teaches the importance of grace by teaching that a person is completely incapable of self-redemption, but the grace of God overcomes even the unwilling heart. Arminianism believes in a  view, while Lutheran and most other Protestant denominations teach justification by grace through faith alone.

Christianity uses the Bible, a collection of many canonical books in two parts, the Old Testament and the New Testament. It is believed by Christians that they were written by people who were  by the Holy Spirit, and therefore it is most often believed to be the word of God. The Bible has been translated into over 600 languages. The translators are able to verify accuracy by using thousands of handwritten copies of the scriptures which are in the original languages of Hebrew Aramaic, and Greek.

Creeds (from Latin credo meaning "I believe") are direct doctrinal  or , usually of religious beliefs. They started as formulas used when someone was baptised. During the Christological controversies of the 4th and 5th centuries they became statements of faith.

Many Christians accept the use of creeds, and often use at least one of the creeds given above. A smaller number of Protestants, notably Restorationists, a movement formed in the wake of the Second Great Awakening in the 19th century of the 19th century United States, oppose the use of creeds.

The Bible mentions God the Father, God the Son, and the Holy Spirit, which are three persons of the one True God. This idea, called Trinity, was developed at the First Council of Nicaea, in 325, and formalized during several church meetings or councils. Currently, many Christian churches are trinitarian.  The Oriental Orthodox Churches agree with the ideas in the First Council of Nicaea, but they disagree with other councils.

Trinitarianism is the teaching that God is three different persons, or has three different relations, within One God; the Father, the Son (Jesus Christ), and the Holy Spirit. In the words of the Athanasian Creed, "the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God, and yet there are not three Gods but one God."

Trinitarianism is the group of Christians who believe in the doctrine of Trinity. Today, most Christian denominations and Churches believe this. Churches have different teachings about the trinitarian formula. Some say the Spirit comes only from the Father. Others say the Spirit comes both from the Father and the Son. This is known as filioque. Nontrinitarianism (also called Oneness) is the beliefs systems that reject the Trinity. Many different Nontrinitarian views, such as  or ,  in early Christianity but were refuted by the majority of Christians, leading to the  about Christology.

An example of a more recent movement that claims the title of Christian but rejects trinitarianism is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Latter-Day Saints started in the first half of the 19th century, in the United States. There are other smaller groups who also reject trinitarianism.

Christians  believe that human beings will receive judgement from God and are given either eternal life or eternal damnation. This includes the "Last Judgment" as well as the belief of a  particular to the soul after death.

There are also some differences among Christians in this belief. For example, in Roman Catholicism, those who die in a state of grace, go into purgatory, where they are cleansed before they can go into heaven.

Christians believe that at the second coming of Christ at the end of time, all who have died will be raised up from the dead for the Last Judgment, when Jesus will  the Kingdom of God. There is also the belief of Universal Reconciliation. That is the belief that all people will someday be saved, and that hell is not forever. Christians who believe in this view are known as Universalists.

Christians have different ways to talk about the purpose of Jesus' coming:

Worship is thought by most Christians to be a very important part of Christianity all through its history. Many Christian theologians have called humanity homo adorans, which means "worshiping ," and so the worship of God is at the very center of what it means to be human. This would mean that because God created all humanity, Christians should worship and give praise to God.

Most Christian worship has Scripture reading, talk about Scripture from a leader, singing, prayer together, and a small time for Church work. Christians may meet in special buildings, also called Churches, or outdoors, or at schools, or anywhere Christians feel they are needed.

The main worship service in Catholic Churches is the Mass and the main worship service in many Orthodox Churches is called the Divine Liturgy. In both of these Churches, along with the other parts of worship, the Eucharist or Communion is central. Here a priest by prayer asks God to change a small amount of bread and wine into what Catholics and Orthodox believe is Jesus's real body and blood, but without changing the  (appearance, taste, colour, etc.) of the bread and wine. Then the people each may receive a portion. Many Protestant churches have worship services similar to the Mass, some every week, others a few times a year. Some Protestants believe Jesus is really present at the Communion service, and some believe the bread and wine are symbols to help them remember what Jesus did

The Catholic Church has developed a short ceremony, Eucharistic Benediction, worshiping Jesus present in the Eucharist. They also may visit a Church building to pray in the presence of the Eucharist, Eucharistic Adoration.

The Orthodox and Catholic Churches spirituality place importance on the use of human senses such as sight and on the use of beautiful things. Catholic spirituality often involves the use of statues and other artistic representations, candles, incense, and other physical items as reminders or aids to prayer. The Orthodox Churches also use candles, incense, bells, and icons, but not statues. Orthodox and Catholic worship also makes use of movements, such as the Sign of the Cross, made by each person touching first the forehead, then chest, one shoulder, then the other shoulder. There is also bowing, kneeling, and prostration in Catholic and Orthodox worship.

In Catholic belief and practice, a sacrament is a  or often a rite which shows divine grace, blessing, or  for the Christian who receives it. Examples of sacraments are Baptism and the Mass."  The word is taken from the Latin word sacramentum, which was used to translate the Greek word for mystery.

The two most regularly used sacraments are Baptism and Eucharist (communion). Most Catholics use seven Sacraments: Baptism, the ritual immersion of a candidate to welcome them into the church; Confirmation, the sealing of the Covenant; the Eucharist, a ritual where consecrated bread (discs of unleavened, toasted bread) and wine representing Jesus' body and blood are consumed; Holy Orders,  (confession), Anointing of the Sick, and Marriage. Some Christian denominations prefer to call them . These are the Orders from Christ to all believers found in the New Testament.

Roman Catholics, Anglicans, Eastern Christians, and  Protestant groups center their worship around a liturgical calendar. Some events that are part of this calendar are the "holy days", such as  which honor an event in the life of Jesus or the saints, times of fasting such as Lent, and other events, such as . Christian groups that do not follow a liturgical tradition often keep some celebrations, such as Christmas, Easter,and Pentecost. A few churches do not use a liturgical calendar.

These are some symbols that some denominations or individual churches may use:

Christianity has had a large history from the time of Jesus and his apostles to the present time. Christianity began in the 1st century AD as a Jewish sect but quickly spread throughout the Greco-Roman world. Although it was originally persecuted under the Roman Empire, it later became the state religion. In the Middle Ages it spread into Northern Europe and Russia. During the Age of Exploration, Christianity expanded throughout the world, and is now the largest religion of the world.

The religion had schisms and theological disputes that had as result ten main branches or groupings: Catholicism, Eastern Orthodoxy, the Church of the East (Nestorianism), Oriental Orthodoxy (Miaphysitism), Lutheranism, the Reformed churches (Calvinism), Anglicanism, Anabaptism, Evangelicalism—these last five often grouped and labeled as Protestant—and Nontrinitarianism.

People who call themselves Christians may show or live their faith in different ways. They may also believe different things. Through history, the six main groups or "denominations" of Christianity have been:

Not all Christians use these titles. Some believe Christianity is bigger and includes others. Some believe Christianity is smaller and does not include all these churches.

Some of these groups could not agree on certain points about Christian teaching (called “doctrine”) or practice. The first split was in the 5th century after the Church Council of Ephesus. The council agreed Nestorianism was wrong. The Assyrian Church of the East did not agree and split from the rest. The argument was about the nature of Jesus. Should he be regarded as God and human in one combined nature, or in two separate natures? Most of the bishops, following the Pope (the Bishop of Rome), refused to stay in communion with any bishop who would not say "two separate natures". This was also discussed at the Council of Chalcedon, about 20 years later. The Christians who did not agree with the decision of the Council to excommunicate them, became the non-Chalcedonian Orthodox. The largest Non-Chalcedonian Churches are the Coptic Orthodox in Egypt, the Ethiopian Orthodox, the Armenian, and some Lebanese Orthodox Churches. In general, these churches are known as Oriental Orthodox Churches. Recent discussions between the Roman Catholic Pope John Paul II and the Coptic Orthodox Pope Shenouda III concluded that they believe many of the same things after all, even though the Coptic Church does not recognize the Pope of Rome as its leader.

The third split happened in the 11th century. It is called the Great Schism. It was mostly based on the creed being translated incorrectly from Greek into Latin. The disagreements were made worse because the two cultures often did not understand one another. Also, many Crusaders from Western Europe behaved badly. The Christians in Western Europe were led by the Bishop of Rome, known also as the Pope. They are called the Catholic Church. Most Christians in Eastern Europe, Russia, the Middle East and South Asia, and northeast Africa belong to Orthodox, Nestorian, and Miaphysite Christianity, led by the Bishops of other cities or areas.

In the 15th century, the invention of the printing press made it easier for more people to read and study the Bible. This led many thinkers over the years to return to biblical ideas and to break away from the Catholic Church. They started the Protestant Reformation. The most important Protestant leaders were Jan Hus, Martin Luther, and John Calvin. Later some of these groups disagreed amongst themselves so that these denominations split again into smaller groups. The largest Protestant denominations today are within Evangelical, Lutheran, and Reformed Christianity. In England, a similar protest against the Pope, first political and later religious, led to the Church of England which has bishops and officially calls itself Reformed Catholic but is often referred to as Protestant. The Anglican communion of churches includes several churches called "Episcopal" or "Episcopalian" because they have bishops. Some Anglican Churches have a style of worship that is closer to the Protestant services, others worship more like Catholics, but none of them accept the Pope, or are accepted by him. The Anabaptists also arose from disagreements with Lutheran and Reformed Protestants during what is often called the Radical Reformation. The Evangelical churches arose in reaction to what they views as needs for reform within mainstream Protestantism. This can be seen in the rise of non-conformist movements against the Anglican church in Britain and during revivalist movements, prominently in the several Great Awakenings in Britain and North America. Denominations that arose or surged as a result of these Evangelical reform, renewal, and revival movements include Quakers, Baptists, Moravians, Methodists, the Restoration (Stone-Campbell) movement, Adventists, the Holiness movement, Pentecostals, the Fundamentalist movement, the Charismatic movement, Messianic Judaism, among others including many independent and non-denominational churches. In general, some Protestant denominations, especially within Anabaptism and Evangelicalism, differ from the Catholic, Orthodox, Nestorian, and Miaphysite churches in having given up some of the traditional sacraments, having no ordained priesthood, and not having the same fondness for Mary, the mother of Jesus, that the Catholic and Eastern churches have.

With an estimated number of Christians being somewhere around 2.2 billion, split into around 34,000 different denominations, Christianity is the world's largest religion. The Christian share of the world's population has been around 33% for the last hundred years. This has caused Christianity to spread throughout the world, mainly in Europe and North America. It is still the main religion of Europe, the Americas, the Philippines, and Southern Africa. However it is becoming smaller in some areas, some of them are; Oceania (Australia and New Zealand), Northern Europe (with Great Britain, Scandinavia and other places), France, Germany, the Canadian provinces of Ontario, British Columbia, and Quebec, the Western and Northern parts of the United States, and parts of Asia ( the Middle East, South Korea, Taiwan and Macau).

In most countries in the developed world, the number of people going to church who claim to be Christians has been dropping over the last few decades. Some believe that this is only because many no longer use regular  in places, for example, churches, while others believe it is because people may be thinking that religion is no longer important.

Most churches have for a long time showed that they want to be tolerant with other belief systems, and in the 20th century Christian ecumenism (the uniting of Christians from different backgrounds), advanced in two ways. One way was more cooperation between groups, such as the Edinburgh Missionary Conference of Protestants in 1910, the Justice, Peace and Creation Commission of the World Council of Churches started in 1948 by Protestant and Orthodox churches, and similar national councils, for example the National Council of Churches in Australia with Roman Catholics.

The other way was creating  for different churches to join together. Congregationalist, Methodist, and Presbyterian churches joined together in 1925 to form the United Church of Canada, and in 1977 to form the Uniting Church in Australia. The Church of South India was formed in 1947 by the union of Anglican, Methodist, Congregationalist, Presbyterian, and Reformed churches. And other such formations have been done by different Christian groups throughout the years.

Cereal usually refers to a type of grass that is grown to be eaten. Some, such as wheat, are mostly used to feed people. Some are fed to cattle, and lesser amounts are used for other purposes.

Breakfast cereal is a common breakfast meal in the United States. It is made of grain, usually eaten with milk, and often sweetened with sugar, syrup, or fruit.

The word "cereal" comes from 'Ceres', the name of the Roman goddess of harvest and agriculture.  Grains are called corn in the United Kingdom and Ireland, but in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand corn means maize.

In the 19th century, Americans typically ate meat for breakfast, not grains or fiber. But after that, people who were interested in eating more healthy foods began a push for healthy breakfasts.

In 1863, Granula became the first breakfast cereal. The name Granula comes from granulates, formed of grain. It included heavy nuggets made from bran, the outer husk of a grain that is taken out when making flour. The cereal had to be soaked overnight before being eaten. Simply pouring milk over it was not enough to make it eatable.

The cereals eaten today grew out of a health campaign that began in the 1860s. Thin baked dough served to patients in hospitals inspired two men, C.W. Post and W. K. Kellogg. These two men started their own companies, named them after themselves.

A continent is a large area of the land on Earth that is joined. There are no strict rules for what land is considered a continent, but in general the Earth is known to have seven continents; these being, Africa, Antarctica, Asia, Europe, North America, South America and Oceania or Australia

The most populous continent by population is Asia, followed by Africa. The third most populous continent is Europe. The fourth most populous is North America, and then South America. In sub-Saharan Africa, the largest age group are denarians (in their teens). In north Africa, the largest age group are vicenarian (in their twenties). In Europe, most people are tricenarian (in their thirties) or quadragenarian (in their forties).

Geologists use the term continent to mean continental crust, a platform of metamorphic and igneous rock, largely of granitic composition. Continental crust is less dense and much thicker than oceanic crust, which is why it "floats" higher than oceanic crust on the underlying mantle. This explains why the continents form high platforms surrounded by deep ocean basins.

Some sources say that Australia is one of the seven continents. Others say that Australia is part of a larger continent, such as Australasia, or Oceania. Oceania is a region which includes Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific Islands. Australasia includes at least all countries on the Australian continental plate. This includes the islands of New Guinea, Tasmania, New Zealand and a number of smaller islands. It is on the south-eastern side of the Wallace Line, with distinct differences in its biology from the Asian side of the line.

Zealandia is an almost entirely submerged land mass, and 93% of it still remains under water. Zealandia may have broken off the Australian plate between 85 and 130 million years ago.

North America and South America together are often described as one continent, "the Americas", or simply "America". This has the advantage of including Central America and the Caribbean islands. Otherwise, Central America is counted as part of North America.

Eurasia is not really an alternative, rather it is a recognition that the landmasses of Europe and Asia are continuous, and some of its largest countries are in both regions. Russia extends from eastern Europe to the far east of Asia without a break. The Ural Mountains, which run roughly north–south, are the traditional dividing-line between Europe and Asia. For many purposes it is convenient to consider the great landmass as a single continent, Eurasia.

When British people talk about "the Continent" (or "Continental" things) they mean the European mainland. This meaning is not used as much as it used to be, but is still seen in phrases like "Continental breakfast" (rolls with cheese, jam etc. as distinct from an "English breakfast" which is a cooked breakfast).

Continents not only move but also sometimes move against each other. The Indian subcontinent has been colliding with the Eurasian continent for a while now. As these continents push against each other, they buckle and bend. Because of this, the Himalaya Mountains, with Mount Everest, are still being built up today.

Antarctica is Earth's fifth largest continent. Antarctica, the coldest place on Earth, covers Earth's South Pole. It has a surface area of ~13.6 –14 million km2: this is about 1.4 times the size of Europe, The continent only has two seasons, a brief summer and a long winter. Antarctica is a cold desert. It does not rain or snow much there. Ever since its discovery in 1812, Antarctica was a great challenge for explorers. Despite being nearly completely covered by a thick layer of ice, Antarctica has a range of aquatic and terrestrial environments.

A craton is an old and stable part of the continental lithosphere. It is the Earth's two topmost layers, the crust and the uppermost mantle.

There are various hypotheses of how cratons have been formed.. Continents may have been formed by giant meteorite impacts in the first billion years of Earth's existence. The question is not yet settled. What is clear is that the cratons are very old, and are the basis for the continents we see today.

A comet is a ball of mostly ice that moves around in outer space. Comets are often described as "dirty snowballs". They are very different from asteroids.

The orbital inclinations of comets are usually high and not near the ecliptic where most solar system objects are found. Most of them are long-period comets and come from the Kuiper belt. That is very far away from the Sun, but some of them also come near enough to Earth for us to see at .

They have long "tails", because the Sun melts the ice. A comet's tail does not trail behind it, but points directly away from the Sun, because it is blown by the solar wind.

The hard centre of the comet is the nucleus. It is one of the blackest things (lowest albedo) in the solar system. When light shone on the nucleus of Halley's Comet, the comet reflected only 4% of the light back to us.

Periodic comets visit again and again. Non-periodic or single-apparition comets visit only once.

Comets sometimes break up, as Comet Biela did in the 19th century.  Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 broke up, and the pieces hit Jupiter in 1994. Some comets orbit (go around) together in groups. Astronomers think these comets are broken pieces that used to be one object.

For thousands of years, people feared comets. They did not know what they were, or where they came from. Some thought that they were fireballs sent from demons or gods to destroy the earth. They said that each time a comet appeared, it would bring bad luck with it. Whenever a comet appeared, a king would die. For example, the Bayeux Tapestry shows the return of Halley's Comet and the death of a king. Comets were also known to end wars and thought to bring famine. During the Renaissance, astronomers started to look at comets with less superstition and to base their science on observations. Tycho Brahe reasoned that comets did not come from the earth, and his measurements and calculations showed that comets must be six times farther than the earth is from the moon.

Edmond Halley reasoned that some comets are periodic, that is, they appear again after a certain number of years, and again and again. This led to the first prediction of a comet's return, Halley's Comet, named after him.

Isaac Newton also studied comets. He realised that comets make U-turns around the sun. He asked his friend Edmond Halley to publish this in his book Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica. Before Newton said this, people believed that comets go in to the sun, then another comes out from behind the sun.

In later years, some astronomers thought comets were spit out by planets, especially Jupiter.

All this new information and research gave people confidence, but some still thought that comets were messengers from the gods. One 18th century vision said that comets were the places that hell was, where souls would ride, being burned up by the heat of the sun and frozen by the cold of space.

In modern times, space probes have visited comets to learn more about them.

The constitution of a country (or a state) is a special type of law document that tells how its government is supposed to work. Every country has its own constitution, it tells how the country's leaders are to be chosen and how long they get to stay in office, how new laws are made and old laws are to be changed or removed based on law, what kind of people are allowed to vote and what other rights they are guaranteed, and how the constitution can be changed.

Limits are put on the Government in how much power they have within the Constitution (see Rule of Law ). On the other hand, countries with repressive or corrupt governments frequently do not stick to their constitutions, or have bad constitutions without giving freedom to citizens and others. This can be known as dictatorship or simply "bending the rules". A Constitution is often a way of uniting within a Federation.

The UK's constitution is not written in one single  like many other countries' are. In fact, the UK's constitution is not completely written down at all. Some of it can be found in writing, starting with Magna Carta of 1215 and the Bill of Rights Act 1689 and including more modern Acts of Parliament. Other parts of it are considered common law and are made up of the decisions of judges over many hundreds of years in a system called legal or judicial precedence. Because of this, some people say that the United Kingdom has a de facto or "unwritten" constitution.

The United States in 1787 began a trend in the writing of constitutions. The United States Constitution is also the shortest that people are still using, and it has been changed (amended) many times over the years. It was made after the colonists won their independence from Britain. At first they had the Articles of Confederation but the Articles were replaced with today's Constitution.

The Indian constitution of 1950 is the longest ever written constitution in the world. It originally consisted of 395 Articles arranged under 22 Parts and 8 Schedules. As of 2021, it has 470 Articles, 12 schedules, and 25 Parts with 5 appendices and 98 amendments.

Cuba is an island country in the Caribbean Sea. The country is made up of the big island of Cuba, the Isla de la Juventud island (Isle of Youth), and many smaller islands. Havana is the capital city of Cuba. It is the largest city. The second largest city is Santiago de Cuba. In Spanish, the capital is called "La Habana". Cuba is near the United States, Mexico, Haiti, Jamaica and the Bahamas. People from Cuba are called Cubans (cubanos in Spanish). The official language is Spanish. It is the largest island of the West Indies and the second most populous island (after Hispaniola) of the West Indies. Cuba is warm all year.

In 1492, Christopher Columbus landed on the island of Cuba. He claimed it for the Kingdom of Spain. Cuba became a Spanish colony until the Spanish–American War of 1898. In 1812 Jose Aponte led the First Cuban rebellion against the Spanish monarchy. After the Spanish-American war, it was a protectorate of the United States. It gained independence in 1902.

In 1959, guerrilla fighters led by Fidel Castro and Che Guevara overthrew Cuba's dictator, Fulgencio Batista, in what became the Cuban Revolution. The United States had supported Castro in 1958 by stopping the sale of weapons to the Batista government, At first, relations were friendly between Castro and the United States government under President Dwight D. Eisenhower. However, Castro began making relations with the Soviet Union. Castro tried to take over American businesses and land owned by Americans without paying the owners; the United States did not like this. In 1961 Castro officially announced that his government was communist. The new United States President, John F. Kennedy, ordered an attack to invade Cuba. The plan was to take control of the country and overthrow its communist government. The attack failed. The Communist Party of Cuba was created in 1965 and has ruled the island ever since. Today, Cuba is the only communist state outside of Asia, in the Caribbean, and in the western hemisphere.

Cuba is famous for many types of music, especially dance music such as the Salsa_music and undefined. Because Cubans have ancestors from Spain, Africa, South America and North America, Cuban music is special and different.

Reading is very popular in Cuba. Many people especially enjoy reading books or things that come from outside the country, even though the government does not approve of this. They also love music and sports. Cuban music is very lively. This is because a lot of it comes from African and Spanish rhythms. Baseball, basketball, and athletics events are loved by many Cuban people. The Chiefs football-team took at one Football-World-Cup part. In 1938, they reached the quarter-final and lost against Sweden 0:8.

Before Cuba was conquered by the Spaniards, three tribes lived on the island. They were the Taínos, the Ciboneys, and the Guanajatabeyes. The Taínos were the largest and most common of the three tribes. They farmed crops such as beans, corn, squash, and yams. The Taínos also slept in hammocks, which the Spaniards would introduce to the rest of the world. Then, in 1492, Christopher Columbus arrived in Cuba on his first trip to the Americas. Three years later, he claimed the islands for the Spanish. The Spanish began to rule Cuba afterwards. The Spanish brought thousands of slaves from Africa to Cuba to work for them. Most of the native Cubans died because of the new diseases brought by the Spanish and Africans. The Spanish also treated the native Cubans very cruelly and killed many of them.

The Spanish ruled for many years. Cuba became the most important producer of sugar. In the early 1800s, Cubans rebelled against the Spanish rulers, but failed until 1898, when the United States went to war with the Spanish and defeated them. This was the Spanish–American War. Cuba became American for four years afterwards, before it became an independent republic in 1902 while  Theodore Roosevelt was the President of the United States. Even though Cuba was independent, the Americans still controlled the island by a law called the Platt Amendment. In 1933 the Cubans stopped the Platt Amendment, but the Americans still had a big say in Cuban politics. Americans owned most of Cuba’s businesses. The Americans supported the leader Fulgencio Batista, who was seen by many Cubans as corrupt.

As well as controlling Cuban politics, the United States also had a lot of control over the Cuban economy. At the time, Cuba was a monoculture economy. They produced coffee, tobacco, and rice, but mostly they produced sugar. So Cuba was known by other countries as the "sugar bowl of the world." The United States bought sugar from the Republic of Cuba at a price higher than everyone else in the world so that Cuba favoured the United States and its industries. Cuba depended on the United States and their investments. Cuba was not industrialized and needed the money for goods and oil. Cuba also needed US money for gas, electricity, communications, railways, and banks. Although Cuban workers had better conditions than other countries in Latin America, they still faced inequality, lack of infrastructure, high illiteracy rates, and a lack of full-time work (the sugar industry was not the same all year round).

In 1959, Fidel Castro led a revolution against Fulgencio Batista. Castro took power in Cuba with Che Guevara from Argentina, his brother Raul, and others who fought against Batista. Castro made many changes to Cuba. He ended American ownership of Cuban businesses. This made Castro unpopular in America and the United States banned all contact with Cuba. Many Cubans went to America because of this. In 1961, the Americans helped some of these Cubans to attack Cuba and try to remove Castro, but they failed. Castro then asked the Soviet Union to help defend them from the Americans, which they did. The Soviet Union put nuclear weapons in Cuba and aimed them at the United States. American President Kennedy demanded that they be removed or a new war would begin. This was known as the Cuban Missile Crisis. The Soviet Union removed the missiles when the United States agreed to not continue attacking Cuba and to remove missiles from Turkey.

Cuba became a communist-led country like the Soviet Union after this. The Soviet Union bought most of Cuba’s sugar at high prices. Cuba spent this money on health, education and the army. This made Cuba’s schools and hospitals some of the best in the world. The army fought in Africa to support black Africans against the white South African army. Cuba also supported groups in South America fighting against the dictators of those countries.

However, the Cuban government began to control most of life in Cuba under the communist system. Disagreeing with the Cuban government and Fidel Castro in public was not allowed. Some Cubans did not like this and tried to leave Cuba. Most Cubans who left went to the United States. Some Cubans who did not like the government and stayed were put in jail. Many groups from around the world protested against Cuba because of this, and demanded that Fidel Castro give up power.

In 1991, the Soviet Union collapsed. This meant that Cuba, which had sold most of its products to the Soviet Union, had no money coming into the country. The Americans made the restrictions against contact with Cuba tighter. America said the restrictions on contact would continue unless Fidel Castro gave up power. Cuba became very poor in the 1990s. This became known in Cuba as “The Special Period”. Because of the disaster, Cuba changed to allow less control by the government, more discussion amongst the people, and private shops and businesses. Cuba also tried to get tourists to visit the island.

In the 2000s, tourism to Cuba began to make money for the island again. Though Fidel Castro had remained in power, he had passed all duties to his brother Raul after an illness. Fidel Castro was one of the longest-serving heads of state. In 2018, Miguel Díaz-Canel became the official President of Cuba.

In April 2015, historic talks took place with US president Barack Obama and Cuban first secretary Raúl Castro about improving relations between the two nations.

The trade embargo issued by President Kennedy in the 1960s was considerably loosened under Obama's administration. US citizens can now travel directly to Cuba at certain times of the year. Before, Americans had to go via Mexico if they wanted to go to Cuba. Americans are still not allowed to purchase or smoke Cuban cigars. The cigars are smuggled over the US-Canadian border since they are legal in Canada.

For military service, men from the age of 17 to 28 years old must go into the army for two years. It is optional for women.

In July 2021, there were demonstrations against the government.

The country is divided into 15 provinces and one special municipality (Isla de la Juventud). The provinces are divided into municipalities.

The population of Cuba is close to 13 million. The people of Cuba come from three different groups. The largest group is the descendants of the Spanish settlers who came to Cuba. The smallest group is the descendants of the black African slaves who were brought in to do the work and birth children (in the barracoon) as New World slaves who could be legally sold into life time bondage in the United States. The middle-sized group is a mix of African and Spanish. The government succeeded in seeing that the three different groups were treated the same. According to a DNA Caribbean Studies Institute, the racial-makeup of the population of Cuba is:

Christianity is the most widespread religion in Cuba, with Catholicism being its largest denomination, which is practiced by more than 53% of the Cuban population. Protestantism is practiced by less than 3% of the Cuban population. A large part of the Cuban population is either non-religious or practices folk religions such as Santeria. Hinduism is practiced by 0.2% of the population and Islam is practiced by less than 0.1% of the population.

Cuba is a developing country, and, by economic measures, is a very poor country. In some aspects however, like education, health care and life expectancy it ranks much better than most countries in Latin America. Its infant death rate is lower than some developed countries. The average life expectancy is 78 years, about the same as in the United States.

All the children are required to go to school from six to twelve years old, and nearly everybody is able to read and write at least. There is free education at every level. Because of this, Cuba has a 99.8% literacy rate.

In 2006, the World Food Programme certified Cuba to be the only country in this region without undernourished children. In the same year, the United Nations said that Cuba was the only nation in the world that met the World Wide Fund for Nature's definition of sustainable development.

Cuba is the largest island in the West Indies. It has many resources. Only about one-fourth of the land is mountains or hills. Much of the land is gentle hills or plains which are good for farming or raising cattle. Cuba has fertile soil and a mostly warm and humid climate that makes it a great place for growing crops.

Sugar is the most important crop of Cuba, which is made from sugar cane. Sugar cane is the largest cash crop grown in Cuba, and it brings in most of the money. After that, the second is tobacco. Tobacco is made into cigars by hand. A hand-made cigar is considered by many people to be the finest in the world. Other important crops are rice, coffee, and fruit. Cuba also has many minerals. Cobalt, nickel, iron, copper, and manganese are all on the island. Salt, petroleum, and natural gas are there too. The coast of Cuba has many bays and a few good harbors. Havana, which is the capital, is also a port. Other harbors have port cities. Nuevitas is a port city on the north coast. Cienfuegos, Guantánamo, and Santiago de Cuba are some of the port cities on the south coast.

Cuba has a semi-tropical climate. That means that the cool ocean winds keep it from becoming hot, despite it being in the tropical zone. Cuba has a wet season and a dry season. The dry season is from November to April, and the wet season is from May to October. August to October is also the hurricane season in the Atlantic Ocean. Because of this, most of Cuba's port cities can be flooded along the coast.

Cuba has a planned economy. That means the government decides what things should be made and what services should be provided. In recent years, the government has allowed people to sell fruits and vegetables or things they have made. People are allowed to build houses for themselves if they have money. Most people work for the government. People who work for the government do not get paid much money. Salaries in Cuba are the lowest in the world, but some things are free that people in other countries have to pay for. The government owns most of the houses. People do not have to pay rent to live in them. School is free. Health care is free. People do not have to pay to go to a doctor or hospital.

Relatives living in other countries often send some money to their parents, brothers or sisters still living in Cuba. Money from other countries is very valuable in Cuba.

Death is the end of a life in an organism. All biological and living activity of the living thing stops, including the mind and the senses. The usual signal for death in humans and many other animals is that the heart stops beating and cannot be restarted. This can be caused by many things. All living things have a limited lifespan, and all living things eventually die.

Living things that have died are normally described as being dead. Death of humans is often investigated for the cause, in case of crime (such as murder), accident or disease that may continue to kill other humans. About 150,000 people die every day around the world. About two thirds of these people die because of age. In addition to the physical body, some believe humans also have a soul and believe that the soul can continue without a body (afterlife), move into another body (reincarnation), or cease to exist (annihilationism). Religions have different beliefs about this issue. Many cultures have their own customs and rituals to respect the dead.

When people talk about things or events that lead to the death of a plant or animal, those things or events are usually described as being deadly, or fatal. In the case of diseases, they are described as terminal. Humans are no different from any other lifeform. Our bodies have an ability for self-repair, but that ability is limited. Finding the cause of death is a medical speciality called pathology. In medicine, death is when the heart stops beating for more than several minutes. There are special times in which people recover even though the heart has stopped for 30 minutes, such as near-drowning in very cold water. If machines are used to help the heart and lungs work, then the moment of death is more difficult to know.

Death is commonly a sad or unpleasant thing to people. It can make people think about their own death. People might miss or be sad for the person who has died. They might also be sad for the family and friends of the person who has died.

In any society, human death is surrounded by ritual - a wake or funeral is normal.  In some places it was common to eat the dead in a form of ritual cannibalism.  But this is no longer common, in part because disease like kuru can be passed this way. Human dead bodies are taboo in most societies and must be handled in special ways - for a combination of religious and hygiene reasons.  A human dead body must always be reported in law, to be sure it is disposed of properly. In 2021 the leading cause of death in the United States was heart disease followed by cancer and then COVID-19.

Finding the cause of any human death and stopping a similar death from happening to someone else are the main reasons people look into human morbidity or let dead bodies be cut open and looked at in an autopsy.  Some religions do not allow autopsies, because they feel the body is holy. Autopsies are usually required by the state if someone dies and people do not know why. The autopsy helps find out if someone killed the person on purpose, tried to hurt them, or if they died from a sickness.

To prepare for their own death, humans can write a last will and testament to be clear about who gets their property and possessions.  A person will sometimes also volunteer to be an organ donor. This might mean giving the whole body to medical research.  It can also save the lives of others by making organ transplants possible.

For a long time, many people have been afraid of death and a lot of people have wondered about what may happen to people after they die.  This is one of the largest questions of philosophy and religion. Many people believe there is some form of afterlife.

Ancient rulers sometimes did insist not only that their own bodies, and much property, but even their servants and relatives be destroyed at their funeral.

Christianity has a special focus on death because of the state killing of Jesus Christ by the Romans.  In Islam this is thought to demonstrate the injustice of human systems of dealing out death, and the ability of the best people to overcome it and even forgive it.  In Christianity itself it is thought to prove that Jesus himself was really God and so could lose his body and still have the power of resurrection. In Buddhism reincarnation is believed to occur. Reincarnation is an idea taken from Hinduism.

Confucianism advises respect for parents and forms of ancestor worship to respect both dead and living ancestors.

Every ethical tradition including the medical view of the body has some ritual surrounding death.  Often these excuse behaviours that might be hated if they did not have the ritual.  For instance, one may say that organ transplant is like cannibalism.

Very much of what happens at a human death is ritual.  People who wish theirs to be dealt with a certain way, and who wish a particular treatment like cremation of their body, should decide in advance and set up the necessary payments and agreements.  This makes it much easier for their family after they die, since there is no longer the ability to clearly communicate the wish.

For the same reason, saying goodbye is important.  Most of the  of death seems to come for loved ones who "did not have a chance to say goodbye".

Maybe it is to relieve this stress that rituals are created, and to bring together those that knew someone so that the personal experience a person can no longer communicate for themselves, can be exchanged by others.

Some ritual, such as seances, claim to allow people to speak to the dead. This is not claimed to be very reliable, both by scientists and even by those who do them very often.

Aside from wills, goodbyes, organ donations and funerals, there is important personal experience to decide to pass on, or not, when someone knows they may soon die.  Palliative care focuses on basic decisions people make when they are very close to the end of their lives, and it ensures someone is always available to talk to them.  It is a replacement for heroic medical intervention that may keep them physically alive but with no quality of life.  Human psychology must prepare for death if it is anything other than a quick surprise:

Elizabeth Kubler-Ross wrote that there were several stages in dying, of which denial was the first, and acceptance was the last.  Recording one's life is often something people with acceptance will do to leave a memoir or a full autobiography:

Because events leave living memory, and may only be part of oral tradition, there are projects to record everything that people remember about World War I and the Shoah.  The first of these was to record everything remembered about the U.S. Civil War.  This discipline has changed history since we have so many more first person accounts of the times, and made social history much more standard.

There are other terms for death. Examples are, "to pass away", "to go to a better place", "to buy the farm" (generally used in the military), "to leave the earth", "big sleep", and "to kick the bucket". the term gone may also be a term for describing death. for example: if a person has died, they are also said to be gone, as in gone to a better place or no longer here.

Death is often considered as inevitable, and as "the beginning of a new life" extending beyond human existence.

Old age and illness are not the only things that can end a person's life. People make other people die. This is called killing or murder. Three famous murders are John Wilkes Booth killing Abraham Lincoln, James Earl Ray killing Martin Luther King Jr. and Lee Harvey Oswald killing the President of the United States John F. Kennedy. People can also die by accidents resulting in terminal trauma, hypothermia, starvation, suicide and dehydration.

The Cold War (1947-1991) was the fighting between the United States and its allies and the Soviet Union and its allies between the end of World War II and the fall of the Soviet Union. It is called the "Cold" War because the Americans and the Soviets never actually fought each other directly.

Instead, they influenced or intervened in conflicts known as proxy wars in which powerful countries fight a foreign war but do not send their own troops. Both sides built large militaries with many new weapons and technology, and they spied on and threatened each other.

Most of the countries on one side were allied by NATO, whose most powerful country was the United States, while most of the countries on the other side were allied by the Warsaw Pact, whose most powerful country was the Soviet Union.

The Western Bloc was the name of the capitalist countries led by the United States. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) is an alliance that was created in 1949 and included the United States, the United Kingdom, France, West Germany, Canada, Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark, Greece, and Turkey. Other countries allied with the Western Bloc included Israel, Brazil, South Korea, Kenya (1960-1991), Bangladesh (1964-1968), Pakistan, North Yemen, Malaysia, Saudi Arabia, Philippines, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand.

The Eastern Bloc was the group of communist countries led by the Soviet Union. The Warsaw Pact was an alliance that was created in 1955 and included the Soviet Union, Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Romania. Other countries allied with the Eastern Bloc included Angola (1975–1991), Cuba, Afghanistan, Bolivia, Cambodia (1977–1979), South Yemen, Tunisia, Nepal, Libya (1974–1991), Mongolia, Jamaica, North Korea, Vietnam, China, and Laos (1975–1991).

In February 1917, Tsar Nicholas II of the Russian Empire was overthrown because people were unhappy with their living conditions similar to serfdom and especially the Russian defeat during World War I. The new government in Russia was a democratic socialist government. Unfortunately, it was ineffective, and people were still unhappy. In November 1917, a communist group called the Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, overthrew the new government and were supported by groups of workers called soviets. The Bolsheviks created a new communist government, called the Russian Soviet Federation Socialist Republic, also called simply Soviet Russia or the Russian SFSR.

However, not everyone supported the communists. Many countries that had been part of the Russian Empire left, such as Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. The Russian Civil War began, with the Red Army of communist Russians fighting the White Army of anti-communist Russians. The White Army was not very united or organized. The allies of World War I, such as the United States, the United Kingdom, and France, invaded Russia to support the White Army and stop the Red Army. The Red Army eventually won the war in 1922 and established the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, also called the Soviet Union, along with the newly-formed Ukrainian, Armenian, Azerbaijan, and Georgian Soviet Socialist Republics.

The start of the Cold War in 1947 was caused by a belief that all governments would become either communist or capitalist. The Western Allies feared that the Soviet Union would spread communism to the rest of Europe and were very concerned that Soviet agents had found out how to make nuclear weapons after World War II.

Both nations had opposed Nazi Germany although the United States worked with German scientists, and the Soviet Union had chosen not to fight Germany by the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, and the two occupied Poland in 1939. However, Germany turned against the Soviet Union in June 1941 and invaded it during Operation Barbarossa.

After World War II, Germany was left in ruins. The victorious Allies occupied it and split it into four parts. In the western half of Germany, one part was given to the United States, one to the United Kingdom, and one to France. The eastern half of Germany was occupied by the Soviets, however, the city of Berlin was split among the four countries even though it was entirely within the eastern half.

The Federal Republic of Germany (Bundesrepublik Deutschland or BRD), or West Germany, was recognized by the Western Allies in June 1949 and was a capitalist democracy. West Berlin was considered part of the country. The Soviets named their section of Germany the German Democratic Republic (Deutsche Demokratische Republik or DDR), or East Germany, later in 1949 and established it as a socialist state.

From April 1948 to May 1949, the Soviets blockaded West Berlin to prevent the city from using the West German currency. The United States and its allies supplied the city by airplanes until September 1949 in what became known as the Berlin Airlift. Many East Germans wanted to live in West Germany, which had a greater quality of life and more political freedom. In 1961, the East German government built the Berlin Wall, divided the two halves of the city, and heavily guarded it to prevent more people from escaping to the West. The wall was considered a symbol of the Cold War and the Iron Curtain that divided Europe.

Espionage, also called spying, has been around for a long time and was very important during the Cold War. After its successful nuclear espionage during the Manhattan Project, the Soviets created their spy organs, especially the KGB. The CIA led Americans efforts abroad, and the FBI led counterespionage. The KGB caught foreign spies and fought domestic subversion.

In 1953, the Soviet leader, Joseph Stalin, died, and Nikolai Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchev took his place. Khrushchev later took sole control of the Soviet Union. Khrushchev's Secret Speech marked a period of de-Stalinization, and Khrushchev tried to undo many of Stalin's actions such as the gulags and Stalin's cult of personality.

In the United States, there was a Red Scare, and when the Soviets detonated their own nuclear bomb, there was a big political fallout, and the United States was scared of communists. Famous people in many fields who had been communist sympathizers in the past like Larry Adler lost their positions. Many actors were blacklisted and so were not hired to act in movies, which ruined their careers. U.S. Senator Joseph McCarthy was believed by many when he accused some important Americans of being communists, including government officials with high positions.

The 1950s were the beginning of the Space Race between the United States and the Soviet Union. It began when the Soviets put the first satellite, Sputnik 1, into orbit around Earth and were the first country to send a vehicle into space. The United States responded by starting NASA and soon sent up its own satellites. The Soviets also sent the first man, Yuri Gagarin, into Earth orbit and claimed that proved communism to be a better ideology than capitalism.

In the 1950s, the United States, led by President Dwight Eisenhower, created a policy called "New Look" to cut defense spending and to increase the number of nuclear weapons as a deterrent to prevent the Soviet Union from attacking the West. The Soviets also increased their nuclear force, which resulted in mutual assured destruction.

In the Suez Crisis of 1956, the Cold War's alliances were broken in an important way for the first time, with the Soviet Union and United States supporting one side and Britain and France the other. The Western Allies also decided to let Soviet troops suppress the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.

US Vice-President Richard Nixon engaged in several talks with Khrushchev during the 1950s. One of them was the 1959 "Kitchen Debate" in a model kitchen in Moscow. The debates highlighted the political and economic differences between the Americans and the Soviets. The following year, an American U-2 spy plane crashed in the Soviet Union. Tensions between the two countries increased.

After the Americans' Bay of Pigs invasion had failed, the Soviet Union attempted to supply Cuba with nuclear missiles. The missiles in Cuba would have allowed the Soviet Union to target almost the entire United States effectively. In response, the United States sent a large number of ships to blockade Cuba to prevent the Soviets from sharing the weapons.

The United States and Soviet Union agreed 13 days later that the Soviet Union would recall their missiles, and the US would recall its own missiles in Turkey and avoid invading Cuba again. It was the highest period of tension during the Cold War and the closest that the world came to a nuclear war, with possible global conflict to follow.

After the agreement that ended the Cuban Missile Crisis, relations between both sides eased. Several treaties were signed that were designed to reduce the number of nuclear weapons. In 1964, US President Lyndon Johnson decided to fight North Vietnam, which resulted in a humiliating defeat for the US after South Vietnam fell in 1975, which caused a communist victory during the Vietnam War. During this period of détente, the United States began building a good relationship with the People's Republic of China, which had once been an ally of the Soviet Union but then fought against it.

The policy of détente ended in 1981, when US President Ronald Reagan ordered a massive military build-up to challenge Soviet influence around the world. The United States began to support anti-communists all over the world with money and weapons. The idea was to help them overthrow their communist governments.

The Soviets had a slow economy during this decade because military spending was at an all-time high. They tried to but could not keep up with the United States in military spending. In the Soviet-Afghan War, which started in 1979, the Soviets had a difficult time fighting resistance groups, with some of them armed and trained by the United States. The Soviets' failed invasion of Afghanistan is often compared to the American failure during the Vietnam War.

In the late 1980s, the new Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, made an effort to make an ally of the United States to fix world problems caused by the war, with the ultimate aim of eliminating nuclear weapons. However, that did not take place because Reagan insisted on having a nuclear missile defence system. The Soviet people were divided. Some wanted Gorbachev to fight harder to eliminate nuclear weapons, but others did not want him to be talking to the United States at all. The mixed feelings created an atmosphere of political infighting, and the people were no longer united behind one goal. Also, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union started to crumble.

After the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, without communist rule holding together the countries that comprised the Soviet Union, the former superpower split into smaller countries in 1991 like Russia, Ukraine, Lithuania and Georgia. Eastern Europe got very poor and broken and returned to capitalism. The Cold War was over.

Not all historians agree on when the Cold War ended. Some think it ended when the Berlin Wall fell, but others think it ended when the Soviet Union ended.

Climate means the usual condition of the temperature, humidity, atmospheric pressure, wind, rainfall, and other meteorological patterns in an area of the Earth's surface for a long time. In simple terms, climate is the average condition for about thirty years. Climate and weather are different: weather is the day to day conditions in the atmosphere.

The types of climates are: Tropical, Desert/dry, Temperate, Polar, Mediterranean.

The latitude, ground, and height can change the climate of a location. It is also important to note if oceans or other large bodies of water are nearby. Climates are most commonly classified by temperature and precipitation. The most commonly used classification was the Köppen climate classification, first made by Wladimir Köppen. The Thornthwaite system, which was used from 1948, not only uses temperature and precipitation information, but evapotranspiration too. This makes it useful for studying how many different kinds of animal species there are, and about the things that could happen when climates change. The Bergeron and Spatial Synoptic Classification systems focus more on where the air masses which help make climates come from.

Climates can change after a long time. Nowadays people are making the world warmer in many places, but not in all: 12/2023 "Beijing shivers through coldest December on record" (BBC). North Korea and Japan are also unusually cold, Decenber 2023.

Currency is a unit of money used for buying and selling goods and services, commonly backed by a country or a union of countries.

Some currencies are "pegged" or "fixed" to something, like another currency. These currencies have a constant value compared to what it is pegged to. For example, the Cape Verdian escudo is pegged to the Euro. This means that any changes in the value of the Euro equally affect the escudo.

Some currencies are pegged to a commodity, like gold or silver rather than to another currency. This was called the "gold standard" or "silver standard". Most countries stopped using silver and gold standards in the 20th century.

Communication is when information is passed from a sender to a recipient using a medium. There are different media that can be used:

Communication can be  (a word) or non-spoken (a smile). Communication has many ways, and happens all the time. Not only humans communicate, most other animals do too. Some communication is done without thinking, such as by changing in posture.

Communication that tries to change somebody's mind may be called persuasion or propaganda.

Communication works by exchanging information or messages. In very basic terms

Besides the content of the message, there are other things that are important. These are not part of the message itself, but rather of its context

For a message exchange to be successful, the sender and the recipient must have agreed on a vocabulary that avoids ambiguity. For example, the word hedge can mean completely different things based on the context. In botany a hedge is a row of shrubs or trees that make a barrier or form a border. In finance, a hedge is an investment made to reduce the risk of another investment. In linguistics a hedge is a word or set of words that make other words less important. Without information it is therefore very difficult to know which hedge is really meant by the speaker.

Key elements of effective communication include clarity, correctness, conciseness, active listening, empathy, feedback, and the appropriate choice of medium or channel.

Culture is a word for the 'way of life' of groups of people, meaning the way they do things. Different groups may have different cultures. A culture is passed on to the next generation by learning, whereas genetics are passed on by heredity. Culture is seen in people's writing, religion, music, clothes, cooking, and in what they do.

The concept of culture is very complicated, and the word has some meanings. The word 'culture' is most commonly used in three ways.

Most broadly, 'culture' includes all human phenomena which are not purely results of human genetics. The  which investigates cultures is called anthropology, though many other disciplines play a part.

Cultures are what make a country unique and interesting. Each country has different cultural activities and cultural rituals. Culture includes material goods, the things the people use and produce.  Culture is also the beliefs and values of the people and the ways they think about and understand the world and their own lives.

Different countries have different cultures. For example, some older Japanese people wear kimonos, arrange flowers in vases, and have tea ceremonies.  Some countries oppose some things in their culture, like discrimination or religion. Some countries also have multiple cultures within them.

Culture can also vary within a region, society or sub group.  A workplace may have a specific culture that sets it apart from similar workplaces.  A region of a country may have a different culture than the rest of the country. For example, in a large country like China or Canada a region may have a distinctive way of talking, different types of music, and different types of dances.

A group who acts or speaks differently may be said to be, or have, a subculture.

Ethnic groups such as the Romani people in Europe have a distinct culture.

Companies or other organizations (groups of people) can have a separate culture. Japanese manufacturing companies often have a different culture to Western companies; the workday starts with exercise, and the workers are very loyal to the company.

Companies in the high-technology sector often have a different culture than other companies. Software and computer companies sometimes allow employees to play games during the workday, or take time off work to relax, because these companies believe that this will help the workers to think better.

Anthropology is studying human beings and how they relate to each other. An anthropologist is a person who studies anthropology. Anthropologists study how culture shapes people and their lives. Cultures constantly change as people move and communicate with new groups of people.

For example, immigrants (people who move from one country to another) may keep some of their customs and traditions from their old country. By keeping their culture in this way, they bring pieces of their culture to a new place where others begin to experience it.

A day is the time it takes the Earth to spin around once. It is daytime on the side of the Earth that is facing the Sun. When it is nighttime, that side of the Earth is facing away from the Sun. It takes 24 hours for the Earth to spin once, so that is one day, including the daytime and nighttime. This is mean solar time, measured relative to the Sun. There is also sidereal time, measured relative to the fixed stars. The sidereal day is a few minutes shorter.

A cloud is water vapour in the atmosphere (sky) that has condensed into very small water droplets or ice crystals that appear in visible shapes or formations above the ground.

Water on the Earth evaporates (turns into an invisible gas) and rises up into the sky. Higher up where the air is colder, the water condenses: it changes from a gas to drops of water or crystals of ice. We see these drops of water as clouds. The drops fall back down to earth as rain, and then the water evaporates again. This is called the "water cycle".

The atmosphere always has some water vapour. Clouds form when the atmosphere can no longer hold all the invisible air vapor. Any more water vapor condenses into very small water drops.

Warm air holds more water vapor than cool air. So if warm air with lots of water inside cools, it can form a cloud. These are ways air can cool enough to form clouds:

Clouds are heavy. The water in a cloud can have a mass of several million tons. Every cubic metre (m3) of the cloud has only about 5 grams of water in it. Cloud droplets are also about 1000 times heavier than evaporated water, so they are much heavier than air. They do not fall, but stay in the air, because there is warm air all round the heavier water droplets. When water changes from gas to droplets, this makes heat. Because the droplets are very small, they "stick" to the warm air.

Sometimes, clouds appear to be brilliant colors at sunrise or sunset. This is due to dust particles in the air.

Clouds are  according to how they look and how high the base of the cloud is in the sky. This system was suggested in 1803.  There are different sorts of clouds because the air where they form can be still or moving forward or up and down at different speeds.  Very thick clouds with large enough water droplets can make rain or snow, and the biggest clouds can make thunder and lightning.

There are five basic families of clouds based on how they look:

The following is a summary of the main cloud types arranged by how high they form:

High clouds form from  in cold places,  in mild regions and  in the very hot tropics.  They are too high and thin to produce rain or snow.

Middle clouds usually form at  in colder areas. However, they may form as high as  in the tropics where it's very warm all year.  Middle clouds are usually made of water droplets but may also have some ice crystals.  They occasionally produce rain or snow that usually evaporates before reaching the ground.

Low-level clouds are usually seen from near ground level to as high as .  Low clouds are usually made of water droplets and may occasionally produce very light rain, drizzle, or snow.

When very low stratus cloud touches the ground, it is called fog.

These are clouds of medium thickness that can form anywhere from near ground level to as high as .  Medium-level cumulus does not have alto added to its name.  The tops of these clouds are usually not much higher than .  Vertical clouds often create rain and snow.  They are made mostly of water droplets, but when they push up through cold higher levels they may also have ice crystals.

These clouds are very tall with tops usually higher than .  They can create heavy rain and snow showers.  Cumulonimbus, the biggest clouds of all, can also produce thunderstorms.  These clouds are mostly made of water droplets, but the tops of very large cumulonimbus clouds are often made mostly of ice crystals.

Communism is an idea in politics based on equality, that seeks a world without different social class groups. They say that things like factories, tools and farms (the relations of production) are owned by the bourgeoisie. Communists want the workers to take power and the means of production. They believe this will bring about the end of all money and private property.

This is the opposite to capitalism where there is money, and a state and class structure. In capitalism, there is a working class (people who don't own the means of production, also called the proletariat) and the owning class (people who own the means of production, sometimes called the ruling class or the bourgeoisie).

Communist thinkers believe a communist world can happen if the working class take away the power of the bourgeoisie and start to control the means of production.

Countries that claim themselves to be communist include Vietnam, China, Cuba and Laos, which are Marxist–Leninist, and North Korea, which follows Juche.

The most famous communist thinkers were Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels; other prominent thinkers include Vladimir Lenin, Joseph Stalin, Leon Trotsky, and Mao Zedong.

In 1848, Karl H. Marx and Friedrich Engels wrote The Communist Manifesto. It was a short book with the basic ideas of communism. Most socialists and communists today still use this book to help them better and more accurately understand politics and economics. Many non-communists read it too, even if they do not agree with everything in it.

Karl Marx said that for society to change into a communist way of living, there would have to be a period of change. During this period, the workers would govern society. This is called a dictatorship of the proletariat. Marx was very interested in the Paris Commune of 1870, when the workers of Paris ran the city after the Prussian Army defeated the French Army. He thought that this practical experience was more important than the theoretical views of the various radical groups.

Many groups and individuals liked Marx's ideas. By the beginning of the twentieth century, there was a worldwide socialist movement called Social Democracy. It was influenced by his ideas. They said that the workers in different countries had more in common with each other than the workers had in common with the bosses within their own countries. In 1917, Vladimir Lenin and Leon Trotsky led a Russian group called the Bolsheviks in the October Revolution. They got rid of the temporary government of Russia, which was formed after the February Revolution against the Tsar (Emperor). They established the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, also called the Soviet Union.

The Soviet Union was the first country claiming to have established a workers' state.

During the 20th century, many people tried to establish workers' states. In the late 1940s, China also had a revolution and created a new government with Mao Zedong as its leader. In 1959, the island of Cuba had a revolution and created a new government with Fidel Castro as its leader. At one time, there were many such countries, and it seemed as though communism would overtake capitalism. However, communist party governments didn't use democracy. Because of this, the governments became separated from the people, making communism difficult. This also led to disagreements and splits between countries.

By the 1960s, one third of the world had overthrown capitalism and were trying to build communism. Most of these countries followed the model of the Soviet Union. Some followed the model of China. The other two thirds of the world still lived in capitalism, and this led to a worldwide divide between capitalist countries and communist countries. This was called the "Cold War" because it was not fought with weapons or armies, but competing ideas. However, this could have turned into a large war. During the 1980s, the United States and the Soviet Union were competing to have the biggest army and having the most dangerous weapons. This was called the "Arms Race". President Ronald Reagan called the Soviet Union the "Evil Empire", because they had invaded the countries of Eastern Europe and forced them to have communist governments.

Since 1989, when the Berlin Wall was torn down, most countries that used to be communist have returned to capitalism. Communism now has much less influence around the world. In 1991, the Soviet Union broke up. However, around a fifth of the world's people still live in states controlled by a communist party. Most of these people are in China. The other countries include Cuba, Vietnam, Laos, and North Korea. There are also communist movements in Latin America and South Africa.

Many people have written their own ideas about communism. Vladimir Lenin of Russia thought that there had to be a group of hard-working revolutionaries (called a vanguard) to lead a socialist revolution worldwide and create a communist society everywhere forming Leninism. Leon Trotsky, also from Russia, argued that socialism had to be international, and it was not important to make it happen first in Russia forming Trotskyism. He also did not like Joseph Stalin, who became the leader of the USSR after Lenin's death in 1924. Trotsky was made to leave the Soviet Union by Stalin in 1928, and then killed in 1940. This scared many people, and lots of communists argued about whether this was right and whose ideas should be followed.

Mao Zedong of China thought that other classes would be important to the revolution in China and other developing countries because the working classes in these countries were small. Mao's ideas on communism are usually called Maoism or Mao Zedong Thought. After Stalin's death in 1953, Mao saw himself as the leader of worldwide communism until he died in 1976. Today the Chinese government is still ruled by the Communist Party, but they actually have what is called a mixed economy. They have borrowed many things from capitalism. The government in China today does not follow Maoism. Some revolutionaries in other countries like India and Nepal still like his ideas and are trying to use them in their own countries.

The word "communism" is not a very specific description of left-wing political organizations. Many political parties calling themselves "communist" may actually be more reformist (supportive of reforms and slow change instead of revolution) than some parties calling themselves "socialists". Many communist parties in Latin America have lost many members because these parties do different things than what they promised once they get into power. In Chile, between 1970 and 1973, under the left-wing Coalition (groups of parties) of Popular Unity, led by Salvador Allende, the Communist Party of Chile was to the right of the Socialist Party of Chile.  This means it was more reformist than the socialist party.

Many communist parties will use a reformist strategy. They say working-class people are not organized enough to make big changes to their societies. They put forward candidates that will be elected democratically. Once communists become elected to parliament or the Senate, then they will fight for the working class. This will allow working-class people to change their capitalist society into a socialist one.

The color red is a symbol of communism around the world. A red five-pointed star sometimes also stands for communism. The hammer and sickle is a well-known symbol of communism. It was on the flags of many communist countries, like the Soviet Union (see top of article). Some communists also like to use pictures of famous communists from history, such as Marx, Lenin, and Mao Zedong, as symbols of the whole philosophy of communism.

A song called The Internationale is the international song of communism. It has the same music everywhere, but the words to the song are translated into many languages. The Russian version was the national anthem of the Soviet Union from 1922 until 1944.

The sickle in the Soviet Union's flag shows the struggle of the peasants-farmers. The hammer in the flag represents the struggle for the workers. Both of them crossing shows their support for each other.

There is also a special kind of art and architecture found in many communist and former communist countries. Paintings done in the style of socialist realism are often done for propaganda to show a perfect version of a country's people and political leader. Art done in the socialist realism style, such as plays, movies, novels, and paintings show hard-working, happy, and well-fed factory workers and farmers. Movies, plays and novels in this style often tell stories about workers or soldiers who sacrifice themselves for the good of their country. Paintings often showed heroic portraits of the leader, or landscapes showing huge fields of wheat. Stalinist architecture was supposed to represent the power and glory of the state and its political leader. Some communists also enjoy this kind of art.

Classical music is a very general term which normally refers to the standard music of countries in the western world. It is music that has been composed by musicians who are trained in the art of writing music (composing) and written down in music notation so that other musicians can play it. Classical music may also be described as "art music" although that term also includes types of serious modern music which are not classical. Classical music differs from pop music because it is not made just in order to be popular for time or just to be a commercial success. It is different from folk music which is generally made up by ordinary members of society and learned by future generations by listening, dancing and copying.

The word “classic” tends to mean: an art which is so good that it will always be enjoyed by future generations. It is something that has become a model for future artists. The period of Ancient Greece and Rome is known as the Classical Period because, many centuries later, people looked back to those ancient civilizations and thought they were perfect. In recent European history the 18th century was known as the Classical Period because musicians, artists, writers and philosophers were inspired by the art forms of the Classical Period of Ancient Greece and Rome. Something that is a “classic” is therefore something that will always be remembered as something great. Famous books such as the novels of Charles Dickens are called "classics". “Classical music” therefore tends to mean music that will not be forgotten soon after it is written, but is likely to be enjoyed by many future generations.

Although people sometimes think of classical music as the opposite of pop music, it can still be very popular. Like all kinds of music, classical music can be in many different moods: happy, sad, scary, peaceful, thoughtful, simple etc. Mozart wrote his serenades and divertimentos to entertain people at parties. Classical pieces of music can be quite short, but they can also be very long, like a big, musical story. A symphony by Mahler or Shostakovich can last for nearly an hour, and an opera is a whole evening’s entertainment also Classical music is nowadays fused with Rock music and EDM music and even some Rap music which also have subgenres related to pop music.

Classical music is also different from jazz because true jazz is improvised. However, the differences are not always obvious. Classical music has often been inspired by jazz, and jazz by classical music. George Gershwin wrote music which is both jazz and classical. Classical music, too, can be improvised. The great composers Bach, Mozart and Beethoven often improvised long pieces of music on the organ, harpsichord or piano. Sometimes they wrote these improvisations down. They were, in effect, compositions which were composed in one go.

In Western countries a vast amount of music was written for Christian worship in churches and cathedrals. This is called “sacred” (religious) music. All other music is “secular” music. The word “secular” means things that are not sacred. Sacred and secular music have influenced one another in many ways during the course of music history. Secular music was largely influenced by dance, and this in turn changed the style of sacred music. For example: the church music of the 16th century composer Giovanni da Palestrina has nothing to do with dance music, but both the sacred and secular music of Johann Sebastian Bach two centuries later is full of dance rhythms. At some times in music history there have been different styles of composing for sacred and for secular music. Claudio Monteverdi uses two different styles for his church and for his non-church music. When composers were experimenting with new ways of writing music they usually did this with secular music, and sacred music caught up later, Sacred classical music is used in a lot of different video games in order to show tonal themes and intensity as to whether something is good or bad is about to happen. The Legend of Zelda series relies heavily on Religious classical music to convey the various goddesses of Hyrule and Thier prominence and influence in the society.

The term "classical music" was not used until the early 19th century. People then started talking about classical music in order to praise the great composers such as Bach, Mozart and Beethoven. In the 20th century many different ways of composing were used, including music played by electronic instruments or very modern music using strange sounds (experimental or "avant garde" music), for example the music of John Cage. Some people feel that this kind of music cannot really be described as "classical music".

Classical music can be for instruments or for the voice. The symphony orchestra is the most common group of instruments for the playing of classical music. It has four families of instruments: the string instruments which include the violins, violas, cellos and piano, the woodwind instruments which include flutes, oboes,clarinets and bassoons together with related instruments of different sizes, the brass instruments: trumpet, trombone, tuba and French horn, and percussion instruments which nearly always includes timpani as well as many other possible instruments which are hit or shaken. This is very different from a typical rock band which has a drummer, a guitarist, one or two singers and an electric bass and keyboard. Instruments that play classical music are not normally amplified electronically.

The same applies to the voice. Singers may be sopranos, altos, tenors or basses, depending on their vocal range. Their voices are not amplified. Opera singers, in particular, have to develop very powerful voices which will be heard over the orchestra and project right to the back of an opera house.

The instruments used in classical music developed at different times. Some of the earliest were known in Medieval music. The trombone and the triangle have hardly changed for hundreds of years, but the violin family developed from folk instruments such as fiddles and gradually replaced the viols to form the basis of the modern orchestra. This was happening by the beginning of the 17th century, which was the time when opera was invented.

In general, musical instruments have become louder as concert halls have become bigger. Violins are louder than viols. Modern violins are louder than the early 17th century violins, largely because of they have metal strings instead of gut strings. The piano developed from the clavichord which was very quiet indeed. Woodwind instruments developed from Renaissance instruments, while the clarinet was invented in the middle of the 18th century, and the saxophone and tuba came even later. Modern trumpets sound much brighter than the straight trumpets of the 18th century.

Most popular music is based on song form, but classical music has many different forms, some of which can be used over a long time span to make big compositions. Classical music can have many forms, including the symphony, concerto, oratorio, opera, sonata, fugue or any combination of dance movements such as suites. In many of the longer compositions, short tunes are developed and changed during the course of the piece. Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony is a good example of a piece which develops from just four notes into a large piece lasting about half an hour.

People who want to be good at performing classical music have to practice hard for many years. They normally have formal training at a music college or conservatoire and have lessons from well-known music teachers.

Classical musicians often spend a lot of time thinking carefully about pieces of music, especially about pieces of music that they perform. They study such things as harmony and counterpoint to help them understand the way that the composers were thinking when they put the piece together. When they look at pieces of music in this way this is called “musical analysis”. People who specialize in thinking and writing about music may become professors or lecturers of music at universities.

Classical music is often heard in popular culture. It is used as background music for movies, television programs, advertisements and even for mobile phone ringing tones. Most people in the Western world recognize many classical tunes, possibly without even realizing it. Some classical pieces of music have become enormously popular, e.g. the song Nessun dorma from Giacomo Puccini's opera Turandot which was sung by the three tenors Luciano Pavarotti, Plácido Domingo and José Carreras, and used as the theme tune for the 1990 Soccer World Cup. This made many people who had never been interested in opera start to become curious about it.

The history of classical music really started in the late Middle Ages. Music written for the church was almost always vocal (singing),  because instruments were thought to be wicked. This is because the devil played them, and because they were used for dancing. There was a lot of dance music, but most of it is lost because it was never written down.

Medieval composers who are remembered today include Léonin, Pérotin and Guillaume de Machaut

The Renaissance was from the 15th century until the 17th century. This period saw a massive increase in the composition of music, both sacred and secular. Many great cathedrals had been built in Europe and composers wrote music for them, mostly vocal music. Secular music also became extremely popular, especially songs and madrigals, which would sometimes be accompanied by instruments.

The greatest composers of this period include: Giovanni da Palestrina, Orlando di Lasso, Thomas Tallis and William Byrd.

The Baroque period was from about the 17th century until the mid-18th century. This was the time when the modern orchestra was formed, more or less as we know it. It was also the time when opera was invented. Most musicians worked either for the church or for rich people who had their own orchestras. Many of them also started to work for opera houses.

The greatest composers of this time include: Claudio Monteverdi, Heinrich Schütz, Henry Purcell, Antonio Vivaldi, George Frideric Handel, Johann Sebastian Bach, Domenico Scarlatti and Georg Philipp Telemann

The years between 1760 - 1825 was known as the Classical period. Composers thought a lot about the forms of their pieces and were influenced by the classical art of the Ancient Greeks and Romans. The symphony was invented and various forms of chamber music including the string quartet.

The greatest composers include: Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Christoph Willibald Gluck, Antonio Salieri, Ludwig van Beethoven and Franz Schubert .

From 1820 to 1910 was known as the Romantic period. Composers continued to use the forms that had been invented in the 18th century, but they also thought that personal feeling and emotion were very important. Music for orchestra sometimes told a story (programme music). Musicians who played their instruments brilliantly (such as Paganini) were worshipped like heroes. Beethoven and Schubert belong, in many ways, to this period as well as to the Classical period. It was a time when there were a lot of changes in society. After the wars that Napoleon had waged, there were not so many ruling aristocratic families. There was a lot of feeling of nationalism as countries united. 19th century music is often nationalistic: composers wrote music that was typical of their own country.

Some of the greatest composers include: Ludwig van Beethoven, Franz Schubert, Hector Berlioz, Frédéric Chopin, Robert Schumann, Felix Mendelssohn, Anton Bruckner, Johannes Brahms, Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky, Edward Elgar, Gustav Mahler and Richard Strauss.

What is known as 20th century classical music (or “modern music”) is music from about 1910 onwards. At this time many composers felt that everything had already been done by the composers of the past, so they wanted to find new ways of composing. Claude Debussy, Arnold Schoenberg and Igor Stravinsky, in particular, found new ways of writing music which was not necessarily tonal (in any particular key). Classical music was influenced by jazz, especially with American composers. Later in the century people such as Pierre Boulez and Karlheinz Stockhausen experimented in many other ways, including with electronic music (tape recorders etc.). Today’s composers have combined some of these ideas to develop their own styles.

Some of the most important composers are: Claude Debussy, Jean Sibelius, Maurice Ravel, Arnold Schoenberg, Igor Stravinsky, Béla Bartók, Aaron Copland, Benjamin Britten, Dmitri Shostakovich, Leonard Bernstein, Philip Glass, Dmitri Kabalevsky, James MacMillan, Judith Weir, Peter Maxwell Davies

It has never been possible to say exactly what is meant by “classical music”. Many different kinds of music influence one another. Since 1970 it has been even harder to make clear dividing lines between rock, pop, classical, folk, jazz and world music. This shows that classical music, like other kinds of music, continues to develop and reflect the society from which it comes.

Dante Alighieri (), known simply as Dante (, , ; c. 1265 – September 14, 1321), was a major Italian poet of the Late Middle Ages/Early Renaissance. His central work, the Commedia (Divine Comedy), is considered the greatest literary work composed in the Italian language and a masterpiece of world literature. In Italian he is known as il Sommo Poeta (the Supreme Poet). Dante and the Divine Comedy have been a source of inspiration for artists for almost seven centuries. Dante, alongside Petrarch and Boccaccio, is known as one of "the three fountains", and is often referred to as "the Father of the Italian language". The first biography written on him was by his contemporary Giovanni Villani. The most famous section in The Divine Comedy is the first third of it, the first 34 cantos of the poem, called Inferno, which features Dante's vision of Hell.

Dante Alighieri was born in 1265, between May 14 and June 13, under the name Durante Alighieri. ca. 1450 (Uffizi Gallery). His family was important in Florence, and supported the Papacy.

The poet's mother was Bella degli Abati. She died when Dante was seven years old, and Alighiero soon married again, to Lapa di Chiarissimo Cialuffi. Lapa had two children, Dante's brother Francesco and sister Tana ( short version of Gaetana).

Dante fought in the front of the  troops in the battle of Campaldino (June 11, 1289). After the victory Dante gained an important part in public life.

When Dante was 12, in 1277, he married Gemma di Manetto Donati. Dante had already fallen in love with another girl, Beatrice Portinari that is mentioned same in "Divine Comedy", (known also as Bice). Years after Dante's marriage to Gemma he met Beatrice again. He had become interested in writing poems.

Dante had six children with Gemma: Jacopo, Pietro, Giovanni, Gabrielle Alighieri, and Antonia.

Not much is known about Dante's education, and it is presumed he studied at home. It is known that he studied Tuscan poetry. His interests brought him to discover the Occitan poetry of the troubadours and the Latin poetry of classical antiquity (with a particular devotion to Virgil).

At 18, Dante met Guido Cavalcanti, Lapo Gianni, Cino da Pistoia, and soon after Brunetto Latini; together they became the leaders of Dolce Stil Novo ("The Sweet New Style"). Brunetto later received a special mention in the Divine Comedy (Inferno, XV, 28), for what he had taught Dante.

According to his work, La Vita Nuova, when he was nine years old he met Beatrice Portinari, daughter of Folco Portinari, with whom he fell in love "at first sight", and apparently without even having spoken to her. He saw her frequently after age 18, often exchanging greetings in the street, but he never knew her well—he effectively set the example for the so-called "courtly love". Dante gave his imprint to the Stil Novo. Love for Beatrice (as in a different manner Petrarch would show for his Laura) would apparently be the reason for poetry and for living, together with political passions. In many of his poems, she appears such as semi-divine, watching over him constantly.

When Beatrice died in 1290, Dante tried to find consolation in Latin literature.

He then dedicated himself to philosophical studies at religious schools like the Dominican one in Santa Maria Novella. This fervent passion for philosophy would later be criticized by the character Beatrice, in the Purgatorio (Purgatory), the second book of the Divine Comedy.

Boniface quickly dismissed the other delegates and asked Dante alone to remain in Rome. At the same time (November 1, 1301), Charles de Valois entered Florence with Black Guelphs, who in the next six days destroyed much of the city and killed many of their enemies. A new Black Guelph government was installed and Messer Cante dei Gabrielli di Gubbio was appointed Podestà of Florence. Dante was put in exile for two years, and ordered to pay a large hill of money.

Dante did not pay the money, in part because he believed he was not guilty, and in part because all his needs in Florence had been stolen by the Black Guelphs. He was condemned to exile for life, and if he returned to Florence without paying the money, he could be burned at the stake.

In exile he began searching the foundation for the Divine Comedy, a work in 100 cantos, divided into three books of thirty-three cantos each, with a single introductory canto.

He went to Verona as a guest of Bartolomeo I della Scala, then moved to Sarzana in Liguria. Later, he is supposed to have lived in Lucca with Madame Gentucca. Some not sure sources say that he was also in Paris between 1308 and 1310. In 1310, the Holy Roman Emperor Henry VII of Luxembourg, marched 5,000 troops into Italy. Dante saw in him a new Charlemagne who would restore the office of the Holy Roman Emperor for re-take Florence from the Black Guelphs. He wrote to Henry and several Italian princes, demanding that they destroy the Black Guelphs. Mixing religion and private concerns, he invoked the worst anger of God against his city, suggesting several particular targets that coincided with his personal enemies. It was during this time that he wrote the first two books of the Divine Comedy.

When Dante died at Ravenna, the custodians of the body at Ravenna put the bones in a false wall of the monastery. Nevertheless, in 1829, a tomb was built for him in Florence in the basilica of Santa Croce. That tomb has been empty ever since, with Dante's body remaining in Ravenna, far from the land he loved so dearly. The front of his tomb in Florence reads Onorate l'altissimo poeta – which roughly translates as "Honour the extraordinary poet".

Copper is a chemical element. It is the 29th element in the periodic table. Its atomic weight is 63.55. It is a transition metal in the middle of the periodic table. The symbol for copper is "Cu", which comes from the Latin word cuprum, which, in turn, came from the Latin word for the island of Cyprus, where copper was found.

Copper is a reddish-orange color when it is pure, but soon gets a reddish tarnish after it is exposed to air.

Copper is one of the few coloured metals. Most metals are gray or silver. Gold, copper, caesium and osmium are the only four coloured metals. It is magnetic. Copper is green as copper(II) carbonate and copper(II) hydroxide. It turns green because it oxidizes. After a time in the air, copper forms green copper carbonate at the surface, called verdigris. That is why the copper roof of a building looks green.

Copper is very flexible and . It can be stretched into wires easily. Copper is also very soft, it has a Mohs hardness of 2.5 to 3. That means that it is harder than a fingernail but softer than a steel pocketknife.

It reacts with solutions of hydrochloric acid or ammonia containing oxygen. It can also dissolve in a mixture of hydrogen peroxide and hydrochloric acid. This makes copper(II) chloride. It does not dissolve in weak acids. It can dissolve in nitric acid to make copper(II) nitrate and nitrogen dioxide or nitric oxide.

Copper forms chemical compounds. In these compounds, it has two normal oxidation states: +1 and +2. +2 is more common. Most +2 copper compounds are blue. +1 copper compounds can be white. Copper compounds are weak oxidizing agents. They corrode many metals. This corrosion takes the metal and puts it in the chemical compound, leaving the copper behind. An example would be iron and copper(II) sulfate reacting to make copper and iron(II) sulfate. +1 copper compounds are reducing agents when in air. They are normally made by reduction of +2 compounds.

Copper compounds can be black, green, reddish, white, blue, or yellow.

Copper(I) compounds have copper in +1 oxidation state. They are weak reducing agents. They react with air to make copper(II) compounds. They also disproportionate to copper and copper(II) compounds. Most of them do not dissolve in water.

Copper(II) compounds have copper in +2 oxidation state. They are weak oxidizing agents. They are greenish when hydrous (water molecules added). They are more  in air than copper(I) compounds.

Copper can be found as a metal in the ground. Normally, it is green on the outside. Most copper is not as a metal but in chemical compounds. Chalcopyrite is the most common copper ore. It is a mixture of pyrite and copper sulfide. Copper is found in small amounts in living things. Some mollusks and arthropods have blue blood because they have copper in their blood. Animals such as humans and other mammals have red blood because it contains iron.

Copper can be used in many ways but one example is wires. Copper is used in making wires as it is easy to stretch and it is not expensive. So that’s why large wire companies will use copper as it is cheaper and takes less time to get

Copper may be the oldest metal in use, as very old copper tools have been found. Copper is used in electrical wiring. It can also be shaped into various parts. It can be used in a . The Statue of Liberty is made of copper. It is also used in pipes carrying water, because it does not corrode.

When people mix copper with tin, bronze is made. Bronze is much harder, and created the Bronze Age. It became less important when people learned to use iron better. When zinc is mixed with copper, brass is made, which is even harder than bronze. Copper with nickel makes cupronickel.

Copper is also used in medical and food production industries. Copper can alter proteins, form radicals, and disrupt enzymes, thereby inactivating or killing bacteria and viruses.

Copper is an easily molded base metal that is often added to precious metals to improve their elasticity, flexibility, hardness, color, and resistance to corrosion.

Copper is important in the human body. If a person does not get enough copper, the molecules in the body might not work. Having too much copper, though, can be a problem. Humans get most of the copper they need from food, and vitamins also contain copper to make sure we get enough. Copper compounds are also used to kill fungi and algae.

Copper is not as toxic as a metal. Copper compounds are toxic, although small amounts are needed to live. Copper is expelled from the body easily, so it does not build up in toxic effects.

Copper is sometimes just taken out of the ground and shaped into objects. But most copper is not in a metal form in the ground. Chalcopyrite is the main copper ore. It is heated with air to separate the iron as iron(II) oxide. Some copper(I) oxide is made. Sulfur dioxide is also made. Then silicon dioxide is added, which reacts with the iron(II) oxide to make a liquid which is drained. Now only copper and sulfide are left. The copper sulfide reacts with air to make copper metal and sulfur dioxide. Some copper sulfide reacts with the copper(I) oxide to make copper and sulfur dioxide. This makes impure copper.

Copper is made pure by electrolyzing it. A thin sheet of pure copper is put on the cathode and a thick sheet of impure copper is put on the anode. The electrolyte is copper sulfate. The impure copper gets dissolved in the solution. It then coats the thin sheet of pure copper. This makes the copper pure.

Large amounts of copper are recycled because of its high value and the increasing depletion of worldwide copper reserves.

A dictatorship is a form of government, where one person effectively has all the power to run a country without having elections. This person is called a dictator. In very few cases, a small group of people holds this power, which is called an oligarchy. A dictatorship that is ruled by soldiers is called a military dictatorship or junta.

Roman dictators were temporary rulers appointed to protect the state during a war or other emergency. Many countries have laws that allow a similarly time-limited dictatorship or state of emergency to fight against such problems. Karl Marx has the idea of the Dictatorship of the proletariat. When they became independent in the 1960s and 1970s, many African states changed to be dictatorships, run by one person. Karl Popper distinguished between two different forms of government, "Those where it is possible to change the government without bloodshed, in a popular vote, and those where it isn't." He said that this was the key difference, and not how the forms of government are named.

Dictators often come to power in times of difficulty, such as massive unemployment, inflation, and unrest among the population. Dictators are normally backed by powerful groups, such as landowners, private company owners, bank owners and in some cases institutions like the Roman Catholic Church to put in place law and order by force. This force may be directed at the poorer parts of society, such as unemployed workers, ethnic minorities, working class areas and shanty towns. Examples of this are the dictatorships in Latin America and the persecution of Jews in Nazi Germany.

Dictators normally need to do a number of things to put in place their dictatorships: they need to get rid of their opponents (which may be political or religious) - some are imprisoned, exiled (sent outside their country) or killed. Dictators will then need to prohibit (or not allow) political parties that oppose their rule. They will confiscate (take away) the political parties' property or offices and such things. Dictators may suppress or persecute some religious groups or institutions. Dictators will also need to undo or close down democratic institutions such as parliament and in some cases the congress.

Some social organizations, such as civil rights groups, human rights organisations, legal aid centers, students' unions, teachers' federations, trade or workers unions are also undone and those who persist with such activities may be imprisoned or killed. Dictators often rewrite an existing constitution or put in place a completely new one. This makes their power constitutional (which then cannot be disputed). Dictators then maintain their rule with state terrorism, which normally involves a secret police, death squads, random or night curfew, indefinite arrest without trial and a network of torture centers and concentration camps. Some dictatorships create a fictional (or non existent) internal (inside their country) enemy which they claim to be at war with to justify (give reason for) their use of much military violence against their people.

Conservatism is a type of political belief that supports emphasis on traditions and relies on the individual to maintain society.  The term was first used by François-René de Chateaubriand in 1818, during the Bourbon Restoration, which wanted to roll back the policies of the French Revolution. The term is associated with right-wing politics. It has been used to describe a wide range of views. There is no single set of policies that are regarded as conservative because the meaning of conservatism depends on a given place and time, although most Conservatives oppose Modernism in some way and want to go back to old values.

In Western culture for example, Conservatives try to maintain things like organized religion, property rights, parliamentary government and family values.

Conservatism tends to support the notion of faith, particularly in Abrahamic traditions in countries where those are the dominant religions. In England, the publication of Edmund Burke’s book Reflections on the revolution in France suggested people should be satisfied and advocated a caring government.

Some conservatives seek to keep things as they are, while others want a return to the way things were at an earlier time. This is often called reactionary conservatism. A conservative party in England formed which wanted better co-operation between rich and poor, democracy, and some aspects of a welfare state. This was also favored by conservatives in France and other parts of Europe.

In Brazil, conservatism comes from its Portuguese roots, often being Evangelical, such as President Jair Bolsonaro.

Conservatives in India are pro-Hindu, anti-Pakistan, and are socially conservative. The Bharatiya Janata Party is the biggest conservative party in India, lead by Narendra Modi.

In the United States, conservatives worry about centralism, do not trust the welfare state, and consider business people trustworthy on wages and prices. During the 20th century the Republican Party became a Conservative political party in the United States.

The Danube (Latin name Hister) is the second-longest river in Europe (the Volga is the longest). It is the longest river of the European Union.

The river is 2,860 km (1,777 mi) long. Brigach and Breg join in Donaueschingen (near the Black Forest) to "make" the Danube. The Danube flows through or makes part of the border of 10 countries: Germany, Austria, Slovakia, Hungary, Croatia, Serbia, Romania, Bulgaria, Moldova and Ukraine. The river ends in the Black Sea through the Danube Delta.

Bigger cities include Ulm, Regensburg in Germany; Linz, Vienna in Austria; Bratislava in Slovakia, Budapest in Hungary; Vukovar in Croatia; Novi Sad and Belgrade in Serbia.

The Danube is named in many other languages: ,  (Dunav), German and Plattdüütsch: , , , , , ,  or Danubius, , , , .

The Danube is an important waterway. Ocean ships can go to Brăila in Romania. River boats can go to Kehlheim in Bavaria. Smaller ships can travel as far north as Ulm, Germany.

There is much history and culture related to the Danube. As with many other rivers, its natural environment and plants and animals are affected by pollution.

Cotton is a soft, natural fiber that grows with the seeds of the cotton plant.  (Fiber is long and thin, like hair.)  After the cotton fiber is gathered from the plant, it can be spun into cotton thread. The cotton thread can then be made into cloth.  The cloth can be used to make clothes for people and many other things.  People often wear cotton clothing, especially in hot weather. Bandages are usually cotton.

There are different types of cotton plants.  Some cotton plants grow wild in tropical and subtropical areas of the world.  This is how cotton was discovered many years ago.  Most of the cotton gathered to make cloth comes from crops grown on cotton plantations.  Cotton is farmed in Africa, Asia, Europe, Australia, and the Americas.  Cotton soaks up to 24-27 of its own weight in water (very absorbent). All parts of cotton plants are useful.

Cotton is in the mallow family and produces delicate, lovely flowers.  Other members of the mallow family include hollyhocks and hibiscus, used to brighten gardens all over the world.  The cotton fiber forms around the seeds of the cotton plant. It helps carry the seeds long distances on the wind so the baby plant can grow up far away. Early humans realized that the soft, fluffy fibers might be suitable for textile use and began to breed the plant, selecting for fluffy, easily spun varieties.

Cotton is one of the oldest fibers under human cultivation, with traces of cotton over 7,000 years old recovered from archaeological sites. Cotton is also one of the most used natural fibers in existence today, with consumers everywhere wearing and using cotton for various purposes. The word "cotton" comes from the Arabic word "qutn".Millions of acres globally are devoted to the production of cotton, whether it be new world cotton, with longer, smoother fibers, or the shorter and coarser old world varieties.

After harvesting, cotton must be combed to remove the seeds. This was a laborious process until the industrial revolution and invention of the cotton gin, which quickly separates the seeds from the fiber and combs them for spinning. While a single cotton fiber is not terribly strong, when multiple curling fibers are straightened and twisted together, they form a strong, smooth thread that can be knitted or woven, as well as dyed.

Diabetes mellitus is a medical condition that results when there is not enough of the insulin hormone in the blood, or when the body cannot properly use the insulin it produces (insulin resistance). People with diabetes mellitus are called diabetics.

There is another disease with a similar name called diabetes insipidus. However, they are not related. When people say "diabetes", they usually mean diabetes mellitus.

Diabetes entered the top 10 causes of death in 2019, following a significant percentage increase of 70% since 2000. Diabetes is also responsible for the largest rise in male deaths among the top 10, with an 80% increase since 2000.

Diabetes involves problems with insulin, a hormone made by the pancreas. Hormones are chemicals in the body that send messages between cells. Insulin is one of several hormones that control the glucose level in blood.

Eating causes the pancreas to make insulin to send a message to other cells in the body. This insulin tells the cells to take up glucose from the blood. The glucose is used by cells for energy. Extra glucose that is not needed right away is stored in some cells as glycogen. When you are not eating, cells break down the stored glycogen into glucose to use as energy.

Glucose is not the regular "table sugar" that is available in stores and supermarkets. Table sugar is  sucrose, and it is very different from glucose. Glucose is a natural carbohydrate that our bodies use as a source of energy. Soft drinks and fruits have high concentrations of glucose.

Type 1 diabetes mellitus happens when a person's own immune system destroys the part of the pancreas that makes insulin.  When the pancreas does not make insulin, glucose (sugar) in the blood cannot get into the parts of the body that need sugar to live.  In order to live, a person with type 1 diabetes must take insulin for the rest of their life, usually through injections or a pump.  They need to check their blood sugar level often, many times each day.

Type 1 diabetes happens most of the time in younger people. It can occur in adults, although this is much less common.  About 1 out of every 10 people with diabetes have type 1 diabetes.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus is very different from type 1 diabetes. In type 2 diabetes, the person makes insulin. However, either they do not make enough, or the insulin they make does not work properly.  When insulin does not work as it should, glucose (sugar) in the blood cannot get into the parts of the body that need sugar.

Gestational diabetes mellitus is like type 2 diabetes.  It happens to some women when they are pregnant.

Type 2 diabetes happens most often in older people who are overweight or obese.

Symptoms of type 1 diabetes usually appear suddenly.  In type 2 diabetes, there may be mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. This makes it much harder to detect.

About 2% of people have other types of diabetes. These types include monogenic diabetes, cystic fibrosis-related diabetes and diabetes caused by rare syndromes.

Some medications (steroids, antipsychotics) as well as hormonal imbalance can also lead to some types of diabetes.

People with diabetes usually experience the following symptoms:

Complications are problems that happen because of a disease. In the case of diabetes, there are two kinds of complications. The first kind happens quickly and can be dealt with quickly. This kind is called an acute complication. The other kind is caused by the blood glucose being too high for many years, and is called a chronic complication or long-term complication.

Excess blood glucose is called 'hyperglycemia'. If a person's blood sugar is very high, it can cause acute complications. In type 1 diabetics, one of these complications is diabetic ketoacidosis which is a medical emergency and can often be detected by a fruity smell on the breath. Another very dangerous acute complication, more common in type 2 diabetics, is non-ketotic hyperosmolar coma.

Low blood glucose is called hypoglycemia. It can also cause acute complications. If it is severe enough, it can be fatal.

If their blood sugar is too low, diabetics can have many symptoms, like sweating, trembling, anger (or feeling passive), and possibly even fainting. Diabetics with hypoglycemia may be confused or lose consciousness (pass out). They may appear to have drunk too much alcohol. Severe hypoglycemia is very dangerous and can come on quite suddenly.

The best treatment of hypoglycemia is avoiding it. If it happens, eating food containing glucose (for example, table sugar) usually improves the condition quickly. Sometimes it is treated by giving an injection of a medicine called 'glucagon'. Glucagon is a hormone made by the pancreas which has the opposite effect of insulin. Administering glucagon will cause the blood glucose level to rise by forcing stored glucose into the blood.  Hypoglycemia is usually caused by too much diabetic medication, insufficient food, too much exercise, or a combination of these.

Chronic complications are mostly caused by hyperglycemia in cases where the blood sugar is usually high, but not high enough to cause acute complications. Over time, the chronic high blood sugar damages blood vessels and nerves. Damage to blood vessels can eventually cause strokes, heart attacks, kidney failure, blindness, slow healing of skin breaks - with the added possibility of infection - and even amputations from poor circulation (decreased blood flow, usually to the feet and toes). Damage to nerves can make diabetics not feel pain (this usually happens in their feet). This causes them to have more injuries and not realize they have hurt themselves. Damage to nerves can also cause pain even when there's no real injury. It's a type of phantom pain or ghost pain. The pain can be so intense that strong pain medication may be required. They may also suffer severe constipation and frequent urination.

These conditions are related to blood sugar, but they're very different. Hyperglycemia is when your blood sugar spikes too high, while hypoglycemia means your blood sugar level is lower than normal.

Because high blood glucose can cause so much damage, it is important to treat diabetes mellitus. The goal is to maintain a normal blood glucose level: 80-120 mg/dL (milligrams of glucose per deciliter of blood) or 3.5-7 mmol/l (millimole per liter of blood). These are different ways of saying the same thing, much like yards and meters are different units of distance measurement.

Diabetics should check their blood glucose frequently to make sure they do not get hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. A glucometer is a battery-powered measuring device that checks the blood glucose level. Diabetics often carry a glucometer with them and check their blood sugar level several times a day.

Doctors may also use a blood test called a hemoglobin A1C. This is sometimes written Hgb-A1C or other ways; there's no standard name. This tells the doctor what the average blood glucose has been for about the past 90 days. If the level has been too high, it may indicate new medication, different medication dosages, or a better diet may be needed. Genetic tests may also be used to diagnose most forms of diabetes which are caused by a gene mutation.

Diabetics must be monitored for signs of complications due to diabetes. They should see an eye doctor (ophthalmologist) regularly to be checked for damage to the blood vessels in the eyes. If this is not found and treated early, it can cause blindness. They should have their urine or blood checked regularly for signs of kidney damage. They must check their feet for cuts, bruises, blisters, and other problems at least every day. The feet should be checked regularly for other things like damage to nerves, problems with the circulation, and infections.

The most important goal in diabetes is to keep the blood glucose level as close to normal as possible. This requires effort and awareness. Because blood glucose rises after eating and decreases after exercise, managing blood sugar can be complex.

Treatment differs between type 1 and type 2 diabetes.  People with type 1 diabetes are treated with insulin. People with type 2 usually begin with diet, exercise, and losing weight, perhaps moving to medication (and, though not as common, insulin).

Education is important for both types of diabetes. Diabetics must learn about diet. They learn how to estimate and keep track of how much carbohydrate, protein, and fat are in different foods. They plan their meals to have the right amount of each. People with type 1 may decide how much insulin to take before a meal based on how much they will eat.

Diabetics must also be careful about exercise. Exercise is important to stay healthy, but intense or extended periods of exercise can cause hypoglycemia. As a result, diabetics must plan exercise carefully.

In addition to controlling blood glucose levels, other treatments may be needed. Diabetics often have blood vessel diseases, so it is important to pay attention to other diseases that may affect blood vessels. In people with diabetes, treating high blood pressure (hypertension) and high cholesterol (hypercholesterolaemia) is more important than usual. Both of these diseases damage blood vessels.

The treatment goals can change for diabetics. For instance, in people without diabetes, blood pressure should be 140/90 or less. In diabetics, it should be 130/80 or less.

A health disparity refers to unfair burden of disease on one population compared to another. In the United States, there is a health disparity faced by South Asian Americans (SAA) when it comes to diabetes. Overall, diabetes is linked to obesity or high body mass index (BMI). However, SAA face this condition at lower BMIs due to their food, lifestyle, and biological factors. Traditional diets consist of foods that are usually are imported, brought in the country from outside, without nutrition labels or in different languages. This makes it hard to follow the dietary guidelines for Americans or government recommendations on how to eat healthy.

Also, a lot of the population does not know that there are biological factors that make it likely for them to get diabetes. One big factor is insulin resistance. Insulin is a hormone or an assisting character that helps sugar get into cells. Sometimes, bodies get into the condition of ignoring insulin which means the sugar cannot easily get into cell. To solve this problem, the body ends up making even more insulin which just leads to high blood sugar levels in bloodstream. Because diabetes costs the government and people a healthy life and a lot of money, more people, specifically SAAs, should be aware of their risks to minimize chance of diabetes.

Confucius  (born 551 BC, died 479 BC) was an important Chinese educator and philosopher. His original name was Kong Qiu or Zhong Ni.

As a child, he was eager to learn about everything, and was very interested in rituals. Although he grew up in extreme poverty, it did not stop his curiosity from growing. He was a very dedicated student, especially in his teenage years. It is not known how he received his formal education, but he mastered many subjects of the arts. Once he grew up, he worked as a state official who handled farms and cattle. Then he became a teacher.

Confucius lived in a time when many states were fighting wars in China.

This period was called the Spring and Autumn period of the Zhou Dynasty.

Confucius did not like this and wanted to bring order back to society.

Like Socrates, Confucius sometimes did not answer philosophical questions himself.

Instead he wanted people to think hard about problems and to learn from others, especially from history.

Confucius also thought that people should get power because they were good and skilled, and not just because they came from powerful families.

Confucius wanted people to think about other people more than about money or what they owned.

However he also felt that there should be strong rules in society and that people needed to obey them.

Confucius thought that there were five relationships people could have, and that they all had their own rules.

These were traditional relationships called the 'five prototypes'.

Confucius said that in all these relationships, both people must obey rules.

For example, a subject must obey a prince, but also a prince must listen to a subject and must rule him well and fairly.

Confucius said that people should only do things to other people if they would be okay with other people doing those things to themselves.

This is sometimes called the Golden Rule and was also taught by Jesus Christ.

His students wrote down small stories about him, and things that he said.

These were put together to make a book called The Analects, which became one of the main books of Confucianism.

Classical mechanics is the part of physics that describes how everyday things move and how their motion changes because of forces. If we know how things are moving now, classical mechanics allows us to predict how they will move in the future and how they were moving in the past. We can use classical mechanics to predict how things like planets and rockets move.

Classical mechanics is not accurate when things are the size of atoms or smaller: for those things, we use quantum mechanics instead. Classical mechanics is also not accurate when things move close to the speed of light: for those things, we use special relativity instead.

The position of an object tells you where it is. For example, if you live in New York City and your friend lives in Seattle, your friend has a position of 3,876 kilometers (2,408 miles) west from you. But your friend would say that you have a position of 3,876 kilometers (2,408 miles) east from them instead. This is because position depends on where "position zero" or the origin is. For you, the origin is in New York City, but for your friend, the origin is in Seattle. So we make sure to always say where the origin is when we talk about position.

We talk about position using vectors: we first say a distance (such as 3,000 km) and then the direction (such as east, left, or 38 degrees south). If there is no direction, position is simply distance. Position can sometimes be negative: for example, New York City is 3,876 kilometers (2,408 miles) east of Seattle and Seattle is negative 3,876 kilometers (2,408 miles) east of New York City. However, it is easier to say "west" instead of "negative east".

When something moves, its position changes. You may pull a book closer to you, and the book has a new position. Or, you may walk away from your house and you have a new position. The velocity of an object tells you how fast the object changes position, and where it is moving. Velocity is a vector just like position: a car can move "160 kilometers per hour west" (100 miles per hour west) or "31 miles per hour south" (50 kilometers per hour south). Since position can be negative, velocity can be negative too.

When something speeds up or slows down, its velocity changes. The acceleration of an object tells you how fast the object speeds up or slows down. Acceleration is a vector, too, and we can use negative acceleration when we want to say that an object slows down: for example, if you drive your car south and slow down, your acceleration is positive going north but negative going south.

Newton's laws of motion are important to classical mechanics.  Isaac Newton discovered them.  They tell us how forces change how things move, but they do not say what causes the forces.

Newton's first law of motion says that objects do not change how they move unless something pushes or pulls them. Things that push or pull objects are called forces.

Before Isaac Newton, people thought that things do not move forever: they will always stop even if nothing touches them. On Earth, this seems correct: if you roll a ball on the grass, the ball will stop; if you push a book across a table, the book stops moving. But this does not happen everywhere. In outer space, rockets and planets move and they do not slow down or stop. So something on Earth makes objects stop moving, and this is a force called friction. Every object that touches another object feels friction. Even when you throw something like a baseball, the baseball feels friction because of the air. This is called drag or air resistance. In outer space, there is no friction because outer space is a vacuum: there are no objects there, including no air.Gravity is another force that changes how objects move on Earth, but in outer space gravity is very small unless you are close to a planet or a star.

Newton's first law of motion also tells us that an object that is not moving will stay still unless something pushes or pulls it. This makes sense because a book on your bookshelf does not suddenly fly away.

Newton's second law of motion says that bigger objects need a bigger force to change how they move, and smaller objects need a smaller force to change how they move. For example, it is easy to push a marble across the floor but it is really hard to push a car across the road. This is because the car is very heavy and the marble is not.

We sometimes write Newton's second law of motion as an equation: .  is the amount of force you need,  is the mass of the object you want to move, and  is the amount of acceleration (change of velocity) that the object gets when you try to move it. We can also write the equation as , where  is momentum and  is the way we write "change in momentum over time" using calculus. Momentum is the mass of an object times how fast it is moving (its speed): , where  is the speed. A bumblebee has a small mass, but it moves very fast so it has lots of momentum. The Earth moves very slow, but it has a large mass so it also has lots of momentum.

Newton's third law of motion says that forces always come in pairs. When you push a book, the book also pushes you, but it does not push you very far because you have a much larger mass. However, if you and your friend go ice skating and you push your friend, you and your friend both move back.

Consider a book lying on a table. The weight of book is acting on the table in the downward direction. This is action. The reaction of table act on the book in upward direction.

A rocket works because of Newton's third law of motion: the bottom of the rocket makes very hot gas and the gas pushes the colder air. Then the rocket goes up because the colder air also pushes the bottom of the rocket. The force that makes a rocket go up is called thrust. Birds and airplanes fly because of Newton's third law of motion: this is because both birds and airplanes push air down when they move, and the air pushes them up. This force is called lift. Without lift, birds and airplanes fall on the ground.

In physics, kinematics is the part of classical mechanics that explains the movement of objects without looking at what causes the movement or what the movement affects.

1-Dimensional (1D) Kinematics are used only when an object moves in one direction: either side to side (left to right) or up and down. There are equations with can be used to solve problems that have movement in only 1 dimension or direction. These equations come from the definitions of velocity, acceleration and distance.

2-Dimensional kinematics is used when motion happens in both the x-direction (left to right) and the y-direction (up and down). There are also equations for this type of kinematics. However, there are different equations for the x-direction and different equations for the y-direction. Galileo proved that the velocity in the x-direction does not change through the whole run. However, the y-direction is affected by the force of gravity, so the y-velocity does change during the run.

A clock is a device that tells the time. Some clocks can only show the time. Other clocks can show other things. For example, some clocks can show the date as well as the time, or show other information, like the timer,

temperature or the weather, some have stopwatch and some have alarm.

Clocks use different ways to measure time. Clocks need some sort of steady beat or motion to track the change in time. Ancient water clocks worked by the steady movement of water from a container with a hole in the bottom to another container without a hole. Other clocks use pendulums, springs and gears to track the change in time correctly.

Digital clocks work by measuring the vibrations of quartz crystals when charged with electricity. The vibration frequency of the crystal does not change.

Atomic clocks use the electromagnetic waves absorbed and emitted by atoms such as caesium to measure time. They are the most precise clocks in the world.

The two most common types of displays on clocks are "analog" and "digital".

Analog clocks use angles to tell time. They have hands that rotate around the clock's face (the front of the clock). The position of the hands shows the time. The face of the clock is a flat disk. It will often have the numbers one through twelve on the face to make it easier to read. Analog clocks commonly have two or three hands. If it has two, there is a large hand or minute hand and a smaller hand, the hour hand. Clocks with three hands also have a second hand. This hand is usually about as long as the minute hand, but much thinner.

Each hand shows the time it is named for and moves around the face of the clock one complete rotation for each movement to the next larger hand. For example, the second hand moves around the face of the clock in 60 seconds. It moves once each second. When it moves all the way around the clock, the minute hand moves forward one space. When the minute hand moves all the way around the face of the clock (which takes 60 minutes), the hour hand moves forward one section. The second and minute hands take 60 movements to move all around the face of the clock. The hour hand only needs 12 movements to do the same.

Digital clocks use numbers to show the time. LCDs and LEDs are common for digital clocks. Unlike analog clocks which are based on 12 hours, digital clocks can use either a 12-hour clock (often with am for postmidnight/morning and pm for afternoon/evening) or a 24-hour clock. Digital clocks are usually smaller and easier to both use and read than analog clocks but they can also be made much larger. New digital clocks can even correct themselves using the internet or radio signals.

There are also clocks that use sound, usually along with a dial or some other means, to show the time. The sound could be as simple as a bell or so complex that it sounds the same as a person. Many clocks that do this are old and are driven by springs or weights rather than batteries or other forms of electric power. Some special clocks are often used by people who are blind or cannot see well enough to read an analog or digital clock. They can also be used by people with mental problems that cause them to be unable to read other clocks.

There are many different types of clocks and watches. They are different in what they are used for, what they can do or how they are made. Examples include:

Confucianism is the philosophy based on the teachings of Confucius (551 BC - 479 BC), who was an important Chinese philosopher. Confucianism is a system of moral, social, political, and religious thought, and has had a large influence on the history of Chinese civilization.  Some people think Confucianism should be called a religion but others do not agree.

Confucianism was made to stop the fall of former Chinese society. After the Zhou Dynasty fell, people cared only for themselves and did not have any respect for others. This created a situation lacking peace and social order. Confucianism became a social order for China, teaching that social relationships are the most important. People slowly started to believe in it, because they wanted to have peace, but they had to care for themselves too. As a result, Confucianism brought the people love, harmony, and respect for one another.

Confucianism was started in Ch'u-fu, Confucius's birthplace.  Today, Confucianism has spread around the world, but it is still more important in China.

The teachings of Confucius focus largely on the respect of one's parents, elders, and ancestors. He also taught that humans 'can never stop learning'; meaning that knowledge is infinite, therefore we will always learn, never stopping. For example, he once asked a seven-year-old child to be his teacher, because the child knew something that he did not.

Confucianism is mainly built on the idea of etiquette and building good relations within a community. Confucius, founder of Confucianism, taught that harmony was a fundamental aspect of the world, and viewed God (Tian) as not the personal maker of the universe, but as the governing order and regularity of the universe, and that people should regularly engage in ritual dedicated to God in order ground oneself and the community with the divine.

The Three Fundamental Bonds and Five Constant Virtues: are the bases of morality.

Chinese culture that exists today has its roots in Confucianism. Confucius believed that families are the building blocks of a society, which is why he laid emphasis on Filial Piety, which is known as xiào (孝) in Chinese. Filial Piety means loyalty towards one's family. A Filial son is expected to take care of his parents and go to any extent to make their wishes come true. Confucians venerate their ancestors in the form of ritual dedicated to statues or representations of them.

Confucianism advocates for people to strive for achieving the title of a Junzi, or "gentleman". The Confucian Junzi acts as a leader to the community, has the ability to see beyond himself and works in the interest of the whole rather than himself, works towards gradual, rather than immediate, goals, and is loyal and humble.

I Ching divination is regularly practiced in the realm of Confucianism, as the book of I Ching is part of the Confucian Five Classics.

The book, Analects, describes the teachings of Confucius and was written by his disciples.

A civil war is a type of war that takes place between two or more groups in one country. While civil wars can take place for many reasons, there are two common reasons.

The first is because the different groups disagree about who should be in charge, or how the country should be run. If two political parties disagree about the result of an election and do not come to an agreement, this might lead to a war.

The second is because one group of people does not want to be part of the country anymore. This is known as a war of secession or separatism. A group living in a certain area might decide that they want independence to make their own country. Very few national leaders would be happy to give up land that is part of their country, and a war could result.

Sometimes the people who want to break away do not necessarily want to form a whole new country, but they might want more autonomy over their affairs. This happens sometimes when different ethnic groups belong to the same nation.

Civil wars can go on for many years and be just as destructive and damaging as international wars. Civil wars tend to become complicated very quickly. A civil war might start between two sides, but groups might break up and the new, different sides could start fighting each other. Groups who were not involved at the beginning can easily be sucked in, as they fight to defend themselves against both sides. Civil wars with many different sides all fighting each other have occurred. Sometimes foreign countries help one side, or different countries help different sides. This can become a proxy war.

The Crusades were a series of religious wars initiated, supported, and sometimes directed by the Christian Latin Church in the medieval period. The best known of these military expeditions are those to the Holy Land in the period between 1095 and 1291 that were intended to conquer Jerusalem and its surrounding area from Muslim rule.

Beginning with the First Crusade, which resulted in the conquest of Jerusalem in 1099, dozens of military campaigns were organised, providing a focal point of European history for centuries. Crusading declined rapidly after the 15th century.

In 1095, Pope Urban II proclaimed the first expedition at the Council of Clermont. He encouraged military support for Byzantine emperor AlexiosI Komnenos and called for an armed pilgrimage to Jerusalem. Across all social strata in western Europe there was an enthusiastic response. Participants came from all over Europe and had a variety of motivations, including religious salvation, satisfying feudal obligations, opportunities for renown, and economic or political advantage. Later expeditions were conducted by generally more organized armies, sometimes led by a king.

All were granted papal indulgences. Initial successes established four Crusader states: The County of Edessa, the Principality of Antioch, Kingdom of Jerusalem and County of Tripoli. A European presence remained in the region in some form until the fall of Acre in 1291. After this, no further large military campaigns were organised.

Other church-sanctioned campaigns include crusades against Christians not obeying papal rulings, against the Ottoman Empire, and for political reasons. The struggle between Christians and Muslims in the Iberian Peninsula was proclaimed a crusade in 1123, but eventually became better known as the Reconquista, and only ended in 1492 with the fall of the Emirate of Granada. From 1147, campaigns in Northern Europe against pagan tribes were considered crusades. In 1199, Pope Innocent III began the practice of proclaiming crusades against what the Latin Church considered heretic Christian communities.

Crusades were called against the Cathars in Languedoc and against Bosnia; against the Waldensians in Savoy and the Hussites in Bohemia; and in response to the rise of the Ottoman Empire. Unsanctioned by the church, there were also several popular Crusades.

The crusades started as a fight for control over the Holy Land, also known as the Land of Israel. The Holy Land is very important for the three major monotheistic religions: Islam, Judaism and Christianity. Muslims believe the Prophet Mohammed visited the Holy Land and rose to Heaven from Jerusalem. Christians believe Jesus was born, crucified, and resurrected in the Holy Land.  The Dome of the Rock, the Western Wall, the Temple Mount, and the Mount of Olives are all located there.  So are many other important religious sites.

During the Caliphate of Umar in the 7th century, Muslim forces had taken control of Jerusalem, Nazareth, Bethlehem, and other important religious sites.  In the crusades, Christian armies tried to re-take control of the Holy Land.

There were many different crusades.  The biggest and most important happened between the 11th century and the 13th century.  During this time, there were 9 large crusades.  They are numbered 1 through 9.

There were also many smaller crusades. These continued through the 16th century, until the Renaissance and Reformation. Some crusades were within Europe. For example, the Teutonic Knights fought in the Prussian Crusade against the Lithuanians and Old Prussians, and the Albigensian Crusade was in France. There were also crusades in Austria and Scandinavia. The word "crusade" is related to the word "cross", and means a Christian holy war.

In 1095 the ruler of the Byzantine Empire, Alexius I, called for help to defend his empire against the Seljuk Turks. Pope Urban II asked all Christians to join a war against the Turks. The Pope told Christians that fighting the war would repay God for their sins. He said that anyone who died on a crusade would go straight to heaven.

The Christian soldiers who joined the crusade were called "crusaders". They marched to Jerusalem, attacking several cities on their way. In 1099 they won the battle for Jerusalem.

As a result of the First Crusades, four crusader states were created. These were the County of Edessa, the Principality of Antioch, the County of Tripoli and the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

After about 50 years of peace, Bernard of Clairvaux called for a new crusade after the Turks attacked the town of Edessa. French and German armies marched to the Holy Land in 1147, but were defeated. However, on the way, the Crusaders helped the Portuguese capture Lisbon from Al-Andalus as part of the Reconquista.

In 1187, after Saladin recaptured Jerusalem, Pope Gregory VIII called for a new crusade. Three of Europe's kings led this Third Crusade: Philip II of France, Richard I of England and Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor.

The Third Crusade was partially successful. The Crusaders took back control of Arsuf and Jaffa, two important cities in the Holy Land. However, they did not have enough soldiers to try to recapture Jerusalem. Instead, they made a truce with Saladin that let Christians travel safely through Jerusalem. The Crusaders then re-established the Kingdom of Jerusalem in Acre.

In 1190, Frederick drowned in Cilicia. In 1192, Richard left the Holy Land. On his way home, his ship was wrecked, leading him to Austria. There, he was captured and ransomed by his enemy, Duke Leopold.

Pope Innocent III started the Fourth Crusade in 1202. His plan was to attack the Holy Land through Egypt. To do this, he needed a fleet of ships. The Venetians agreed to build ships and train sailors for the crusade. The Venetians then changed the goal of the crusade, and went to the Christian city of Constantinople, where they tried to place a Byzantine exile on the throne. After a series of misunderstandings and outbreaks of violence, the city was sacked in 1204.

The Albigensian Crusade was started in 1209 to eliminate the Cathars of southern Europe

The Children's Crusade is a crusade of 1212. An outburst of the old popular enthusiasm led a gathering of children in France and Germany. A boy, from either France or Germany, said that Jesus had visited him, and told him to peacefully convert Muslims to Christianity. Following this vision, many children formed bands, and marched to Italy. There, they were put onto ships which either capsized in a storm, or which went to Morocco. Most of the children either starved to death or were sold into slavery.

In the first movement, Nicholas, a shepherd from Germany, led a group across the Alps and into Italy in the early spring of 1212. About 7,000 arrived in Genoa in late August. However, their plans did not bear fruit when the waters failed to part as promised and the band broke up. Some left for home, others may have gone to Rome, while still others may have travelled down the Rhône to Marseille where they were probably sold into slavery. Few returned home and none reached the Holy Land.

The second movement was led by a "shepherd boy" named Stephen de Cloyes near the village of Châteaudun. In June of that year, the boy said that he had a letter for the king of France from Jesus. He could gather a crowd of over 30,000 and went to Saint-Denis. There he was seen to work miracles. On the orders of Philip II, on the advice of the University of Paris, the crowd was sent home, and most of them went. None of the contemporary sources mentions plans of the crowd to go to Jerusalem.

Later chroniclers elaborated on these events. Recent research suggests those taking part were not children, at least not the very young. In the early 1200s, bands of wandering poor started cropping up throughout Europe. These were people displaced by economic changes at the time which forced many poor peasants in northern France and Germany to sell their land. These bands were referred to as pueri (Latin for "boys") in a condescending manner, in much the same way that people from rural areas in the United States are called "country boys."

In 1212, a young French puer named Stephen and a German puer named Nicholas separately began claiming that they had each had similar visions of Jesus. This resulted in these bands of roving poor being united into a religious protest movement which transformed this forced wandering into a religious journey. The pueri marched, following the Cross. They associated themselves with Jesus's biblical journey. This, however, was not a prelude to a holy war.

At that time, chronicles were mostly kept by the Catholic Church. They were written in Latin.

Thirty years later, chroniclers read the accounts of these processions and translated pueri as "children" without understanding the usage. So, the Children's Crusade was born. The resulting story illustrates how ingrained the concept of Crusading was in the people of that time— the chroniclers assumed that the pueri must have been Crusaders. In their innocence, they returned to the foundations of crusading characteristic of Peter the Hermit, and met the same sort of tragic fate.

According to Matthew Paris, one of the leaders of the Children's Crusade became "Le Maître de Hongrie," the leader of the Shepherds' Crusade in 1251.

During 1213, Pope Gregory IX pushed Frederick II into leading the Fifth Crusade.

The Church tried another crusade to retake the Holy Land. A crusading force from Hungary, Austria, and Bavaria captured Damietta, a city in Egypt, in 1219. The crusaders had to surrender, due to losing the battle for Cairo.

In 1228, Emperor Frederick II set sail from Brindisi for Syria. He did this after the Pope excommunicated him. By talking to the Turks he had success, and Jerusalem, Nazareth, and Bethlehem was given to the Crusaders for ten years without fighting. This was the first major crusade not started by the Papacy, a trend that was to continue for the rest of the century. This crusade only lasted for a year, from 1228 to 1229.

The Templars argued with Egypt in 1243. In 1244, Egypt attacked Jerusalem. Louis IX of France started a crusade against Egypt from 1248 to 1254. It was a failure and Louis spent much of the crusade living in the city of Acre. In the midst of this crusade was the first Shepherds' Crusade in 1251.

The Eighth Crusade was organized by Louis IX of France in 1270, to help the Crusader states in Syria. However, the crusade got as far as Tunis, where Louis died a month later.

Before he was the king, Edward I of England started a crusade in 1271. He retired the following year after a truce.

In time, the people went on Crusades for other purposes. The Crusades ended two centuries after they had begun, achieving mixed results. The crusades ended with the Mamluk Fall of Acre in 1291. (the link is not yet started).

Civilization (or civilisation) comes from the Latin word civis meaning someone who lives in a city. The Romans usually wanted conquered people to live in towns. When people are civilized, they have learned from the wisdom, skill, and knowledge gained over centuries of human progress. The opposite of civilization is sometimes said to be entropy, barbarity, rudeness, or animal-like behavior.

A civilization is generally an advanced stage of organization. That means it has laws, culture, and a regular way of getting food and protecting the people. Most civilizations have agriculture and a system of government like monarchs or elections. They speak a common language and usually have a religion of some kind. They teach their young the knowledge they need. All civilizations since the Sumerians and the Greeks have had some kind of writing. This is because writing lets people store and build up knowledge. Civilizations also have large cities, large and unique architecture, and complex labor divisions.

Past societies that would be called more primitive compared to today, are still often referred to as civilizations for their time. The Roman Empire is an example of a past large civilization. It was governed by Rome. This empire once stretched from the Scottish borders to North Africa and the eastern Mediterranean. Their language was Latin.

Latin remained the preferred way of communication among educated people, long after their civilization had vanished. Some scientists, scholars, and others in Western civilization still use Latin in the course of everyday work, even though the Western Roman civilization fell apart more than 1,500 years ago. The Roman civilization lasted almost 1000 years.

Other examples of civilizations are the Incas and Aztecs. They had large territories with complex cities and social structures. The empires were made of city-states. They had advanced agriculture that could feed many people. They also had complex architecture.

One way a civilization ends is to become part of another civilization. For example, Ancient Egypt was conquered by foreigners who changed the country. It became part  of Persian, Greek, Roman, and Islamic civilization. Another way is to go back to an earlier, simpler way of life. For example, Roman civilization collapsed in the Dark Ages. When people became more civilized again, it was the Medieval civilization.

Dhaka is the capital and largest city of Bangladesh. Dhaka is a megacity, and has a population of 10.2 million residents as of 2022, and a population of over 22.4 million residents in Greater Dhaka. It is widely considered to be one of the most densely populated built-up urban area in the world.

It is located just north of the Buriganga River, a channel of the Dhaleswari River, in the south-central part of the country. Dhaka is Bangladesh’s most populous city and is one of the largest metropolises in South Asia. Pop. (2001) city, 5,333,571; metro. area, 9,672,763; (2011) city, 7,033,075; metro. area, 14,543,124.

It was part of the Mughal Empire of Hindustan and served as the capital of the empire twice. Once from 1608 to 1639 and once from 1660 to 1704. After that, it became a part of the British Raj. Then it became a part of Pakistan as part of the Partition of India on 15 August 1947. Bangladesh was then called East Pakistan, and Dacca (Dhaka) became provincial capital of East Pakistan. In 1971, the new nation of Bangladesh was created.

Dhaka is home to Bangladesh Bank which is the country's central bank. Many multinational companies have offices in the city. The Dhaka Stock Exchange is one of the largest stock exchanges in South Asia.

The Bangabhaban in Dhaka is the official residence and workplace of the President of Bangladesh. It is also home to the National Parliament House.

There are 52 universities in Dhaka. Dhaka College was started in 1841, making it the oldest institution for higher education in the city.

The Hindu Dhakeshwari Temple (shrine of “The Hidden Goddess”) is located in the western part of the city.

Although the city’s history can be traced to the 1st millennium CE, the city did not rise to prominence until the 17th century, when it served as the capital of the Muslim Mughal dynasty of Bengal province (1608–39 and 1660–1704). It was the center of a flourishing sea trade, attracting English, French, Armenian, Portuguese, and Dutch traders.

Historic buildings of the Muslim period include Lal Bagh fort (1678) and its tomb of Bibi Pari (died 1684), wife of a governor of Bengal; the Bara Katra (great caravansary, a building historically used for sheltering caravans and other travelers; 1664); the Chhota Katra (small caravansary; 1663); and Husayni Dalan (a religious monument of the Shīʿite branch of Islam; 1642). Other 17th-century buildings include the Hindu Dhakeshwari temple and Tejgaon church, built by the Portuguese.

With the removal of the provincial capital to Murshidabad (1704) and the weakening of the muslin industry, Dhaka entered a period of decline. It passed under British control in 1765 and was constituted a municipality in 1864, but it continued to lose prominence until it was designated the capital of Eastern Bengal and Assam province (1905–12). During the early 20th century Dhaka served as a commercial center and seat of learning. Following the end of British rule, when the region became a part of Pakistan, it was named the capital of East Bengal province (1947) and of East Pakistan (1956). Dhaka suffered heavy damage during the war of independence in 1971 but emerged as the capital of Bangladesh.

It has one of the best schools for students to study in and it is a very educational city. Dhaka has the largest number of schools, colleges and universities of any Bangladeshi city. The education system is divided into 5 levels: Primary (from grades 1 to 6), Junior (from grades 6 to 8), Secondary (from grades 9 to 10), Higher Secondary (from grades 11 to 12) and tertiary.[98] The five years of Primary education concludes with a Primary School Completion (PSC) Examination, the three years of Junior education concludes with Junior School Certificate (JSC) Examination, and next two years of Secondary education concludes with a Secondary School Certificate (SSC) Examination. Students who pass this examination proceed to two years of Higher Secondary or intermediate training, which culminate in a Higher Secondary School Certificate (HSC) Examination.[98] Education is mainly offered in Bengali, but English is also widely taught and used. Many Muslim families send their children to attend part-time courses or even to pursue full-time religious education alongside other subjects, which is imparted in Bengali and Arabic in schools, colleges and madrasas.Dhaka College is the oldest institution for higher education in the city and among the earliest established in British India, founded in 1841. Since independence, Dhaka has seen the establishment of numerous public and private colleges and universities that offer undergraduate and graduate degrees as well as a variety of doctoral programmes.

Since its establishment as the capital city, the population, area, and social and economic diversity of Dhaka have grown tremendously. Together with its river port of Narayanganj, 10 miles (16 km) to the south, Dhaka now is one of the most densely industrialized regions in the country. Traditional products include jamdani (fine-quality muslin), embroidery, silk, and jewelry. Among the city’s major industries are jute processing and the manufacture of chemicals, pharmaceuticals, textiles, leather goods, ceramics, and electronics products. A strong export-oriented garment industry emerged in the late 20th century.

The area around Dhaka consists of a level plain bounded by the Meghna, Padma (Ganges [Ganga]), and Jamuna (Brahmaputra) rivers. The plain is crossed by a network of streams and rivers, the chief being the Dhaleswari, Buriganga, and Sitalakhya. Important crops are rice, jute, sugarcane, and oilseeds; there is also some cattle farming.

The city contains several universities, among which the University of Dhaka (1921), the Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology (1962), and Jahangirnagar University (1970) are prominent. Dhaka is also home to numerous government colleges, a nuclear-science training and research centre, the national library, a museum, and the national art gallery. In addition, the area includes the site of the ancient city of Vikramapura, former capital of the Pala rulers of Bengal (8th–12th century). Among Dhaka’s more recent buildings of note are the Star Mosque (Tara Masjid), built in the Mughal architectural style in the early 19th century with later renovations; Curzon Hall at the University of Dhaka, erected at the beginning of the 20th century, combining Mughal and European influences; and the National Assembly Building (Jatiya Sangsad Bhaban), designed by architect Louis I. Kahn and completed in 1982.

After years of negotiations, the Dhaka-Agartala bus was agreed upon on July 11, 2001. The bus connects Bangladesh with its eastern neighbor, the Indian state of Tripura. Tripura has a substantial Bengali population and indigenous peoples who have close commercial and cultural links with the people of eastern Bangladesh.

A complex number is a number, but is different from common numbers in many ways. A complex number is made up using two numbers combined. The first part is a real number, and the second part is an imaginary number. The most important imaginary number is called , defined as a number that will be -1 when squared ("squared" means "multiplied by itself"): . All other imaginary numbers are  multiplied by a real number, in the same way that all real numbers can be thought of as 1 multiplied by another number. Arithmetic functions such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division can also be performed with complex numbers. They follow commutative, associative and distributive properties, just like real numbers. The set of complex numbers is often represented using the symbol .

Complex numbers were discovered while attempting to solve special equations that have exponents in them. These equations began to pose problems for mathematicians. As a comparison, using negative numbers, it is possible to find the x in the equation  for all real values of a and b, but if only positive numbers are allowed for x, it is sometimes impossible to find a positive x, as in the equation .

With exponentiation, there is a difficulty to be overcome. There is no real number that gives −1 when it is squared. In other words, −1 (or any other negative number) has no real square root. For example, there is no real number  that solves the equation . To solve this problem, mathematicians introduced a symbol i (I representing the square root of -1) and called it the imaginary unit. This is the imaginary number that will give −1 when it is squared.

The first mathematicians to have thought of this were probably Gerolamo Cardano and Rafael Bombelli. They lived in the 16th century. It was probably Leonhard Euler who introduced writing  for that number.

All complex numbers can be written as  (or ), where a is called the real part of the number, and b is called the imaginary part. We write  or  for the real part of a complex number . So, if , we write . Similarly, we write  or  for the imaginary part of a complex number ; , for the same . Every real number is also a complex number; it is a complex number  with .

A complex number can also be written as an ordered pair , where both a and b are real numbers. Any real number can simply be written as , or as the pair .

Sometimes,  is written instead of . In electrical engineering for instance,  means electric current so j is used instead of , to avoid confusion as some complex numbers are often utilised in electrical engineering.

Addition, subtraction, multiplication and exponentiation (raising numbers to exponents) are all possible with complex numbers. Division is also possible with complex numbers, as long as the divisor is not zero. Some other calculations are also possible with complex numbers.

The rule for addition and subtraction of complex numbers is pretty simple:

Another notable operation for complex numbers is conjugation. A complex conjugate  to  is .

It is pretty simple, but is important for calculations, because  is actually a real number for all complex :

Complex numbers can be shown on a so-called complex plane. If you have a number , you can go to point a on the real axis and point b on the imaginary axis, and draw a vector from  to . The length of this vector can be calculated using the Pythagorean theorem, and the angle of this vector is simply the angle between the positive real axis and this vector—going counterclockwise. The length of a vector for a number  is called its modulus or absolute value (written as ), and the angle is called its argument ().

This leads to the trigonometrical form of describing complex numbers: by the definitions of sine and cosine, it follows that for all :

With the introduction of complex numbers to math, every polynomial with complex coefficients has roots in complex numbers. This introduction also helped to open a path to the creation of another kind of numbers, which could help resolve and explain many different problems. These include the hypercomplex numbers, sedenion, hyperreal numbers, surreal numbers and many others. For more, see types of numbers.

Delhi (;  Dillī;  Dillī;  Dēhlī), officially the National Capital Territory of Delhi (NCT), is a city and territory in India. It includes the country's capital New Delhi. It covers an area of . It is bigger than the Scandinavian territory of the Faroe Islands but smaller than the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe. Delhi is a part of the National Capital Region, which has 12.5 million people living there. The governance of Delhi is like that of a state in India, since it has its own legislature, high court, and a council of executive ministers. Delhi is a part of Punjab region.

Delhi is on the banks of the Yamuna River. Historians have evidence that people have been living in this region since at least the 6th century BC. People also believe that the legendary city of Indraprastha was here. This city has many remains and monuments of historic importance.

The India Gate is a war memorial in Delhi. Following the Bangladesh Liberation war in 1972, a structure consisting of a black marble plinth with a reversed rifle, capped by a war helmet and bounded by four eternal flames, was built beneath the archway. This structure, called Amar Jawan Jyoti (Flame of the Immortal Soldier), has since 1971 served as India's tomb of the unknown soldier.

The largest gotra of Brahmin caste in Delhi is Jamdagni in 2023.

Delhi was described as the most polluted city in the world in 2023. The air quality index, which measures levels of deadly pollutants such as very small particles known as PM2.5, is often above 400. People who live there would have a life expectancy 12 years longer if the pollution was cut to meet World Health Organization guidelines.

Deafness is when someone cannot hear at all, or cannot hear well. Deafness is also known as 'hearing loss'. There were many famous people who were deaf, such as Ludwig van Beethoven and Helen Keller.

A person is considered to be deaf if they cannot hear the same range of sounds as a person with normal hearing ability. People that cannot hear any sounds are also deaf. People who are partially deaf may hear some sounds and may hear words.

People who cannot hear and understand words well are 'hard of hearing'. And people who cannot hear and speak are called "deaf-mute".

Colonialism occurs when a country or a nation takes control of other countries, regions, or territories outside of its borders (boundaries of the country) by turning those other countries, regions, or territories into a colony. Usually, it is a more powerful, richer (developed) country that takes control of a smaller, less powerful region or territory. Sometimes the words "colonialism" and "imperialism" are used to mean the same thing. Colonialism is one of the main results of imperialism.

In the second millennium BC Phoenicia made colonies around the Mediterranean, including Carthage. A few centuries later the cities of ancient Greece also made colonies, including Naples. In the 15th, 16th, 17th, 18th and 19th centuries, many of the richer, more powerful European countries (such as Britain, Portugal, France, Spain, Germany and the Netherlands) made colonies in Africa, North America, South America, Asia and Oceania

Ancient Rome invented the word "colonia" from the word "colonus" meaning "farmer". "Colonia" at that time meant a new town to which some Romans moved, including farmers. Many of the settlers were veterans. In later centuries the word "colony" less often meant settlers, and more often meant rule by foreigners.

The Phoenicians started many trade colonies around the Mediterranean. Carthage was the largest and most famous colony, and also made other colonies including Cartagena in Spain.

Later, the Ancient Greeks expanded their territories with colonies. Ancient Greece was many city-states. Each city was independent with a government in place. Those cities also fought wars against each other and traded goods. To get more influence, or to secure a trade route, the city would send settlers to a new place. These people would then make a new city called a colony. Sometimes a new city had to pay some form of taxes to the mother city in exchange for protection, for example. The colonies, however, ruled themselves. The mother city did not send them a governor. Syracuse is the most famous of these Greek colonies.

If the Greek settlers found a local tribe living in the new territory, they would fight to force them to leave. The local tribe was usually made into slaves. The new colony would exploit the land it found, by growing crops or by raising cattle.

The history of colonization is not limited to ancient Greece. Massive colonization took place in Ancient India too. There, colonization began not with political conquest but with cultural conquest. Hinduism (and, after centuries, Buddhism) became the main source of colonization. It was a colonization that began with cultural expansion leading to economic colonization. Indians were in the role of masters for a few centuries and in the role of slaves for centuries.

The Defense Agreements between France and French-speaking African countries established close cooperation, particularly in defense and security matters. Often accompanied by secret clauses, they allowed France to intervene militarily: to rescue regimes in order to establish the legitimacy of political powers favorable to its interests, to fight jihadism, particularly in the Sahel, or to put an end to civil wars. The departure of French troops from the African continent signals the end of a world, that of interventions in Chad, Togo, Gabon, Rwanda, Djibouti, Zaire, Somalia, Ivory Coast, Mali, Libya, and Cameroon. It also marks the end of "Françafrique".

Some countries use colonialism to get more land for their people to live in. They helped settlers move to the new area. The indigenous people living in the land or territories were usually moved away by using force and violence from armies. To protect these settlers from the indigenous people who were pushed aside, colonial nations often set up a military fort or colonial police system.

Other countries use colonialism to get more land so that they can use the land for farming or to extract (take out) resources such as trees (wood), coal, or metals, or to create a local government or military fort.

Other countries use colonialism so that they can get workers from the poorer country to work in factories or farms (either in the richer country, or in the poorer country). In the past, powerful countries that were colonizing poorer countries or regions often forced the people from the poorer countries to work as slaves.

There are several different types of colonialism.  Some countries that expanded their territory made settler colonies.  Some countries that started out as settler colonies include the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and the states of Latin America.  In all of these countries, people from European countries moved to the best parts of the new place, and forced the indigenous peoples (such as Native Americans, Maori, etc.) to move. When the local people or tribes had to move, it caused a lot of problems. Many of these indigenous peoples were also enslaved, killed through genocide or died in pandemics because they had no immunity against infectious diseases brought by the settlers.

With the plantation colony, the powerful, rich country use the poorer country's land to grow crops.  Typically, slaves work on the farms.  Examples of plantation colonies include Barbados, Saint-Domingue and Jamaica.

In some regions which were colonized, the settlers married the local people and had children with them. An example is Mexico, where a new people called the mestizos came from the marriages of the settlers and the local tribes. In other regions which were colonized, the settlers and the local people lived in separate areas, without living together or marrying. An example of this situation is French Algeria (when France colonized the African country of Algeria) or Southern Rhodesia.

Another type of colonialism is when a powerful country sets up dependencies. With a dependency, the colonizing country does not send over thousands of settlers to the new territory. Instead, the colonizing country sets up administrators (a governing organization) that control the existing local (native) populations or tribes. Examples include the British Raj, (geraldine) in which the British government controlled India; the Dutch East Indies, in which the Netherlands controlled parts of the East Indies; and the Japanese colonial empire, in which Japan controlled Asian territories.

Another type of colony is the trading post colony. Rich and powerful countries set up trading post colonies so that there would be a territory where trading, selling, and business could be conducted. The rich and powerful countries usually set up military forts or police forces to enforce the rules and laws of the colonizing country. Examples of trading colonies include Macau, Malacca, Deshima and Singapore.

David Hilbert (Königsberg, Prussia, 23 January 1862 –Göttingen, Germany, 14 February 1943) was a German mathematician, logician, and philosopher of mathematics. He is widely considered to be one of the most influential and greatest mathematicians of the 19th and 20th centuries.

Hilbert discovered and developed a range of fundamental ideas in many areas. He worked on invariant theory, the axiomization of geometry, and the notion of Hilbert space. This is one of the foundations of functional analysis. Hilbert and his students supplied much of the mathematics needed for quantum mechanics and general relativity. He was one of the founders of proof theory and mathematical logic. He was also one of the first people to make the distinction between mathematics and metamathematics, and warmly defended Georg Cantor's set theory and transfinite numbers.

In 1895 Hilbert became Chairman of Mathematics at the University of Göttingen, at that time the best research center for mathematics in the world. He remained for the rest of his life. Among his students were: Hermann Weyl, the champion of chess Emanuel Lasker, Ernst Zermelo, and Carl Gustav Hempel. John von Neumann was his assistant. At the University of Göttingen, Hilbert was surrounded by a social circle of some of the most important mathematicians of the 20th century, such as Emmy Noether and Alonzo Church.

The text Grundlagen der Geometrie (Foundations of Geometry) was published by Hilbert in 1899. It proposed a formal set, Hilbert's axioms, instead of the traditional axioms of Euclid. They avoid weaknesses in those of Euclid, whose works at the time were still used textbmathematics is his 1900 presentation of a set of problems that set the course for much of the mathematical research of the 20th century.

He put forward a number of unsolved problems at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900. This is reckoned the most successful and deeply considered compilation of open problems ever to be produced by an individual mathematician. Later he expanded his list to 23 problems.

In 1920 he proposed explicitly a research project in metamathematics, which became known as Hilbert's program. He wanted mathematics to be formulated on a solid and complete logical foundation. He believed that in principle this could be done, by showing that:

He seems to have had both technical and philosophical reasons for formulating this proposal.

After 1912, Hilbert turned his focus to physics. At that time, he worked in general relativity and mathematical physics. His work in these fields is also important.

A dam is a large wall or barrier that blocks or stops the flow of water, forming a reservoir or a lake. Most dams have a section called a spillway or weir over which, or through which, water flows, either sometimes or always.

Dams generally serve the primary purpose of retaining water. The tallest dam in the world is the 300 meter high Nurek Dam in Tajikistan. Fish ladders are usually added to dams to allow fish to cross over.

Some of the first dams were built in Mesopotamia up to 7,000 years ago. Modern dams are built with arched walls of steel rod-reinforced concrete. The arched wall is a very strong shape which helps the wall to withstand the huge weight of the water.

There are a number of reasons that people build dams. Some countries build dams to control the flow of water in the downstream river systems, and prevent flooding. Other countries build dams to generate electricity using hydroelectric turbine generators. Other countries use dams to store water for use in irrigation (for farming) or drinking by people. However, mis-management of dams could cause flooding.

Constantine I (27 February 272 – 22 May 337 AD) was a Roman emperor from 306 until he died. He was emperor for longer than any other emperor since Augustus, the first emperor. He was the first ruler of the Roman Empire to be a Christian. He made the old city Byzantium into a new, larger city: Constantinople (now Istanbul, Turkey). The city's name means "City of Constantine" in Greek. He was the son of the emperor Constantius I, and members of their Constantinian dynasty controlled the empire until 364.

Six years after Constantine became Emperor, he had to fight a civil war with his rival Maxentius. A major battle of this war was the Battle of Milvian Bridge, (which is a bridge over the Tiber River.) It is believed that before the battle, Constantine saw a cross in the sky with the words . Because of this, he ordered his soldiers to draw Christian symbols on their shields. Constantine went on to win the battle and later on won the war.

Constantine (; ) was born in Naissus (Niš, Serbia). He was born on 27 February. The Calendar of Philocalus and the works of the Latin writer Polemius Silvius both say Constantine was born in 272 or 273. The Latin historian Eutropius wrote the same information. However, the Greek historian and bishop Eusebius of Caesarea wrote that Constantine was born around the year 285.

Constantine's father was Constantius, who later became Roman emperor. Constantine's mother was Helena. She was not from the nobility. The Greek historian Procopius wrote that Helena had come from Drepanon, a city in Bithynia. The Latin theologian Ambrose wrote that Helena was a . Helena and Constantius may not have married, and Helena may have been Constantius's concubine.

Constantine was a military tribune in the Roman army by 293, the year his father became caesar (a junior Roman emperor) on 23 March.

Constantius and the other caesar Galerius each became augustus (a more senior Roman emperor) on 1 May 305. On that day, the emperors Diocletian and Maximian retired. Maximinus Daza and Valerius Severus each became caesar.

The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that Constantius I died on 25 July 306 in Eboracum (York, England). There, on the same day, the army of Constantius made Constantine augustus. (Later, around August 306, the augustus Galerius agreed that Constantine was caesar, but not that he was augustus.) Roman Egypt accepted Constantine was an emperor.

In autumn 306 or early the next year, Constantine made a military campaign against the Franks. Constantine said that he was Roman consul for the first time in 307. However, the Roman provinces that other emperors controlled did not accept that Constantine was consul. Constantine may have been in Roman Britain again in 307.

Maximian and Constantine may have met at Augusta Treverorum (Trier, Germany) in 307, possibly in late summer. Maximian made Constantine augustus. Constantine married Maximian's daughter Fausta. (This could have been in late summer, September, or as late as 25 December. Historians are not in agreement about the date.) At the start of his reign, only the lands that Constantine controlled accepted Constantine as augustus. Then, the lands that Maximian's son Maxentius controlled also accepted that Constantine was an augustus.

In 308 Constantine fought a war against the Bructeri. In November 308, the emperors Diocletian, Maximian, and Galerius met at Carnutum (Petronell-Carnuntum, Austria) and agreed that Constantine was a caesar. Constantine himself continued to say that he was an augustus. The Latin writer Lactantius wrote that in 309, Constantine got the title in . The Roman provinces that Galerius controlled said that Constantine was Roman consul for the first time in 309, but the provinces Constantine and Maxentius controlled did not accept this.

In 310, probably on the 1 May, Galerius made Maximinus Daza augustus. From this time, the whole empire started to agree that Constantine was an augustus as well. In summer 310, Constantine again fought a military campaign against the Franks. A war between Constantine and Maximian began. Maximian was at Massilia (Marseille, France) when Constantine took control of the city, probably in around July 310. Then Maximian died, probably by suicide.

On 25 July 310, it was Constantine's fifth anniversary festival as emperor (his ). At that time, Constantine gave himself the name in . Constantine said that his father Constantius had been part of the family of the emperor Claudius Gothicus. This was fiction.

On 30 April 311, the augustus Galerius made a edict. The Edict of Serdica mostly ended the persecution of Christianity in the Roman Empire. At the start of May, Galerius died. Constantine was Roman consul for the second time in 312.

Constantine was consul for the third time in 313. Constantine fought a civil war with Maxentius. The Calendar of Philocalus says that the Battle of the Milvian Bridge happened on the 28 October 313. In this battle, Constantine's army overcame the army of Maxentius. Maxentius died in the battle. The Latin writer Lactantius wrote about these events. After the battle, Constantine went across the Tiber River and took control of Rome itself. The Calendar of Philocalus says that Constantine went into the city on 29 October, and that there was a festival for two days.

After 18 January 313, Constantine was in Mediolanum (Milan, Italy). There Constantine met his co-emperor, Licinius, in January or February. Either in autumn 313 or during the first half of 314, Constantine travelled to Britain. On 1 August 314 in the city of Arelate (Arles, France), the Council of Arles started (a meeting of bishops. Constantine was consul for the fourth time in 315. In the first half of 315, Constantine probably had success in a military campaign he fought against the Goths and Sarmatians.

The Calendar of Philocalus says that Constantine came again to Rome in July 315. There was a ceremony (an ) when Constantine came to the city. The Calendar says that there was a festival for two days. Constantine got the . On 25 July 315, it was Constantine's tenth anniversary as emperor (his ).

On 27 September 315 Constantine went away from Rome. There was another ceremony (a ) when Constantine went out of the city. At some time, Constantine fought a civil war with his co-emperor Licinius. The Calendar of Philocalus says that Constantine's army overcame Licinius's army at the Battle of Cibalae on 8 October 314, but historians are not in agreement about the date. It may have been in 316. After this civil war, Constantine and Licinius made peace. This was either at the end of 314 or in January 317. As part of the agreement, Constantine got from Licinius the Roman provinces next to the Danube. (Licinius kept Thracia however.)

The Consularia Constantinopolitana and the Chronicon Paschale both say Constantine and Licinius chose co-emperors on 1 March 317. Constantine and his co-emperor made their three sons their junior co-emperors (their ). Crispus and Constantine II (Constantine's sons) and Licinius II (Licinius's son) were each made caesar at Serdica (Sofia, Bulgaria). Constantine was Roman consul for the fifth time in 319. He was consul for the sixth time in 320. On the 25 July 320, it was Constantine's fifteenth anniversary as emperor (his ).

In 321, it was the fifth anniversary of Crispus, Constantine II, and Licinius II as emperors (each caesar's ). In summer 322, Constantine won a military victory against the Sarmatians. At the start of 323, Constantine fought a war against the Goths.

In 324, Constantine and Crispus fought another war against their co-emperor Licinius. The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that Constantine's army overcame the army of Licinius in a battle near Hadrianopolis (Edirne, European Turkey) on 3 July 324. Constantine's armies again overcame Licinius's soldiers at the Battle of Chrysopolis. The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that this battle was on the 18 September 324. Licinius and Licinius II both retired from being emperors. On 8 November that year, Constantine made his son Constantius II caesar. At that time, all Constantine's co-emperors were Constantine's own children (the  Crispus, Constantine II, and Constantius II).

On 20 May 324 at Nicaea (İznik, Turkey) the Council of Nicaea started. This meeting of bishops ended on 19 July 325. The Greek historian Socrates Scholasticus wrote about these events. The Chronicle of the Latin theologian Jerome and the Chronicon Paschale both say that on 25 July 325, it was Constantine's twentieth anniversary festival as emperor (his ) at Nicomedia (İzmit, Turkey).

Constantine was Roman consul for the seventh time in 326. The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that in around March 326, Constantine executed his oldest son, the caesar Crispus. The Calendar of Philocalus says that on 18 July 326 (or the 21 July) Constantine again came to Rome. When he came to the city there was another  ceremony. Jerome wrote that on 25 July 326, it was Constantine's twentieth anniversary festival as emperor (his ) in Rome. (326 was the second year in which Constantine had a festival for the same twentieth anniversary.) Jerome's Chronicle and the Chronicon Paschale both say that Constantine set up the city of Helenopolis on 7 January 327. Constantine was consul for the eighth time in 329. The year was the last time Constantine was consul. The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that on 11 May 330, Constantine was in Byzantium. On that day, Constantine dedicated again the city. After that, Byzantium had the name Constantinople (; ).

The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that on 25 December 333, Constantine made his youngest son, Constans, his caesar. They were probably at Constantinople then. In 333 or 334, Calocaerus started a rebellion in Cyprus. The Consularia Constantinopolitana says that the Romans forced the Sarmatians out of the Banat area around the Danube in 334.

Around 335, Shapur II's armies attacked Armenia, as part of the Roman–Persian Wars. Shapur's Sasanian Empire sent Narses to invade Armenia, but the attack did not have success and Narses died. The Consularia Constantinopolitana and the Chronicon Paschale both say that on 25 July 335, it was Constantine's thirtieth anniversary festival as emperor (his ) at Constantinople. Eusebius of Caesarea gave a speech at the festival.

On the 18 September 335, Constantine made Dalmatius caesar. Constantine probably made Hannibalianus "King of Kings and of the Pontic people" () on the same day. Eusebius of Caesarea's Life of Constantine says that a Persian embassy from the Sasanian Empire came to Constantine at Constantinople not long after the festival of Easter. Constantine had been at Constantinople on Easter (3 April 337).

Eusebius of Caesarea's Life of Constantine says that Constantine died at Ancyrona, near Nicomedia (İzmit, Turkey). He died on 22 May 337.

Constantine was the first Christian Roman emperor. His rule changed the Christian Church greatly. In March 313, Constantine met with Licinius in Milan where they made the Edict of Milan. The edict said that Christians could believe what they wanted. This stopped people from punishing Christians, who had often been martyred, or killed for their faith. It also returned the property which had been taken away from them. In 311, Galerius had made a similar edict, though it did not return any property to them. In pagan Rome before this, it had been against the law to practise Christianity, and Christians had often been tortured or killed.  Constantine protected them.  He went on to organize the whole Christian Church at the First Council of Nicea, even though he himself did not get baptized until near the end of his life.

Constantine did not support Christianity alone.  After winning the Battle of the Milvian Bridge, he built the Arch of Constantine to celebrate, but the arch was decorated with pictures of sacrifices to gods like Apollo, Diana, or Hercules.  It had no Christian symbolism.  In 321, Constantine said that Christians and non-Christians should all join the "day of the sun" (the eastern sun-worship which Aurelian had helped him introduce). His coins also had symbols of the sun-cult until 324. Even after pagan gods disappeared from the coins, Christians symbols never appeared on the coin, either. Even when Constantine dedicated the new city of Constantinople, he was wearing the Apollonian sun-rayed Diadem.

The Commonwealth of Nations (also known only as "Commonwealth") is a voluntary organisation of countries. Originally, it was called the  British Commonwealth  which was founded in 1926 when the British Empire began to break up. Now, there are 56 member countries of the Commonwealth.

Only countries which were part of the British Empire are allowed to become members of the Commonwealth (although an exception was made for Rwanda, Mozambique and Gabon which were never colonised by Britain, when they were allowed to become members). Members are free to leave and rejoin the Commonwealth. However, joining or rejoining the Commonwealth can become difficult, when the candidate country has serious human rights violations.

The term the Commonwealth of Nations originated in 1884. Lord Rosebery was on a visit to Australia in 1884. At Adelaide he said that over a period of time a number of colonies of the British Empire will become free and many may become more independent. He further said that all of these countries would then become the Commonwealth of Nations.

The Commonwealth of Nations is not a political organization. King Charles III is also head of state of 15 Commonwealth countries, referred to as Commonwealth realms. Canada and Australia are two of the largest realms.  A Secretary General manages the day-to-day matters of the Commonwealth of Nations. Patricia Scotland is the Secretary General since 2015. However, the United Kingdom or the Secretary General does not have any direct or indirect control over these countries. In fact, almost all the 53 members are independent countries with their own governments and hold Commonwealth Games. These countries have come together to form an association with some common aims. Such common aims include:

The Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) is a regional intergovernmental organization in Eurasia of countries that used to form the Soviet Union.

On December 8, 1991, leaders of Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine met at the nature reserve called Belovezhskaya Pushcha in Belarus. They discussed the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) in place of the Soviet Union. They reached an agreement about many points and signed a document creating the CIS. One of these points stated that the alliance would be open to all the republics of the Soviet Union. Other nations with similar goals could also join the CIS.

The Soviet Union had 15 republics: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Georgia, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. On 6th September 1991, the Soviet Union had recognized the independence of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania. Out of the remaining 12 republics, all (except Georgia) joined the CIS. Before joining the CIS, on 21st December 1991, leaders of these 11 countries had met in Kazakhstan to accept the original CIS agreement of 8th December 1991. Because Ukraine did not ratify the CIS agreement in the national parliament, it never became an official member of the CIS, but nevertheless participated as a de facto member. In December 1993, Georgia also joined the CIS. On 26th August 2006 Turkmenistan left the permanent membership, and became an associate member. On 15th August 2008 Georgia left the CIS membership, and Georgia's CIS membership officially ended on 17th August 2009. On 19 May 2018, Ukraine, which stopped participating in CIS in 2014 because of its conflict with Russia over Crimea and the Donbas, formally ended all participation in CIS.

With the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), the Soviet Union ceased to exist. It was the dissolution of the Soviet Union. Many consider that with CIS, Russia continues to have some control over the former republics of the Soviet Union.

The CIS has its headquarters at Minsk, Belarus. An executive director heads the CIS. The CIS is not a successor country to the Soviet Union. The CIS is an organization or alliance of independent countries. It is more like the European Community. The member countries of the CIS had also signed many agreements for economic cooperation and defense cooperation. They have signed other agreements for cooperation in foreign policy and other matters.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo (), commonly referred to as DR Congo, Congo-Kinshasa or the DRC, is a country in central Africa. It was known as Zaïre from 1971 to 1997. It is the second largest country in Africa by area and the eleventh largest in the world. With a population of over 71 million, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is the nineteenth most populous nation in the world, the fourth most populous nation in Africa, as well as the most populous Francophone (French-speaking) country.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo borders the Central African Republic and South Sudan to the north; Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi in the east; Zambia and Angola to the south; the Republic of the Congo, the Angolan exclave of Cabinda, and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. It is separated from Tanzania by Lake Tanganyika in the east. The country has access to the ocean through a  stretch of Atlantic coastline at Muanda and the roughly 9 km wide mouth of the Congo River which opens into the Gulf of Guinea. It is the only country that has bonobos and the country has the second-highest total Christian population in Africa.

When the Belgian Congo became independent, its leaders fought each other. The Soviet Union and later the United Nations helped destroy the groups who wanted independence from the new country.

The Second Congo War, beginning in 1998, devastated the country. It involved nine African nations and some twenty armed groups. Despite the signing of peace accords in 2003, fighting continues in the east of the country. There, the prevalence of rape and other sexual violence is described as the worst in the world. The war is the world's deadliest conflict since World War II, killing 5.4 million people since 1998. The vast majority died from conditions of malaria, diarrhea, pneumonia and malnutrition.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo was formerly, in chronological order, the Congo Free State, Belgian Congo, Congo-Léopoldville, Congo-Kinshasa, and Zaire (Zaïre in French). Though it is in the Central African United Nations subregion, the nation is also economically and regionally affiliated with Southern Africa as a member of the Southern African Development Community (SADC).

The city of Goma was captured in 2025, as part of the M23 offensive (a series of attacks); The city is "eastern DR Congo’s biggest city"; The armed group M23 is backed by Rwanda. In February, the government lost control of the city of Bukavu and the town of Kavumu and its strategic military airport (map).

Earlier (January 26), the country cut its diplomatic contact with Rwanda, because of Rwanda supporting M23.

The Kivu conflict is ongoing (2025). North Kivu and South Kivu provinces are in the eastern part of the country. Some of the most active rebel groups are the Allied Democratic Forces, CODECO, and some Mai Mai militias. A UN peacekeeping force, MONUSCO, is in the country.

FDLR are supported by the military, in their fight against M23. The group is made up of Hutus. FARDC are the Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Western DR Congo clashes are a series of attacks; As late as July 2024, 42 Mobondo rebels were killed when they attacked a village; 9 government forces died.

The country is bordered by Angola, the South Atlantic Ocean, the Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania across Lake Tanganyika, and Zambia.

World Heritage Sites in the Democratic Republic of Congo include Virunga National Park (1979), Garamba National Park (1980),

Kahuzi-Biega National Park (1980), Salonga National Park (1984) and Okapi Wildlife Reserve (1996).

The country is divided into twenty six provinces. The provinces are then divided into districts. The districts are divided into territories.

The Cyrillic script, sometimes called the Slavonic script or Slavic script, is a writing system. It is used to write Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, Rusyn, Bulgarian, Macedonian and most South Slavic languages. It was developed in the Bulgarian empire during the reign of Tsar Simeon I. The Soviet Union made many non-Slavic languages in the Caucasus, Siberia, Central Asia and in northern Russia to be written in Cyrillic.

Old Church Slavonic was the original language of the Slavic people, and it was used for Russian Orthodox Church. In the 9th century, two monks, St. Cyril and St. Methodius, were missionaries in Eastern Europe. When they preached to the Slavic peoples, they invented the Glagolitic alphabet, an early form of Cyrillic.

In 1708, Peter the Great added lowercase forms to the letters.

After the October Revolution, the Communist Party changed the Cyrillic alphabet for the Russian language so it would be easier for Soviet citizens to learn how to read and write. The letters I/i, Ѣ/ѣ, Ѳ/ѳ, and Ѵ/ѵ were all removed from Russian.

In 1991, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan decided to drop the Cyrillic script and adopt the Latin script.

Damascus () is the capital city of Syria. In Arabic, its name is Dimashq (دمشق). It is the largest city in Syria with about 4.8 million people living there. Damascus is thought to be one of oldest cities in the world that still has people living in it. It is believed that people started living in Damascus as long ago as 8000 BC to 10,000 BC (12000 years ago).

Damascus is about 50 miles inland from the Mediterranean Sea, sheltered by the Anti-Lebanon Mountains.

Damascus used to play an important role as an important trade center. Now it is not because of political development in the region as well as the development of modern trade. Most goods produced in Damascus, as well as in Syria, are distributed to countries of the Arabian peninsula. Damascus also holds an annual international trade exposition in the fall since 1955.

There are many universities in Damascus, one public university: Damascus University. while other universities are private, such as the Syrian Private University  and the aljazeera Private University.

Damascus has many historical sites dating back to many different periods of the city's history. Since the city has been built up with every passing job, it has become almost impossible to dig out all the ruins of Damascus that lie up to 8 feet (2.4 m) below the modern level. The Citadel of Damascus is in the northwest corner of the Old City. The Bab Sharqi street is filled with small shops and leads to the old Christian quarter of Bab Tuma (St. Thomas's Gate). Medhat Pasha Souq is also a main market in Damascus and was named after Medhat Pasha. At the end of the Bab Sharqi street, one reaches the House of Ananias, an underground chapel that was the cellar of Ananias's house. The Umayyad Mosque, also known as the Grand Mosque of Damascus, is one of the largest mosques in the world and also one of the oldest sites of continuous prayer since the rise of Islam.

The Colosseum, also known as the Flavian Amphitheatre, is a large artefact or structure in the city of Rome. The construction of the Colosseum started around 70–72 AD and was finished in 80 AD. Emperor Vespasian started all the work, and Emperor Titus completed the colosseum. Emperor Domitian made some changes to the building between 81 and 96 AD. It had seating for 50,000 people. It is the biggest amphitheatre built by the Roman Empire, and the largest in the world.

The Colosseum is in Rome, the capital of Italy. More precisely, it is on the east bank of the Tiber, the river that crosses the city, east of the ancient Roman forum. A forum in antiquity was a geographical area in which were the main buildings of power, as well as the large square on which the population met. It was both a busy place to live, a place to get married, big parties, community meetings, and so on. The stadium was less than a kilometer to the southwest, the Capitol was a little over a mile to the west.

Colosseum was first called the Flavian Amphitheatre or in Latin, the Amphitheatrum Flavium. This was after Vespasian and Titus who had the family name of Flavius. It was used for gladiatorial contests, and other shows like animal hunts, in which animals would hunt and eat prisoners; or in which gladiators would fight against animals. There were also executions of prisoners, plays, and battle scenes; sometimes it was filled with water to fight sea battles. The people of Rome could go into the Colosseum without any costs; it was free.

In the Middle Ages, after the mid-fifth century, it was no longer used for performances. It was then used as housing, workshops, a Christian shrine, and as a supply of building stones.

It is now in ruins because of earthquakes. The Colosseum is a symbol of the Roman Empire. It is one of Rome's most popular tourist attractions. On Good Fridays, the Pope leads a torch lit "Way of the Cross" procession around the various levels of the amphitheatre.

The building of the Colosseum began under the rule of the Emperor Vespasian in around 70–72 AD. The area was flat, in a valley between the Caelian, Esquiline and Palatine Hills. There was a stream flowing through the valley, but this had been made into a canal. People had been living in this area for over 200 years, but the houses were destroyed in the Great Fire of Rome in 64 AD. The Emperor Nero took much of the land for his own use. He built a grand palace, the Domus Aurea which had a lake, gardens, paths covered with a roof held up by columns (porticoes), and large shelters (pavilions) to sit in. He had the Aqua Claudia aqueduct made longer to supply water to the area. There was also a big bronze statue of Nero, the Colossus of Nero, at the front of the Domus Aurea. In 68 AD, Nero lost control of the government. The Senate made him a public outlaw, and he killed himself soon after.

To  the end of Nero's rule, the Emperor Vespasian built the Colosseum on the site of Nero's lake. This was seen as giving back the land to the people of Rome. The Romans often built monuments to celebrate important events, and the Colosseum is a part of that tradition.

Most of the Domus Aurea was torn down. The lake was filled in and the land used for the Colosseum. Schools for gladiators and other buildings were put up in the old gardens of the Domus Aurea. The Colossus was left in place, but Nero's head was replaced. Vespasian renamed it after the sun-god, Helios (Colossus Solis). Many historians say that the name of the Colosseum comes from the statue, the Colossus. The Colosseum was originally structured to accomoodate a total of 70000 guests of which 60000 could be seated while rested 10000 can be stand. Usually in Roman cities, the amphitheatres were built on the edge of the city.

The Colosseum was built in the city centre; in effect, placing it in the real and symbolic heart of Rome.

The Colosseum had been completed up to the third story by the time of Vespasian's death in 79. The top level was finished and the building opened by his son, Titus, in 80. Cassius Dio said that over 9,000 wild animals were killed during the opening games. The building was changed by Vespasian's younger son, Emperor Domitian. He added the hypogeum, underground tunnels used to hold the animals and slaves used in the games. He also added a fourth level at the top of the Colosseum to add more seats.

In 217, the Colosseum was badly damaged by fire. Cassius Dio said the fire was started by lightning. The fire destroyed the wooden upper levels inside the amphitheatre. It was not fully repaired until about 240 and underwent further repairs in 250 or 252 and again in 320. Theodosius II and Valentinian III (ruled 425–450), repaired damage caused by an earthquake in 443; more work followed in 484 and 508. The last record of gladiator fights is about 435, while animal hunts continued until at least 523.

The Colosseum went through big changes of use during the medieval period. At the end of the 500's, a small church had been built into a part of the building. The arena was used as a cemetery. The areas under the seating was used for houses and workshops. There are records of the space being rented as late as the 1100s. About 1200, the Frangipani family took over the Colosseum and made it into a castle.

During the great earthquake in 1349, the outer south side fell down. Most of the fallen stones were used to build palaces, churches, hospitals and other buildings in Rome. In the middle of the 1300s, a religious group moved into the north part, and were still there in the 1800s. The inside of the Colosseum was used to supply building stones. The marble facade was burned to make quicklime. The bronze clamps which held the stonework together were ripped off the walls leaving marks that can still be seen today.

During the 16th and 17th century, Church officials looked for a use for the big and ruined building. Pope Sixtus V (1521–1590) wanted to turn the building into a wool factory to provide jobs for Rome's prostitutes, but he died and the idea given up. In 1671 Cardinal Altieri said it could be used for bullfights. Many people were upset by this idea, it was quickly dropped.

In 1749, Pope Benedict XIV said that the Colosseum was a sacred place where early Christians had been martyred. He stopped people from taking any more building stones away. He set up the Stations of the Cross inside the building. He said the place was made sacred with the blood of the Christian martyrs who had died there. However, there is no historical evidence that any Christians had been killed in the Colosseum.

Later popes started projects to save the building from falling down. They took out the many plants which had overgrown the building and were causing more damage. The facade was made stronger with triangular brick wedges in 1807 and 1827. The inside was repaired in 1831, 1846 and in the 1930s. The underground area was partly dug out in 1810–1814 and 1874. This digging was finished by Benito Mussolini in the 1930s.'

The Colosseum is a free standing building, quite different to the earlier Greek theatres which were built into the sides of hills. It is really two Roman theatres joined together. It is oval shaped, 189 meters (615 ft / 640 Roman feet) long, and 156 meters (510 ft / 528 Roman feet) wide. It covers an area of . The outer wall is 48 meters (157 ft / 165 Roman feet) high. The distance around the building was 545 meters (1,788 ft / 1,835 Roman feet). The arena is an oval  long and  wide, surrounded by a wall  high. Around the arena were raised rows of seating.

The outer wall was made from about  of travertine stone. This was held together by  of iron clamps. There was no mortar used to hold the wall together. The outside wall has been badly damaged over the years. Large sections have fallen down after earthquakes. The north side of the outside wall is still standing. It has triangular brick wedges at each end, added in the early 1800s to hold up the wall. The rest of the outside wall that can be seen today, is in fact the original inside wall.

In physics, the conservation of energy is that energy can not be created or destroyed, it can only be changed from one form to another, such as when electrical energy is changed into heat energy. Formally, it says that the total amount of energy in an isolated system remains constant, although it may change forms, e.g. friction turns kinetic energy into thermal energy.  In thermodynamics, the first law of thermodynamics is a statement of the conservation of energy for thermodynamic systems.

From a mathematical point of view, the energy conservation law is a consequence of the shift symmetry of time; energy conservation is a result of the empirical fact that the laws of physics do not change with time itself. Philosophically, this can be stated as "nothing depends on time per se (time itself)".

Ancient philosophers as far back as Thales of Miletus had the idea that there is some underlying substance of which everything is made. But that is not the same as our concept of "mass-energy" today (for example, Thales thought the underlying substance was water).

In 1638, Galileo published his analysis of several situations. This included the famous "interrupted pendulum". This can be described (in modernized language) as conservatively converting potential energy to kinetic energy and back again. However, Galileo did not explain the process in modern terms and had not understood the modern concept either. The German Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz during 1676-1689 attempted a mathematical formulation of the kind of energy which is connected with motion (kinetic energy). Leibniz noticed that in many mechanical systems (of several masses, mi  each with velocity vi ),

was conserved so long as the masses did not interact. He called this quantity the vis viva or living force of the system. The principle represents an accurate statement of the approximate conservation of kinetic energy in situations where there is no friction.

Meanwhile, in 1843 James Prescott Joule independently discovered the mechanical equivalent in a series of experiments. In the most famous, now called the "Joule apparatus", a descending weight attached to a string caused a paddle immersed in water to rotate.  He showed that the gravitational potential energy lost by the weight in descending was approximately equal to the thermal energy (heat) gained by the water by friction with the paddle.

Over the period 1840-1843, similar work was carried out by engineer Ludwig A. Colding though it was little-known outside his native Denmark.

The common cold is caused by viruses. It spreads easily, so it is very infectious. The symptoms are mostly in the upper respiratory system. Its damage is mostly felt in the nose and throat. The symptoms include coughs, painful throat, runny nose and fever. These symptoms usually last seven to ten days, but sometimes up to three weeks. Over two hundred different viruses can cause the common cold: that is why the details vary so much. Rhinoviruses are the most common cause.

The common cold mostly hurts the nose, pharynx, throat, and the sinuses (sinusitis). The symptoms come from the immune system's response to the infection, not from direct destruction by the viruses themselves. Hand washing is good, but the viruses also spread through moist air. Close contact with infected people is common in many cities. Wearing face masks might help, especially on any mass transit system (railways, underground, buses...).

In cases of common cold, there will be a bacteria in the spit called strep A or strep B. These bacterias react when in contact with any clear weak acid. The clear colored liquid will turn to a brown color if positive. This method of testing has been replaced by symptom based diagnosis and you can be cured by using antibiotics.

There is no cure for the common cold, but the symptoms can be treated. It is the most frequent infectious disease in humans. The average person gets two to three colds every year. The average child gets between 6 and 12 colds every year. These colds have been with humans for as long as we have a history.

The most common symptoms of a cold are a cough, runny nose, a stuffy nose, and a sore throat. Other issues are sore muscles, feeling tired, headache, and not wanting to eat. Around 40% of people with colds have a sore throat, while around 50% have a cough. Muscle ache happens in about half of the cases. A fever is an uncommon symptom in adults, but it is common in infants and young children. The cough caused by a cold is usually mild compared to a cough caused by influenza (the flu). A cough and a fever indicate a higher likelihood of the flu in adults. A number of the viruses that cause the common cold may also result in no symptoms. The color of the mucus that is coughed up from the lungs (sputum) may vary in color from clear to yellow to green. This color does not indicate if an infection is caused by viruses or bacteria.

A cold usually begins with feeling tired, a feeling of being chilled, sneezing, and a headache. Additional symptoms such as runny nose and cough follow within two or more days. Symptoms typically reach their worst two to three days after the infection begins. Symptoms usually end after seven to ten days, but can last up to three weeks. The cough lasts for more than ten days in 35% to 40% of cases involving children. It lasts for more than 25 days in 10% of cases involving children.

The common cold is an easily spread infection of the upper respiratory tract. Rhinoviruses cause 30% to 80% of all cases. A rhinovirus is an RNA-containing virus. There are 99 known types of this kind of virus.

Other viruses can also cause the common cold. Coronavirus causes 10% to 15% of cases. The flu causes 5% to 15% of cases. Often, more than one virus is present and causing the infection. In total, over two hundred different viruses are associated with colds.

The common cold virus is usually spread in one of two main ways. By breathing or swallowing droplets in the air containing the virus; or by contacting infected nasal mucus or contaminated objects. The most common method of transmitting the cold virus has not been determined. The viruses may survive for a long time in the environment. Viruses may then be transmitted from the hands to the eyes or nose where infection occurs. People sitting close together appear at greater risk of becoming infected. Transmission is common in day cares and in schools, due to the closeness of many children with little immunity and frequently poor hygiene. These infections are then brought home to other members of the family. There is no evidence that the air on commercial flights transmits cold viruses. Rhinoviruses are most infectious in the first three days of cold symptoms. They are much less infectious afterwards.

The traditional theory was that the disease spread to someone staying too long in cold weather, rain, or winter conditions. This is how the disease got its name. The role of body cooling as a risk factor for the common cold is controversial. Some common cold viruses are seasonal, found more often in cold or wet weather. This is believed to mostly be due to more time spent indoors, close to each other; specifically children returning to school. Still, changes in the respiratory system may result in easier infections. Dry air may increase transmission rates by allowing small easily spread droplets to spread farther and stay in the air longer.

Herd immunity, immunity that occurs when an entire group of people become immune to a particular infection, occurs from previous exposure to cold viruses. Thus younger populations have greater rates of respiratory infections and older populations have lower rates of respiratory infections. Poor immune function is also a risk factor for disease. Lack of sleep and poor nutrition have also been associated with a greater risk of developing infection following rhinovirus exposure. This is believed to be due to their effects on immune function.

The symptoms of the common cold are believed to be mostly related to the immune response to the virus. The mechanism of this immune response is virus-specific. For example, the rhinovirus is typically acquired by direct contact. It binds to human ICAM-1 receptors through unknown methods to trigger the release of inflammatory mediators. These inflammatory mediators then produce the symptoms. It does not generally cause damage to the nasal epithelium.

In contrast, the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is contacted by both direct contact and airborne droplets. It then replicates in the nose and throat before frequently spreading to the lower respiratory tract. RSV does cause epithelium damage.

Human parainfluenza virus typically results in inflammation of the nose, throat, and airways. In young children, when it affects the trachea it may produce croup, a hoarse cough and difficulty breathing. This is due to the small size of the airway in children.

The distinction between different upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) is loosely based on the location of the symptoms. The common cold primarily affects the nose, pharyngitis primarily affects the throat, and bronchitis primarily affects the lungs. The common cold is frequently defined as inflammation of the nose and may include varying amounts of throat inflammation. Self-diagnosis is common. Isolation of the actual viral agent involved is rarely performed. It is generally not possible to identify the specific virus through symptoms.

The only effective way to prevent the common cold is by physically preventing the spread of the viruses. This primarily includes hand washing and wearing face masks. In the health care environment, gowns and disposable gloves are also worn. Isolating infected individuals is not possible because the disease is so widespread and symptoms are not specific. Vaccination has proved difficult because there are so many viruses involved and the viruses undergo rapid change. Developing a broadly effective vaccine is very unlikely.

Regular hand washing reduces the spread of cold viruses. It is most effective and is especially recommended for use in children, due to a lack of evidence supporting the effectiveness of over-the-counter cold medicines for children, and due to the risk for harm from those medicines. In 2009, Canada restricted the use of over-the-counter cough and cold medication in children six years old and younger due to concerns regarding risks and unproven benefits. The misuse of dextromethorphan (an over-the-counter cough medicine) has led to its ban in a number of countries.

In adults, the symptoms of a runny nose can be reduced by first-generation antihistamines. However, first-generation antihistamines are associated with adverse side effects such as drowsiness. Other decongestants such as pseudoephedrine are also effective in adults. Ipratropium nasal spray may reduce the symptoms of a runny nose, but there is little effect on stuffiness. Second-generation antihistamines do not appear to be effective.

Due to the lack of studies, it is not known whether drinking more fluids improves symptoms or shortens respiratory illness. A similar lack of data exists for the use of heated humidified air. One study found chest vapor rub to be effective in providing some symptomatic relief of night-time cough, congestion, and sleep difficulty.

Antibiotics have no effect against viral infections and thus have no effect against the common cold. Antibiotics are often prescribed even though antibiotic side effects cause overall harm. Antibiotics are commonly prescribed because people expect doctors to prescribe them, and doctors want to help people. Prescribing antibiotics also happens because it is difficult to exclude causes of infection that may be managed by antibiotics. There are no effective antiviral drugs for the common cold, even though some preliminary research has shown benefit.

While there are many alternative medicines used for the common cold, there is not enough scientific evidence to support the use of most treatments. As of 2010, there is not enough evidence to recommend for or against either honey or nasal irrigation. Zinc supplements may reduce the severity and duration of symptoms when taken within 24 hours of their onset. The effect of vitamin C on the common cold, while extensively researched, is disappointing. Evidence about the usefulness of echinacea is inconsistent. Different types of echinacea supplements may vary in their effectiveness.

The common cold is generally mild and goes away on its own with most symptoms improving in one week. Severe complications, if they occur, are usually in the very old, the very young, or those who are immunosuppressed (have a weakened immune system). Secondary bacterial infections may occur resulting in sinusitis, pharyngitis, or an ear infection. It is estimated that sinusitis occurs in 8% of cases. Ear infections occur in 30% of cases.

The common cold is the most common human disease and people are affected all around the world. Adults typically have two to five infections per year. Children may have six to ten colds per year (and up to twelve colds per year for school children). Rates of symptomatic infections increase in the elderly due to a weakening immune system.

While the cause of the common cold has been known since only the 1950s, the disease has been with humanity since ancient times. Its symptoms and treatment are described in the Egyptian Ebers papyrus, the oldest existing medical text, written before the 16th century BC. The name "common cold" came into use in the 16th century, due to the similarity between its symptoms and those of exposure to cold weather.

In the United Kingdom, the Common Cold Unit (CCU) was set up by the Medical Research Council in 1946, and it was here that the rhinovirus was discovered in 1956. In the 1970s, the CCU demonstrated that treatment with interferon during the incubation phase of rhinovirus infection provided some protection against the disease. No practical treatment could be developed. The unit was closed in 1989, two years after it completed research of zinc gluconate lozenges in the prevention and treatment of rhinovirus colds. Zinc was the only successful treatment developed in the history of the CCU.

The economic impact of the common cold is poorly understood in much of the world. In the United States, the common cold leads to 75 million to 100 million physician visits annually, costing at least $7.7 billion per year (by conservative cost estimates). Americans spend $2.9 billion on over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. Americans spend an additional $400 million on prescription medicines for symptomatic relief. More than one-third of people who saw a doctor received an antibiotic prescription. The use of antibiotic prescriptions has implications for antibiotic resistance. An estimated 22 million to 189 million school days are missed each year due to a cold. As a result, parents missed 126 million workdays to stay home to care for their children. When added to the 150 million workdays missed by employees suffering from a cold, the total economic impact of cold-related work loss exceeds $20 billion per year. This accounts for 40% of time lost from work in the United States.

A number of antivirals have been tested for effectiveness in the common cold.  As of 2009, none have been both found effective and licensed for use. There are ongoing trials of the antiviral drug pleconaril. It shows promise against picornaviruses. There are also ongoing trials of BTA-798. The oral form of pleconaril had safety issues and an aerosol form is being studied.

Researchers from the University of Maryland, College Park and the University of Wisconsin–Madison have mapped the genome for all known virus strains that cause the common cold.

Cyrus the Great (, Kurush-e Bozorg, c. 590 BC or 576 – August 530 BC), was the founder of the Achaemenid dynasty in today's Iran. He was chosen as the leader of Persian people in Anshan, he defeated the Medes and was chosen as the Shah of the Persian Empire in 559 BC. Cyrus fought with the Lydian Empire and the Babylonian Empire. Before leaving Babylon, Cyrus also freed the Israelites who were imprisoned by Babylonians and allowed Jews to return to their native land.

He wrote the Cyrus Cylinder outlining his actions and policies.  Cyrus died, probably in battle, in Pasargadae.  His tomb remains in Pasargadae in Iran.  Cyrus was famous for justice and kindness.

The Congo River (also known as Zaire River) is the largest river in Africa. Its overall length of 4,700 km (2,922 miles) makes it the second longest in Africa (after the Nile). The river and its tributaries flow through the second largest rain forest area in the world, second only to the Amazon Rainforest in South America.

The river also has the second-largest flow in the world, behind the Amazon, and the second-largest watershed of any river, again trailing the Amazon. Its watershed is a little larger than that of the Mississippi River. Because large parts of the river basin sit north and south of the equator, its flow is steady, as there is always at least one river having a rainy season.

The Congo gets its name from the old Kingdom of Kongo which was at the mouth of the river. The Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Republic of the Congo, both countries sitting along the river's banks, are named after it. From 1971 to 1997, the Democratic Republic of the Congo was called Zaire and its government called the river the Zaire River.

The sources of the Congo are in the Highlands and mountains of the East African Rift, as well as Lake Tanganyika and Lake Mweru, which feed the Lualaba River.  This then becomes the Congo below Boyoma Falls.  The Chambeshi River in Zambia is usually taken as the source of the Congo because of the accepted practice worldwide of using the longest tributary, as with the Nile River.

The Congo flows mostly west from Kisangani just below the falls, then slowly bends southwest, passing by Mbandaka, joining with the Ubangi River, and running into the Pool Malebo (Stanley Pool). Kinshasa (formerly Léopoldville) and Brazzaville are on opposite sides of the river at the Pool, where the river narrows and falls through a few cataracts in deep canyons (collectively known as the Livingstone Falls), running by Matadi and Boma, and into the sea at the small town of Muanda.

The mouth of the Congo was visited by Europeans in 1482, by the Portuguese Diogo Cão, and in 1817, by a British exploration under James Kingston Tuckey that went up the river as far as Isangila. Henry Morton Stanley was the first European to travel along the whole river.

Although the Livingstone Falls stop ships coming in from the sea, almost all of the Congo is navigable in parts, especially between Kinshasa and Kisangani. Railways cross the three major falls that interrupt navigation, and much of the trade of central Africa passes along the river. Goods include copper, palm oil, sugar, coffee, and cotton. The river can also be valuable for hydroelectric power, and Inga Dams below Pool Malebo have been built.

In February of 2005, South Africa's state owned power company, Eskom, said that they had a proposal to increase the amount of electric power that the Inga can make through improvements and the building of a new hydroelectric dam. The project would bring the highest output of the dam to 40 GW, twice that of China's Three Gorges Dam.

In the Mesozoic period before the continental drift opened the South Atlantic Ocean, the Congo was the upper part of a river about 12,000 km (7,500 miles) long that flowed west across the parts of Gondwanaland, now called Africa and South America.

The Congo River was the location the novel Heart of Darkness by Joseph Conrad.

Dentistry is a specialty in medicine, which is practiced by a dentist. Dentists find out what's wrong, fix, and help prevent problems with teeth. A dentist has other people that help him with their job. Dental hygienists help people keep their teeth clean. A dental assistant helps the dentist when they are treating a patient. Dental surgeons will perform surgery to fix large or dangerous problems with people's teeth. There are also dentists called orthodontists, who can move people's teeth using braces. Dental surgeons and orthodontists are called specialists.

In philosophy, dialectic is a debate or an argument between different individuals. In medieval Europe, dialectics (or logic) was one of the three beginning liberal arts known as the trivium altogether, while the others were grammar and rhetoric.

The goal of the dialectical process (dialectic or dialectics) is to resolve a dispute by rational discussions, and the search for the truth in the matter.

The Great Proletarian Cultural Revolution (Simplified Chinese: 无产阶级文化大革命, Traditional Chinese: 無產階級文化大革命, Pinyin: Wúchǎn Jiējí Wénhuà Dà Gémìng, literally: Proletarian Cultural Great Revolution); shortened in Chinese as  or , also known simply as the Cultural Revolution, was a time of large cultural change in China.

Mao Zedong (Chairman of the Communist Party of China) started the Cultural Revolution in 1966, after the Great Leap Forward failed. It began to slow down in 1967, and ended in 1969. At a meeting called the Ninth National Party Congress, the end of the Cultural Revolution was announced.

In the Cultural Revolution, Mao tried to remove capitalists from the Communist Party of China: the political party that was in power at the time.

To get rid of the capitalists, Mao started the Socialist Education Movement in 1962. (It ended three years later.) At the same time, Mao's government changed the school system to make sure that students could work in factories and communes. Mao slowly started to regain power in 1965, supported by Lin Biao, Jiang Qing, and Chen Boda.

The Communist Party was split between Mao's partners and Deng Xiaoping's. Deng Xiaoping, a rival of Mao's, was the Secretary-General of the Communist Party of China. Hoping to get support from young people in China, Mao wrote a collection of his sayings called Quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong (also known as the Little Red Book).

The Red Guard was also made popular. They were a group of young people in China that went around teaching Mao's sayings. They also beat people who disagreed with Mao and destroyed homes and museums. There were many fights breaking out, and China faced anarchy.

During the Revolution, several important people in China were forced to leave. These people included Liu Shaoqi, President of China, and Deng Xiaoping, the secretary-general of the Communist Party of China.

The Cultural Revolution caused many problems in China. Because of these problems, China's industrial output decreased by 14 percent during the years of the Revolution.

Factories produced less because of the workers' political activities - and because the people put in charge of the factories did not know how to run them.

Transportation worsened because there were not enough trains. Many of them were being used to take Red Guards around the country.

Many scientists and engineers were put in jail or sent to work on the farms, which meant that their knowledge was lost.

Many Chinese people had their education cut short. This was worse in the cities than in the countryside. Universities and many schools were closed.

A program called the "sent-down youth" program also disrupted education. In that program, children were sent from the cities to the countryside.

An encyclopedia is a collection, usually a book or website, of information. Some are known as encyclopedic dictionaries. An encyclopedia contains a lot of information on many subjects like math, science, English, Geography, etc. making it helpful for learning.

All encyclopedias were printed, until the late 20th century, when some were on CDs and the internet. 20nd century encyclopedias are mostly online by internet. The largest encyclopedia in the English language is English Wikipedia, which has more than 6 million articles. The second largest is the Encyclopædia Britannica, which is the largest one that is printed. Either kind of encyclopedia can inform people on  topics.

Book series were used to summarize all knowledge. They have been published for thousands of years. A famous early one was called Natural History by Pliny the Elder. The name "encyclopedia" is from the 16th century and meant "complete knowledge". The French Encyclopédie of Denis Diderot was the first that had major parts written by many people from all around the world.

After the printing press was invented, dictionaries with long definitions began to be called encyclopedias that were books that has articles or subjects For example, a dictionary of science, if it included essays or paragraphs, it was thought of as an encyclopedia or knowledgeable book on the subject of science. Some encyclopedias then put essays on more than one subject in alphabetical order instead of grouping them together by subject. The word, encyclopedia, was put in the title of some encyclopedias.

Companies such as Britannica were started for the purpose of publishing encyclopedias for sale to individuals, and for public use in libraries.  to dictionaries, these publishers hired hundreds of  to write articles. Some internet encyclopedias allowed their paying customers to submit articles from other encyclopedias. Other internet encyclopedias accepted writing from non-paying users – users not signed in – of the encyclopedia.

There are different types of encyclopedias. Some are general and have pages on lots of topics. The English language Encyclopædia Britannica and German Brockhaus are general encyclopedias. Some are specific topics.

There are encyclopedias of medicine or philosophy. Others include the Dictionary of National Biography, the Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships, and Black's Law Dictionary. There are also encyclopedias that cover many topics with one  or one cultural bias, including the Conservapedia and Great Soviet Encyclopedia.

There are two main ways of organizing printed encyclopedias: from A to Z or by categories. Most encyclopedias go by A to Z. Many dictionaries have similar information to encyclopedias.

Ethics is the study of good and bad behavior. It is one of the main parts of philosophy. Ethics tries to answer questions like:

When discussing ethics, the philosophy is generally separated into:

Morality is what someone thinks or feels is good or bad.  There are many different moralities, but they share some things.  For example, most people think that murder (killing somebody) is wrong. (compare Exodus 20:13)  Some philosophers hope to find more things that moralities share.  They think that ethics should use the scientific method to study things that people think are good or bad.  Their work can be used to test the fairness of a situation, such as how people should treat each other.  An example of this kind of thinking is the categorical imperative.  Many countries have laws based on this idea of fairness.

Understanding ethics can help people decide what to do when they have choices. Many  think that doing anything or making any choice is a part of ethics.

Ethics is part of other fields of study in many ways. Here are some ways:

Along with aesthetics ethics forms part of axiology, the philosophy of what people like.

Ecology is the branch or aspect of biology that  studies the biota (living things), the environment, and their interactions. It comes from the Greek oikos = house; logos = study.

Ecology is the study of ecosystems. Ecosystems describe the web or network of relations among organisms at different scales of organization. Since ecology refers to any form of biodiversity, ecologists research everything from tiny bacteria in nutrient recycling to the effects of tropical rain forests on the Earth's atmosphere.  Scientists who study these interactions are called ecologists.

Terrestrial ecoregion and climate change research are two areas where ecologists now focus.

There are many practical applications of ecology in conservation biology, wetland management, natural resource management (agriculture, forestry, fisheries), city planning (urban ecology), community health, economics, and applied science. It provides a framework for understanding and researching human social interaction.

Population ecology measures the size of a population: all the living things from one species that live in an place. A population gets bigger because of birth and movement into a place, and it gets smaller because of death and movement out of a place. Growth rate is the change in population size divided by the current population size. When a population is small, growth rate does not change, so the population shows exponential growth. Rate of exponential growth depends on how a living thing reproduces. If it has only a few offspring (children) which grow slowly, like a human, the rate will be low. If it has a lot of offspring which grow quickly, like a fruit fly, the rate will be high. Any environment only has enough natural resources, such as food, water, or space, for a certain size of population. This size is called the carrying capacity. When population size is near the carrying capacity, growth rate will become less. The graph of population growth will be an S-shape, called logistic growth.

A community is all populations of different species that live in the same place. An ecosystem is a community and its environment. Ecosystem ecology studies how energy and nutrients move through an ecosystem. All living things need energy to survive, move, grow, and reproduce.  A trophic level is the number of times energy moves from one living thing to another, before reaching a particular living thing. The first trophic level, called producers or autotrophs, gets energy from the environment. They use the energy to make organic compounds. Most producers, such as plants, take in energy from sunlight, but some take it from inorganic compounds. Other trophic levels, called consumers or heterotrophs, get their energy by eating other living things. All animals are consumers, and there are three kinds: herbivores, carnivores, and omnivores. Herbivores eat only plants, carnivores eat only other animals, and omnivores eat both. Decomposers are living things which break down dead things. A food web shows the movement of energy in an ecosystem.

Ecology starts many powerful philosophical and political movements - including the conservation movement, wellness movement, environmental movement, and ecology movement we know today. When these are combined with peace movements and the Six Principles, they are called green movements. In general, these put ecosystem health first on a list of human moral and political priorities, as the way to achieve better human health and social harmony, and better economics.

People with these beliefs are called political ecologists. Some have organized into the Green Parties, but there are actually political ecologists in most political parties. They very often use arguments from ecology to advance policy, especially forest policy and energy policy.

Also, ecology means that it is the branch of biology dealing with the relations and interactions between organisms and their environment, including other organisms.

Ecological economics and human development theory try to separate the economic questions from others, but it is difficult. Many people think economics is just part of ecology now, and that economics that ignores it is wrong. "Natural capital" is an example of one theory combining both.

Sometimes ecology is compared to anthropology. Anthropology includes how our bodies and minds are affected by our environment, while ecology includes how our environment is affected by our bodies and minds. There is even a type of anthropology called ecological anthropology, which studies how people interact with the environment.

Antoine de Saint-Exupery stated: "The earth teaches us more about ourselves than all the books. Because it resists us. Man discovers himself when he measures himself against the obstacle".

Economics is the social science which studies economic activity: how people make choices to get what they want. It has been called "the study of scarcity and choice" (scarcity is when there is not a lot of something). Economics is about the choices people make. It also studies what affects the production (making things), distribution and consumption (using things) of goods and services in an economy.  are real things that people sell.  are things that people do. For example, a shoe is a good. A person who makes shoes is doing a service.

Investment and income relate to economics. The word comes from Ancient Greek, and relates to οἶκος oíkos "house" and νόμος nomos "custom" or "law". Most of the models used in economics today were made in the 19th century (1800-1899). People took ideas from political economy and added to them because they wanted to use an empirical approach similar to the one used in the natural sciences.

The subjects (actors) in economic study are households (every person who lives in a house), business companies, the government (the state), and foreign countries. Households offer their "factors of production" to companies. The four factors of production are labor (work), land, capital (things like machines and buildings) and enterprise (people who make decisions about businesses). In exchange for their factors of production, households get income (money) which they use to consume (buy) goods from businesses representing consumption expenditure.

Business companies produce and sell goods and services and buy factors of production from households and from other companies.

The state or public sector includes institutions and organisations. The state takes some of the earnings from the business companies and households, and uses it to pay for "public goods" like street lights or defense systems, to be available for everyone. The last subject is foreign countries. This includes all households, business companies and state institutions, which are not based in one's own country. They demand and supply goods from abroad.

The objects (things acted upon) in economic study are consumer goods, capital goods, and factors of production. Consumer goods are classified as "usage goods" (for example, gasoline or toilet paper), as "purpose goods" (for example, a house or bicycle), and as "services" (for example, the work of a doctor or cleaning lady). Capital goods are goods which are necessary for producing other goods. Examples of these are buildings, equipment, and machines. Factors of production are work, ground, capital, information, and environment.

Economists have had different ideas in the past. For example, Karl Marx lived in a time when workers' conditions were very bad. John Maynard Keynes lived through the Great Depression of the 1930s. Today, economists can look back and understand why they made their decisions.

The two main types of economics are microeconomics and macroeconomics.

Macroeconomics is about the economy in general. For example, macroeconomists study things that make a country's have more money. They also study things that can make lots of people lose their jobs. Microeconomics is about smaller and more specific things such as how families and households spend their money and how businesses operate.

Famous economists of the 19th and 20th century include Friedrich August von Hayek, Wassily Leontief, Carl Menger, and Léon Walras.

Egypt, officially the Arab Republic of Egypt, is a country in the Middle East and the Eastern Mediterranean, located in North Africa and Western Asia.

It is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north. To the northeast is the region of the Southern Levant comprising Israel and the Gaza Strip, which is part of Palestine. It is also bordered by the Red Sea to the east, Sudan to the south, and Libya to the west. In the northeast, the Gulf of Aqaba separates Egypt from Jordan and Saudi Arabia.

Cairo is the capital, largest city, and most important cultural center, while Alexandria is the second-largest city and an important hub of industry and tourism. Egypt is famous for its ancient monuments, such as the Pyramids and the Sphinx

Egypt is a member of the United Nations, the African Union, and the Arab League.

Ancient Egypt has one of the longest histories of any country in the world. For a long time, it was ruled by pharaohs. It became part of the Achaemenid Empire and the Ptolemaic dynasty and for centuries was a province of the Roman Empire. During the Roman era, many people became Christian. Some Christians, called Copts, remained in Egypt despite over a thousand years of Muslim rule.

The Fatimid Caliphate ruled Egypt in the tenth through twelfth centuries. Mamluks ruled it until 1798 when Napoleon defeated them. Muhammad Ali Pasha soon took over and started a dynasty of Khedives under the Ottoman Empire. The Empire fell apart after World War I. Egypt became an independent country in 1922 and the khedive became a king, starting the Kingdom of Egypt. It became a republic after the Army's revolution of 1952.

Egypt is a large country, but a large portion of it is desert. Most people (95% of Egypt's total people) live in areas around the coast of the Mediterranean Sea and along the Nile River. This includes the cities of Cairo, Alexandria, Aswan, and Port Said. Not many people live in the desert. Today, Egypt has about 110 million people.

Egypt is divided into 29 areas, called Governorates of Egypt.

Egypt is a country that has had many different rulers and many political systems. After World War II, Egypt was still ruled by a king, Farouk of Egypt (11 February 1920 – 18 March 1965). He was the last ruler of the Muhammad Ali dynasty.

Farouk was overthrown on 23 July 1952 by a military coup. The coup was led by Mohamed Naguib, and Gamal Abdel Nasser. From then on, Egypt had military rulers or rulers who had the backing of the army and many citizens.

Nasser became president, from 1956 to 1970. Later rulers were Anwar Sadat, and Hosni Mubarak.

In 2012, Mohamed Morsi became the president after the 2011 revolution.

In January 2011, thousands of protesters gathered in Cairo. They wanted Hosni Mubarak to leave office. He had been the President for almost 30 years. On February 11, 2011, Vice President Omar Suleiman made an announcement. He said that Mubarak agreed to leave office. In 2012, Egypt had a democratic election for the post of President. The winner was the Muslim Brotherhood candidate, Mohamed Morsi.

The events which followed are still controversial, but one aspect stands out. Morsi issued a declaration that in effect gave him unlimited powers. He had the power to legislate (make laws) without legal overview by the courts. This caused widespread protests. On 3 July 2013, he was unseated by a military coup council (a coup d'état). After an election in June 2014, Abdel Fattah el-Sisi became President of Egypt. Islamist movements, such as the Muslim Brotherhood, rejected the change of regime as a military coup, and not democratic.

Today, the people of Egypt are mostly Sunni Muslims. There are many Christians in Egypt today. Many of them belong to the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria.

The official language in Egypt is Arabic. The majority speak Egyptian Arabic but many speak other dialects. Some Egyptians still speak Coptic. English, French and German are also common. These are taught in Egypt as additional languages.

Many famous people are from Egypt. Some of these include Omar Sharif, who was an international actor, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who was the first person from Africa to lead the United Nations, and four Nobel Prize winners: Anwar Sadat, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1978 after making peace with Israel, Naguib Mahfouz, who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1988, Ahmed Zewail, who won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1999, and Mohamed ElBaradei, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 2005. Mohamed Salah is a famous footballer who plays for Liverpool in England. Umm Kulthum is a famous Egyptian singer. Other Egyptian singers include Amr Diab.

Egypt is divided into 27 governorates. The governorates are divided into regions. The regions have towns and villages. Each governorate has a capital. Sometimes the capital has the same name as the governorate.

Egypt is a country with an immense cultural mix. Life in the countryside differs from life in large cities. There are differences between the families which are Muslim, and the smaller number which are Coptic Christians. There are noticeable differences in the standards of education.

Tourism is one of the most important parts of the national income in Egypt. In 2008, about 12 million tourists visited the country. They provided nearly $12 billion of national income to Egypt. Tourism affects the economy of the country as a whole.

Giza Necropolis is one of Egypt's iconic sites. It is a popular destination for tourists to visit. It includes the Great Pyramid of Giza, one of the Seven Wonders of the World.

There are methods of transport in Egypt. The Suez Canal carries ships of many countries.

Cairo Metro is one of the most important projects in Egypt. It consists of 3 lines. Metro is the most preferable transport in Egypt due to persistent major traffic jams in the streets of Cairo. Metro line 4 is being developed to reach the New Cairo District.

Egypt established EgyptAir in 1932. The airline is based in Cairo International Airport and is owned by the Egyptian government

The Egyptian Armed Forces are the defense forces of Egypt. They consist of the Egyptian Air Force, Egyptian Navy, Egyptian Army, and the Egyptian Air Defense Forces. It is ranked 8th in the world. It is the strongest military force in the Arab world and Africa.

Education is about learning skills and knowledge. It also means helping people to learn how to do things and support them to think about what they learn. It is also important for educators to teach ways to find and use information. Education needs research to find out how to make it better.

Through education, the knowledge of society, country, and of the world is passed on from generation to generation. This may include education in morality, for example learning how to act as loyal, honest and effective citizen.

Education may help and guide individuals from one class to another.  Educated people and groups can do things like help less-educated people and encourage them to get educated.

There are different ways to categorize education: for example, by age or subject. One way is to divide it into formal education, non-formal education, and informal education.

Formal education is usually in school, where a person may learn basic, academic, or trade skills. Small children often attend a nursery or kindergarten but often formal education begins in elementary school and continues with secondary school. Post-secondary education, or higher education, is usually at a college or university which may grant an academic degree.

Or, students may go to a City college where they learn practical skills. This way learners can become qualified to be plumbers, electricians, builders and similar occupations. These course have arrangements for students to get practical experience. Apprenticeship was the older way to do this,

Non-formal education includes adult basic education, adult literacy education or school equivalency preparation. In non-formal education, someone who is not in school can learn to read, write, and other basic life or job skills. Home education, individualized instruction, such as programmed learning, distance learning and computer-assisted instruction are other possibilities.

Informal education is less organized. It may be a parent (like a dad or mom) teaching a child how to make a meal or ride a bicycle. People can also get an informal education by reading many books from a library or educational websites. This may also be called self-education. Some famous people have been largely self-educated, like Alfred Russell Wallace.

Distance Education is typically conducted through online platforms, correspondence courses, or virtual classrooms, enabling flexible learning schedules and access for students who cannot attend traditional on-campus class

There are primary schools and secondary schools. In many places they are government funded.  Colleges and universities usually charge fees, or tuition payments.

A  developmental theory of learning was explained by psychologist Jean Piaget. It has four stages of learning through which children progress on their way to adulthood: the sensorimotor stage, pre-operational stage, concrete operational, and formal operational stages.

A teaching method is the way via which educational content is delivered by the teacher. For instance, group work is sometimes used rather than individual learning to make students grasp certain knowledge. There are many teaching methods, and the most effective one in a given (situation or) scenario depends on things like the subject matter and the learner's age and ability, or level of competence.

One important part of teaching methods is to make sure that learners stay motivated, either through their own interest and curiosity or through rewards (that are outside of one's mind).

Educational assessment is the process of making documentation of the student's knowledge and skills; That can happen formally or informally and can take place before, during, or after the learning activity.

Another significant (part of teaching or) pedagogical element in many modern ways of educating, is that each lesson is part of a broad framework; The framework is (supposed to follow a syllabus or) governed by a syllabus; The syllabus can cover several months or years.

According to Herbartianism, teaching can be broken down into (parts or) phases. The first phase has to do with making the student's mind ready for new information. Subsequently (or thereafter), new ideas are (shown or) introduced to the learner and then linked to (ideas or) concepts that are already familiar to them..

The European Union (abbreviation: EU) is a union of 27 member countries in Europe on the  landmass of Eurasia. It was created by the Maastricht Treaty in 1993. It is a unique political organization; in some ways, it acts like a federation, and in other ways, it acts like a confederation. (Political scientists call the EU a "sui generis" organization, which means the EU is so unique that it is hard to compare it to anything else.)

The EU grew out of the European Economic Community (EEC), which was formed by the Treaty of Rome in 1957. It has created a common economic area with Europe-wide laws, allowing the citizens of EU  countries to move and trade in other EU countries almost the same as they do in their own. Nineteen of these countries also share the same type of money: the euro.

The Treaty of Lisbon is the most recent treaty that explains how the Union is run. Every member state signed it, to show that they each agreed with what it says. Most importantly, it says which jobs (’powers’) the Union should do for the members and which jobs they should do themselves. The members decide how the Union should act by voting for or against proposals.

The objective of the European Union is to bring its member states closer together, while also respecting human rights, democracy and rule of law. It does this by helping its members to decide on common rules for many things, like law enforcement,  passports, and how to trade fairly with each other.

Most members share a common currency (the euro) and most allow people to travel from one country to another without having to show a passport.

After World War II, most countries in Europe wanted to live peacefully together and help one another's economies. Instead of fighting each other for coal and steel, the first member countries-- (West) Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, and Luxembourg--  created the European Coal and Steel Community in 1952. Its job was to make rules for how to trade coal and steel in a fair way, and to make sure its members were following the rules.

Since 1974, in the Cypriot city of Nicosia, is considered the last divided capital in europe.

In 1993, with the Treaty of Maastricht, the ECSC joined together with a few other international organizations in Europe to form the European Union. Now it would help its member countries work together in many different ways; not only with trade, but also with money, justice (laws), and foreign affairs.

In 1995, the EU created the Schengen Area, and 22 member countries of the EU opened their borders to each other. This means that people can now travel from one country to the other without a passport or identity card.

In 1999, the EU created its own currency, which is called the euro. Many of its member states got rid of their old currencies, and now use the euro. However, a few countries, like Denmark and Poland, chose to keep their own currency.

Over time, more countries have joined the EU. In 2004, ten new countries became part of the EU: Cyprus, Czechia, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia.  In 2007, two more countries, Bulgaria and Romania, joined the EU. Most recently, Croatia joined the EU in 2013. Then, in 2020, the United Kingdom left the EU. As of 2025, there are 27 member countries.

The EU is now the world's largest single market, with a population of about 450 million people. If the EU were a single country, it would be the world's third largest country.

In 2025 there were United States tariffs against the European Union. In April, the EU informed that from April 15, there would be 25% tariffs on some U.S. goods. The situation is sometimes called a trade war.

A person who is a citizen of the European Union can live and work in any of the 27 member states without needing a work permit or visa. For example, a French person can move to Greece to work there, or just to live there, and he or she does not need permission from an authority in Greece.

Products made in one member country can be sold in any other member country without any special permissions or extra taxes. For this reason, the members agree to rules about product safety - they want to know that a product made in another country will be as safe as it would be if it had been made in their own.

The Council of the European Union is the main decision-making group. The cabinet ministers of the member countries meet (Ministers for Foreign affairs, for Agriculture, for Justice, etc...) and discuss issues that are important to them.

Before the Treaty of Lisbon (written in 2007, implemented in 2008) each member state took a turn at being President of the council for six months. For example, from January 2007 until July 2007, Germany held the presidency. The six months before that, Finland held the presidency. Now the President of the European Union chairs the council summits. The President of the council is the organiser and manager and is voted into office for a duration of two and a half years. He or she does not have the power to make decisions about the European Union like the President of the United States does for that country.

Member countries with a large population (Germany, France, United Kingdom, etc.) have more votes than countries with small populations (Luxembourg, Malta, etc.) but a decision cannot be made if enough countries vote against the decision.

Twice a year, the heads of government (Prime Ministers) and/or the heads of state (Presidents) meet to talk about the main issues and make decisions on different issues. This meeting is different and not as formal. It is known as a European Council.

The European Commission runs the day-to-day running of the EU and writes laws, like a government. Laws written by the commission are discussed and changed by the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union. The commission has one President and 27 Commissioners, selected by the European Council. The Commission President is appointed by the European Council with the approval of the European Parliament. The commission operates like a cabinet government. There is one Commissioner per member state, though Commissioners are bound to represent the interests of the EU as a whole rather than their home state.

The Parliament has a total of 720 members (called Members of the European Parliament, or MEP). They are elected in their countries every five years by the citizens of the European Union member countries. The Parliament can approve, reject or change proposed laws. It can also sack the European Commission. In that case, the entire commission would have to give up their jobs.

There are many discussions in the EU about how it should develop and change in the future.

The main reasons why European countries came together are political and economic:

In 1951, six countries made the European Coal and Steel Community, a basic version of what the EU is now. These six then went further and in 1957 they made the European Economic Community and the European Coal and Steel Community. The UK and others decided not to join, and then when the UK changed its mind it was stopped from joining by French President Charles de Gaulle. When he was no longer President, the UK and others started to join. Today there are 27 members but the idea that more should join is not seen as a good one by everyone.

Serbia, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Turkey and Iceland are "candidate countries"; they are being considered for membership. Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo are expected to follow.

However, since there have been many political problems happening in Turkey recently, especially with President Edrogan's arresting of tens of thousands of political rivals since the failed coup attempt on July 15, 2016, it is unlikely that it would be allowed to part of the EU anytime soon because EU members believe that the current Turkish government is not respecting human rights, rule of law, or democracy.

United in diversity (or together with many types of people in Simple English), is the motto of the European Union.

On June 23, 2016, the UK held a referendum on whether it should stay in the EU or leave it. The majority [52% to 48%] favored leaving. Britain leaving the EU is commonly known as Brexit.

The government of the UK d "Article 50" of the Treaty of European Union (the Treaty of Lisbon) on 29 March 2017. This began negotiations with fellow members of the EU on the terms of exit. The timetable for these negotiations was two years, which meant that the UK would remain a member of the EU until at least March 2019. This deadline was later extended to October 31st 2019 at the request of the British Government. The United Kingdom left the European Union on the 31 of January 2020 at 23:00 (Greenwich Mean Time). Following that, the transition period  expired on December 31, 2020 and ended on January 1, 2021.

Euro or € is the currency of the countries in the eurozone. One euro is divided into 100 cent (officially) (singular) or "cents" (unofficially).

Because of the number of different languages in the European Union, there are different, unofficial, names for this unit (the French call them "centimes" and the Spanish "céntimos", for example).

It was created in 1999, but until 1 January 2002 it was used only for electronic payments. In 2002, 12 countries of the European Union (EU) took their state currencies out of circulation and adopted euro notes and coins as their only money. There was a change-over period, called the "transition period", when both the old national money and the euro were accepted, but by 1 March 2002, all 12 countries were using just euros.

In 2007, Slovenia became the 13th country to use the euro. In 2008 Cyprus and Malta became the 14th and 15th countries to use the euro. In 2009, Slovakia became the 16th country to use the euro. In 2011, Estonia became the 17th country to use the euro. In 2014, Latvia became the 18th country and in 2015, Lithuania became the 19th country to use the euro. In 2023, Croatia became the 20th country to use the euro. In 2026, Bulgaria became the 21st country to use the euro.

There are seven different banknotes, each one with a different colour, size and face value: €5 (grey), €10 (red), €20 (blue), €50 (orange), €100 (green), €200 (yellow), €500 (purple).

Coins are of eight different amounts: €0.01, €0.02, €0.05, €0.10, €0.20, €0.50, €1 and €2.

On every banknote, there is a picture of a different European building style. All banknotes are the same throughout the entire eurozone; there are no different designs for different countries, unlike the euro coins. One side of each coin is the same in all euro countries. The other side is different since each country who mints the coins inserts a symbol relating to that country. Today there are many different sets of coins. Any of the coins can be used everywhere throughout the eurozone despite the country-specific symbol on the back.

The ten new European countries that entered the European Union in May 2004 are planning to adopt the Euro also. First they must meet some conditions to show that they have stable economies.

The symbol for the euro is the Greek letter epsilon (E) with two horizontal lines: €.

Some people see it as the Latin capital letter C with an equal sign (=).

It is also legal to simply write euro. This is especially useful when the symbol cannot be produced, or the result is not satisfactory.

Even though they are not part of the EU, the euro is also the currency used in:

Many other countries' currencies are "pegged" (tied) to, although not exactly equal to, the euro:

Electronics is the study of electricity (the flow of electrons) and how to use that to build things like computers. It uses circuits that are made with parts called components and connecting wires to do useful things.  The science behind electronics comes from the study of physics and gets applied in real-life ways through the field of electrical engineering.

Many people can name several simple electronic components, such as transistors, fuses, circuit breakers, batteries, motors, transformers, LEDs and bulbs, but as the number of components starts to increase, it often helps to think in terms of smaller systems or blocks, which can be connected together to do something useful.

One way of looking at an electronic system is to separate it into three parts:

A television set, for example, has as its input a broadcast signal received from an antenna, or for cable television, a cable.

Signal processing circuits inside the television set use the brightness, colour, and sound information contained in the received signal to control the television set's output devices. The display output device may be a cathode ray tube (CRT) or a plasma or liquid crystal display screen. The audio output device might be a magnetically driven audio speaker. The display output devices convert the signal processing circuits' brightness and colour information into the visible image displayed on a screen. The audio output device converts the processed sound information into sounds that can be heard by listeners.

Analysis of a circuit/network involves knowing the input and the signal processing circuit, and finding out the output. Knowing the input and output and finding out or designing the signal processing part is called synthesis.

People started experimenting with electricity as early as 600 B.C.E, when Thales of Miletus discovered rubbing fur on amber would cause them to attract each other.

Starting in the 1900s, devices used glass or metal vacuum tubes to control the flow of electricity. With these components a low power voltage can be used to change another. This revolutionized radio, and allowed other inventions.

In the 1960s and early 1970s transistors and semiconductors began replacing vacuum tubes. Transistors can be made much smaller than vacuum tubes and they can work using less energy.

At about the same time, integrated circuits (circuits that are integrated inside other circuits) became commonly used. Integrated circuits made it possible to reduce the number of parts needed to make electronic products and made the products much cheaper in general.

Analog circuits are used for signals that have a range of amplitudes. In general, analog circuits measure or control the amplitude of signals. In the early days of electronics, all electronic devices used analog circuits. The frequency of the analog circuit is often measured or controlled in analog signal processing. Even though more digital circuits are now made, analog circuits will always be necessary since the world and its people work in analog ways.

Pulse circuits are used for signals that require rapid pulses of energy.  For example, a radar works by using pulse circuits to create and send high powered bursts of radio energy from radar transmitters.  Radar antennas are used to send ("transmit") the high powered bursts in the direction the antenna is pointed.

The radar transmitter's pulses or bursts of radio energy hit and bounce back (they are "reflected") from hard or big metallic objects.  Hard objects are things like buildings, hills, and mountains.  Big things made of metal include aircraft, bridges, or even objects in space, like satellites.  The reflected radar energy is detected by radar pulse receivers which use both pulse and digital circuits together.  The pulse and digital circuits in radar pulse receivers are used to show the location, distance, and speed of objects which have reflected the radar transmitter's high powered pulses.

Digital circuits are used for signals that only turn on and off instead of often working at levels somewhere between on and off. Active components in digital circuits typically have one signal level when turned on, and another signal level when turned off. In general, in digital circuits a component is only switched on and off.

Computers and electronic clocks are examples of electronic devices that are made up of mostly digital circuits.

An enzyme is a protein molecule in cells which works as a biological catalyst. Enzymes speed up chemical reactions but do not get used while doing so, so they can be used over and over again.

Almost all biochemical reactions in living things need enzymes. With an enzyme, chemical reactions go much faster than they would without the enzymes.p39  Other biocatalysts are catalytic RNA molecules, called ribozymes.

The substances at the start of a reaction are called substrates. The substances at the end of a reaction are the products. Enzymes work on the substrates and turn them into products. The study of enzymes is called enzymology.

There are thousands of different enzymes and each one is specific to the reaction which it catalyses. Enzymes have names which show what they do. Enzyme names usually end in –ase to show that they are enzymes.

Examples of this include ATP synthase. It makes a chemical called ATP. Another example is DNA polymerase. It reads an intact DNA strand and uses it as a template to make a new strand. Amylase is an enzyme found in saliva. It breaks down starch molecules into smaller glucose and maltose molecules. Another kind of enzyme is lipase. It breaks down fats into smaller molecules, fatty acids and glycerol.

The proteases are a whole class of enzymes. They break down other enzymes and proteins back into amino acids which will be used again. Nucleases are enzymes that cut DNA or RNA, often in specific place in the molecule.

Enzymes are not only for breaking large chemicals into smaller chemicals. Other enzymes take smaller chemicals and build them up into bigger chemicals and do many other chemical tasks. The classification below lists the main types.

Biochemists often draw a picture of an enzyme to use as a visual aid or map of the enzyme. This is hard to do because there may be hundreds or thousands of atoms in an enzyme. Biochemists cannot draw all this detail. Instead, they use ribbon models as pictures of enzymes. Ribbon models can show the shape of an enzyme without having to draw every atom.

Most enzymes will not work unless the temperature and pH are just right. In mammals the right temperature is usually about 37oC degrees (body temperature). The correct pH can vary greatly. Pepsin is an example of an enzyme that works best when pH is about 1.5.

Heating an enzyme above a certain temperature will destroy the enzyme permanently. This is termed denaturation.

Some chemicals can help an enzyme do its job even better. These are called activators. Sometimes, a chemical can slow down an enzyme or even make the enzyme not work at all. These are called inhibitors. Most drugs are chemicals that either speed up or slow down an enzyme either in the human body or in a pathogen (this may be the case of antibiotics).

Enzymes are very specific. In 1894 Emil Fischer suggested that both the enzyme and the substrate have specific complementary geometric shapes that fit exactly into one another. This is often referred to as "the lock and key" model. However, this model fails to explain what happens next.

In 1958, Daniel Koshland suggested a modification to the lock and key model. Since enzymes are rather flexible structures, the active site is reshaped by interactions with the substrate. As a result, the substrate does not simply bind to a rigid active site. The amino acid sidechains of the active site are bent into positions so the enzyme does its catalytic work. In some cases, such as glycosidases, the substrate molecule also changes shape slightly as it enters the active site.

Enzymes lower the activation energy of a reaction by forming an intermediary complex with the substrate. This complex is called an enzyme-substrate complex.

For example, sucrase, 400 times the size of its substrate sucrose, splits the sucrose into its constituent sugars, which are glucose and fructose. The sucrase bends the sucrose and strains the bond between the glucose and fructose. Water molecules join in and make the cleavage in a fraction of a second. Enzymes have these key features:

There are five main ways that enzyme activity is controlled in the cell.

Inhibitors can be used to stop an enzyme from binding to a substrate. This may be done to slow down an enzyme-controlled reaction. The inhibitors fit loosely or partially into the enzyme's active site. This prevents or slows down an enzyme-substrate complex being formed.

Denaturation is the irreversible alteration of an enzyme's active site, caused by an extreme change in temperature or pH. It will decrease the rate of reaction because the substrate molecule will not be able to fit into the active site, so products cannot be formed.

Cofactors, or coenzymes, are helper molecules which are needed to make an enzyme work. They are not proteins and may be organic or inorganic molecules. The latter include one or several transition metal atoms: Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, Zn, Mo or W. This is because such ions may act as electron donors, and this is important in many reactions. The need of enzymes for various little helpers is the basic reason why animals, including ourselves, need trace elements and vitamins.

Enzymes have been classified by the International Union of Biochemistry. Their Commission on Enzymes has grouped all known enzymes into six classes:

The individual enzymes are given a four-figure number which classifies them in the database.p145

Dinosaurs are a group of Archosaur reptiles of the clade Dinosauria. Dinosaurs eventually gave rise to birds.

Dinosaurs were the most powerful land animals of the Mesozoic era. Over 500 different genera of dinosaurs are known. Fossils of dinosaurs have been found on every continent.

Dinosaurs evolved in the Upper Triassic, about 230 million years ago (mya). The earliest date of a fossil is that of Eoraptor and Herrerasaurus from Argentina, and Saturnalia from Brazil, 237 to 228 mya.

By the early Jurassic they were the top land vertebrates, and dominated most environments on land. They continued until the K/T extinction event 66 million years ago.

From the fossil record, it is known that birds are living feathered dinosaurs. They evolved from earlier theropods during the later Jurassic. They were the only line of dinosaurs to survive to the present day.

Dinosaurs had adaptations that helped make them successful. The first known dinosaurs were small predators that walked on two legs. All their descendants had an  , with the legs underneath the body. This transformed their whole life-style. Most of the smaller dinosaurs had feathers, and were probably warm-blooded. This would make them active, with a higher metabolism than modern reptiles. Social interaction, with living in herds and co-operation, seems certain for some types. The existence of communal egg-laying sites is best understood if the adults travelled in herds, as herbivores do today.

The first fossils were recognised as dinosaurs in the early 19th century. Some of their bones were found much earlier, but were not understood. William Buckland, Gideon Mantell and Richard Owen saw these bones were a special group of animals. Georges Cuvier was also important in explaining what dinosaurs were. Dinosaurs are now major attractions at museums around the world. They have become part of popular culture. There have been best-sellng books and movies about dinosaurs. New discoveries are reported in the media.

Dinosaurs are so varied that it is not easy to find what they all share. A reasonable list would include many features of the skeleton which are not familiar to the general reader.

Dinosaurs were, at the start, small and bipedal; they walked on their hind legs. They laid eggs in nests. From the start of their fossil record, there were both carnivores and herbivores.

Changes in the basic set-up of dinosaurs happened because of adaptations to different lifestyles. We now know that birds are the living descendants of dinosaurs, and later adapted to different lifestyles as well.

Adaptive radiation let dinosaurs live in many ecological niches. Paleontologists have identified over 500 different genera and 1,000 species of non-avian dinosaurs. Their descendants, the birds, number 9,000 living species, and are the most diverse group of land vertebrates.

The largest dinosaurs were herbivores (plant-eaters), such as Apatosaurus and Brachiosaurus. They were the largest animals to ever walk on dry land. Other plant-eaters, such as Iguanodon, had special weapons to help them fight off the meat-eaters. For example, Triceratops had three horns on its head shield, Ankylosaurus was covered in boney plates, and Stegosaurus had spikes on its tail.

The carnivores were bipedal (walked on their back legs), though they were not exactly like we are. Their body was more horizontal, balanced at the back by their tail. Some were very large, like Tyrannosaurus, Allosaurus and Spinosaurus, but some were small, like Compsognathus. It was the smaller sized meat-eaters that may have evolved into birds. The first fossil bird, Archaeopteryx, had a skeleton which looked much like that of the dinosaur Compsognathus, as T.H. Huxley commented.

Dinosaurs are united by at least 21 traits in their skulls and skeletons. These common characters (called 'synapomorphies') are the reason palaeontologists are sure dinosaurs had a common origin.

However, when definite dinosaur fossils appear (early in the Upper Triassic), the group had already split into two great orders: the Saurischia, and the Ornithischia. The Saurischia keep the ancestral hip arrangement inherited from their archosaur ancestors, and the Ornithischia have a modified hip structure.

A. Eoraptor, an early saurischian, B Lesothosaurus, a primitive ornithischian, C A saurischian pelvis (Staurikosaurus) D Lesothosaurus pelvis

The following is a simplified list of dinosaur groups based on their evolution. Groups with a dagger (†) next to them do not have any living members.

The archosaurs evolved into two main clades: those related to crocodiles, and those related to dinosaurs.

The first known dinosaurs were bipedal predators that were one to two metres long.

The earliest confirmed dinosaur fossils include the saurischian ('lizard-hipped') dinosaurs Herrerasaurus 230–220 mya, Staurikosaurus possibly 230–225 mya, Eoraptor 231.4 mya, and Alwalkeria 230–220 mya. Saturnalia, 232–225 mya, may be a basal saurischian or a prosauropod. The others are basal saurischians.

Among the earliest ornithischian ('bird-hipped') dinosaurs is Pisanosaurus 230–220 mya. Although Lesothosaurus comes from 199 to 189 mya, skeletal features suggest that it branched from the main Ornithischia line at least as early as Pisanosaurus.

Early saurischians were similar to early ornithischians, but different from modern crocodiles. Saurischians differ from ornithischians by keeping the ancestral configuration of bones in the pelvis (shown in a diagram above). Another difference is in the skull: the upper skull of the Ornithischia is more solid, and the joint connecting the lower jaw is more flexible. These features are adaptations to herbivory; in other words, it helped them grind vegetable food.

Dinosaurs were primitively bipedal: their probable ancestors were small bipedal Archosaurs. The date of the early dinosaur genus Eoraptor at 231.4 million years ago is important. Eoraptor probably resembles the common ancestor of all dinosaurs; its traits suggest that the first dinosaurs were small, bipedal predators. The discovery of primitive, pre-dinosaur, types in Middle Triassic strata supports this view. Analysis of their fossils suggests that the animals were indeed small, bipedal predators.

Those dinosaurs which returned to four-legged stance kept all four legs under their body. This is much more efficient than the sprawling legs of a lizard.

The big sauropods could never have reached so large a size without their pillar-like legs. A review surveys what we know about the mechanics of dinosaur movement.

A major change in outlook came in the 1960s, when it was realised that small theropods were probably warm-blooded. The question of whether all theropods or even all dinosaurs were warm blooded is still undecided.

It is now certain (from fossils discovered in China: see Jehol biota) that small theropods had feathers. This fits well with the idea that they were warm-blooded, and that the origin of birds can be traced to a line of small theropods.

Warm blooded animals have a high metabolic rate (use up food faster). They can be more active, and for longer, than animals who depend on the environment for heating. Therefore, the idea of warm-blooded dinosaurs insulated by feathers led to the idea that they were more active, intelligent and faster runners than previously thought.

Main-stream palaeontologists have followed this view for small theropods, but not for larger herbivores. Since we know that the size of a Stegosaurs brain was about the size of a walnut, there is good reason to think its intelligence was limited.

Despite their great success over a long period, there were lifestyles which the dinosaurs never evolved. None ever evolved to live entirely in water, as many mammals do, though Spinosaurus was semi-aquatic. They never entirely dominated the small terrestrial niche. All through the Mesozoic most small vertebrates were mammals and lizards. Some small dinosaurs developed into early birds. In general, we have much still to learn about the smaller fauna of the Mesozoic.

The extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous were caused by a catastrophic event: a massive meteorite hit the Earth (the Chicxulub impact). We now know where it hit: in the Yucantan peninsula in what is now Mexico.

Several other impact craters, and massive volcanic activity in the Deccan Traps in India, have been dated to about the time of the extinction event. These geological events may have reduced sunlight and hindered photosynthesis, leading to a massive disruption in Earth's ecology.

Did any terrestrial dinosaurs survive the great extinction event? Yes they did, because we now know that birds are descended from dinosaurs. But dinosaurs as generally understood were eliminated. Several fossils have been found in the Hell Creek Formation about 40,000 years later than the K/T extinction event. Many scientists dismiss the "Paleocene dinosaurs" as re-worked, that is, washed out of their original places and then re-buried in much later sediments. An associated skeleton (e.g. more than one bone from the same individual) found above the K/T boundary would be convincing, but no such finds have been reported.

Books about dinosaurs have been popular, especially with children, but adults have also enjoyed these kinds of books. In Edwardian times, Arthur Conan Doyle wrote a novel about a plateau filled with dinosaurs which he called The Lost World.

Jurassic Park in 1990 started a new phase in dinosaur popular culture.

A disease or medical condition is an unhealthy state where something bad happens to the body or mind.  Diseases can cause pain, parts of the body to stop working the right way, or death. The word disease is sometimes used to include:

A disease can be caused by many things.  Sometimes germs enter our body through food, water or air.  A person can be infected by infectious agents like bacteria, viruses or fungus. Disease can also be caused by eating bad or old foods. There are small germs in old foods that can cause diseases. Sometimes the germs produce chemicals or toxins which causes the disease.

One of the most common causes of disease is poor sanitation and lack of clean water.  Some deadly diseases like malaria in tropical parts of the world are spread by a mosquito.  Animals that spread disease are called vectors. There are many vectors, including snails, ticks, and fleas.

Some people are born with 'genetic diseases'. These are diseases because of an error or mutation in a person's DNA. An example of a mutation is cancer. Living or working in an unhealthy environment can also be a cause for diseases. Diseases are more common in older people.

Some diseases can be helped with medicine. Infections can often be cured by antibiotics, though resistance to antibiotics is a problem. Some disease may be helped by surgery. Not every disease can be helped with medicine or surgery, though. Some diseases must be treated during the whole life; they are chronic (long-lasting) diseases. An example of a chronic disease is diabetes mellitus. Diabetes can be treated (made better) but it can not yet be cured (made to totally go away). People who usually treat diseases are called doctors or physicians.

Some diseases that are common or very bad are tested for even in people who do not show any symptoms. If these diseases are found early they can be treated before they cause problems. An example would be checking a woman for cervical cancer with a test called a pap smear. If cervical cancer is found early it can be cured. If it is found later it usually causes death.

Another example is immunization. The basic idea is to make the body ready for a disease. The body has its own defense against disease called the immune system. One special characteristic of the immune system is its ability to remember some diseases. If a person is sick and recovers, the immune system will produce a substance called antibodies which fight the disease if it comes back to the person.

The antibody is  to a particular disease or antigen. An example of this is measles which is a virus. A person (usually a child) who had never been sick with measles is given a milder form of the virus, this causes the immune system to produce antibodies against the virus. If this person is exposed to the same virus in the future, the person's immune system will remember and will fight the virus.

Epidemiology is the study of the cause of disease. Some diseases are more popular for people with common characteristics, like similar origins, sociological background, food or nationality. Without good epidemiological research some diseases can be hard to track and to name. Some diseases can be taken for something else. This is why epidemiology takes a huge part in understanding how to protect ourselves against viruses, toxins and bacteria.

The Eiffel Tower (French: La Tour Eiffel, [tuʁ ɛfɛl], IPA pronunciation: "EYE-full" English; "Eiffel" French) is a wrought-iron landmark in Paris. It was built between 1887 and 1889 for the Exposition Universelle (World Fair). It was supposed to be a temporary installation for the 1889 World Fair, held at Paris to show respect to 100 years of the French Revolution. In 1909, there were discussions regarding the potential dismantling of the Eiffel Tower. However, the decision to save this iconic structure was ultimately reached by city officials, who acknowledged its importance as a radiotelegraphy station.

The Tower cost 7,799,401.31 French gold francs to build in 1889, an amount equal to $1,495,139.89 at that time. Today, its cost would equal to $36,784,020.11. It took 2 years, 2 months and 5 days to build it. The tower is  tall, but this  does not include the  aerial (antenna) on the top; the total height of the structure is . It has a square base that is  long on each side. The second story platform is  off , and the surface to be painted is . Since it has been built it has been repainted 18 times, each of these 18 paint jobs there were only 25 painters hired to do the job. Three separate colors of paint are used on the structure in order to enhance the impression of height, with the lightest at the top.

There are 20,000 sparkling lights and  of cables covering the structure. The paper used to print the visitors' tickets in one year weighs . The top of the tower leans away from the sun as the metal facing the sun heats up and expands; it can move as much as  and grow  taller. The tower was also built to sway slightly in the wind.

The Eiffel Tower was built by Alexandre Gustave Eiffel for the 100th anniversary of the French Revolution. Even though Gustave Eiffel is credited for the Eiffel Tower it was actually two lesser known people who came up with the original drawing of it. These people were Maurice Koechlin and Emile Nouguier. These two men were the chief engineers of Eiffel’s engineering firm. The main architect was Stephen Sauvestre.

Koechlin, Nouguier, Sauvestre, and Eiffel submitted the plans to compete for the spot on the champ de mars plot of land, to serve as the expositions entrance. It would also determine the 1889 world's fair centerpiece in Paris. There were 107 bids submitted to construct the Eiffel Tower. Fifty people worked on the design, and more than 100 built the parts. One hundred and thirty two workers assembled the parts on site.

The first digging for the foundations began on January 28, 1887, and all construction was concluded on March 31, 1889. When the tower was built, it was only meant to be kept for 20 years. People did not like the Eiffel Tower and wanted it taken down because they thought is was an ugly structure polluting the scenery of the Paris sky. After the 20 years, the tower became the property of Paris again.

By this time, the city had learned that the tower could be used to help with communications. There was also a metrology lab that had been installed for studies on everything from gravity to electricity. The military used the tower as a wireless telegraph transmitter for communication during battle. The tower was used in the capture of the spy "Mata Hari" during World War I after a message was intercepted. Today, it is used to send radio and television signals to the capital city of Paris and beyond. After people learned about the many benefits the tower provided, no one wanted it to be taken apart.

The Eiffel Tower joined the green energy movement by building two wind turbines on the second level. These wind turbines produce  of electricity.

On March 15, 2022, a new antenna compatible with the DAB+ network, digital radio services, was installed by helicopter at the top of the tower, increasing its height from 324 to 330 meters.

There were 50 architects, engineers, and draftsmen that created 5,300 drawings of the Eiffel Tower before the construction started. Once they had a plan, there were 18,000 pieces built and prepared in Eiffel's factory outside of town. These pieces were created to the accuracy of 1/10 of a millimeter. These pieces were put together to form new pieces that were 5 meters long to be transported to the building site.

There were 132 workers there to assemble the pieces on site. All the pieces were put into place and hooked together by thermally assembled rivets. There were 4 men needed to assemble a single rivet: one person to heat the rivet up, another to hold it in place, a third to shape the head, and a fourth person to beat the rivet with a sledge hammer.

Only  of the 2.5 million rivets were assembled on site. The work on the foundations took 5 months. The workers only used spades, and the rubble was taken away by horses and steam locomotives.

There was no problem in building the pillars on the Champ de Mars side of the tower. But on the Seine River side of the tower, foundations used compressed air and corrugated steel caissons five meters under water. The deepest foundations are 15 meters under ground. The feet of the tower are set in each of these foundation ditches. These foundations support the four pillars or truss frames.

The difficulty building the first floor was in bringing building materials and people up to it with a point of departure as in the elevators. The elevators had to be positioned at a slanting angle to meet the horizontal beams on the first floor. The elevator had to use hydraulic jacks to move and erect the elevator up the slanted legs. Currently the hydraulic jacks are not in use due to more advanced technology. The second floor was assembled with cranes that took the same route as the elevators. There was no troubles from this point onward in the construction.

When the Eiffel Tower was finished in 1889, it became a global wonder of engineering. For 41 years, the tower held the record as the tallest man-made structure in the world. It kept this title until 1930, when it was finally surpassed by the Chrysler Building in New York City. Even after losing the record for height, it remains one of the most famous and recognizable landmarks on Earth.

Elizabeth I (7 September, 1533 – 24 March, 1603) was the Queen of England and Ireland from 17 November 1558 to her death. She was also called Good Queen Bess or the Virgin Queen or the Gloriana.

She was the daughter of King Henry VIII of England and Anne Boleyn, his second wife, and was the last of the Tudor dynasty of monarchs. When Boleyn was disgraced at court and executed, Elizabeth's life became a troubled one, including being locked up in the Tower of London, an old prison, since she was suspected of helping Queen Mary I of England's enemies.

However, Elizabeth reigned with intelligence and hard work.  Her reign was distinguished with great achievements in the arts, trade, and exploration. She ably defended her country through the days of the Spanish Armada. She never married but claimed that she was married to England. She also had a few other favourites, including the Earl of Leicester. At her death in 1603, King James VI of Scotland was named her successor.

Elizabeth was born in 1533 at Greenwich, England. She was the daughter of King Henry VIII of England and his second wife, Anne Boleyn. She had an older half-sister, Mary, and, later, a younger half-brother Edward.

Elizabeth was given a good education. She could speak and read six languages: her native English, as well as French, Italian, Spanish, Greek, and Latin.

When she was thirteen-and-a-half years old, on 28 January 1547, Henry died. Elizabeth's half-brother, Edward, became King Edward VI of England. He died age 15.

Mary succeeded him in 1553. She wanted to make England Catholic again. She released imprisoned Catholics, threw Elizabeth in prison, and imprisoned and killed hundreds of Protestants. Her enemies then called her 'Bloody Mary'.

After Mary's death in 1558, Elizabeth was freed from the prison and was made queen. She was one of the greatest rulers of England.

Mary I had brought back the Catholic Church to England. Elizabeth returned the nation to the Church of England of her father. She, however, retained some of the Catholic traditions. She wanted her subjects to make it look like as if they were Protestant even if they were not.

The years of Elizabeth's reign had many artistic achievements. William Shakespeare, Christopher Marlowe, Edmund Spenser and other writers created enduring drama and poetry. The composers Thomas Tallis and William Byrd worked at Elizabeth's court.

During her reign, many men sought adventure abroad. Elizabeth rented a slave ship to John Hawkins and gave him weapons and equipment to keep slave trading. Sir Francis Drake, Sir Walter Raleigh, Humphrey Gilbert and other "sea dogs" looted Spanish ships. They also sailed to the Americas. In 1580, Drake became the first Englishman to sail around the world. The expeditions of these men prepared England to join the Age of Discovery and international trade and to own other parts of the world. In 1600, Elizabeth herself founded a trading company, known as the East India Company, which would become an important tool of the British Empire.

England and Spain had long quarreled. Elizabeth encouraged Protestants in the Spanish-held Netherlands to rebel against Spain. She also encouraged her "sea dogs" to raid Spanish ships. In 1588, King Philip II of Spain sent an armada (a large fleet of ships) to invade England.

Elizabeth met her troops at Tilbury and told them, "I know I have the body of a weak, feeble woman; but I have the heart and stomach of a king – and of a King of England too".

The Spanish Armada was met by England's smaller ships on 29 July 1588, which defeated the Spanish. The Armada was driven by southwest winds to the north. The English fleet harried it up the east coast of England. The Armada returned to Spain around northern Scotland and south around Ireland. Bad weather near Scotland and Ireland wrecked some of the ships. More than a third of the ships failed to return to Spain.

Elizabeth never married, and she had no children. However, she was fond of several noblemen in her court. Prominent among them was Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester. Later, she turned to Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex. However, he later wanted to overthrow the government of the Queen. He was defeated and executed.

Elizabeth died at Richmond Palace on 24 March 1603. The Protestant King of Scotland, James VI, became King James I of England. He was the son of her cousin Mary, Queen of Scots.

Elizabeth I was the last Tudor monarch and reigned for 44 years. Her accession date was a national holiday for 200 years.

Epistemology is the philosophy of knowledge. It seeks to answer the questions "What is knowledge?" and "How is knowledge acquired?"

Epistemologists are philosophers who are interested in questions such as whether it is possible to have knowledge, what kind of knowledge there is, and how people come to know things.

One of the first philosophers to make a clear statement on these questions was Xenophanes (570 – 470 BC). The following saying was, and still is, famous:

Elvis Aaron Presley (January 8, 1935 – August 16, 1977) was an American singer, musician and actor. He is widely considered as one of the most influential and most famous musicians of the 20th century, widely regarded as one of the 20th century’s greatest cultural icons. Presley is one of the biggest selling musical artists of all time. He was one of the first and the most famous recording artist in rock and roll music. He also starred in over 30 movies. His global fame has continued till today almost 47 years after his death. He’s considered by many to be one of the most popular men in history. He is so popular that some people know him as only "Elvis". He is also referred to as the "King of Rock and Roll", or simply "The King".

Presley was born in Tupelo, Mississippi.  He and his family moved to Memphis, Tennessee, when he was 13 years old. His music career began there in 1954. He first started to work with Sam Phillips who was the owner of Sun Records. RCA Victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by Colonel Tom Parker. Presley's first RCA single, "Heartbreak Hotel" was released in January 1956.  It was a number-one hit in the US. Presley became the leading figure of rock and roll after many TV appearances and chart-topping records. His energetic attitude towards his music and his performance style, made him very popular—and controversial.

In November 1956, he made his film debut in Love Me Tender. In 1958, he was drafted into military service.  When he resumed his recording career two years later, he made some of his most successful work.  In the 1960s, Presley gave most of his time to making Hollywood movies. After a long seven-year break from live performances, he returned to the stage in 1968. In 1973, Presley was featured in the first globally broadcast concert.  Several years of prescription drug abuse damaged his health, and he died in 1977 at the age of 42. Before Presley died, he had type 2 diabetes, Hypertension and Cholesterol that he was diagnosed with on April 29, 1974, due to his weight gain and after a medical check-up

Elvis Aaron Presley was born on January 8, 1935 in Tupelo, Mississippi to 18-year-old Vernon Elvis Presley and 22-year-old Gladys Love Presley (born Smith), in the two-room shotgun house built by Vernon's father in preparation for the child's birth. Jesse Aaron Presley, his identical twin brother, was delivered stillborn 35 minutes before him. As an only child, Presley became close to both parents and formed an unusually tight bond with his mother. The family attended an Assembly of God church, where he found his initial musical inspiration. Presley was of Euro-Indigenous American descent. One of Gladys' great-great-grandmother’s was a Cherokee Native American woman. According to a third cousin of Presley's, one of Gladys's great-grandmothers was Jewish. There is no evidence that Presley or his mother shared this belief in a Jewish heritage. Syndicated columnist Nate Bloom has challenged the cousin's account, which he calls a "tall tale". Presley's father was of European-American descent. Gladys was regarded by relatives and friends as the dominant member of the small family. Vernon moved from one odd job to the next, evidencing little ambition. The family often relied on help from neighbours and government food assistance. The Presleys survived the F5 tornado in the 1936 Tupelo-Gainesville tornado outbreak. In 1938, they lost their home after Vernon was found guilty of altering a check written by the landowner. He was jailed for eight months, and Gladys and Elvis moved in with relatives. He moved to Memphis, Tennessee with his family when he was 13 years old. Presley was one of the first musicians to play a type of music called rock and roll, which combined rhythm and blues with country music. His first No. 1 hit, "Heartbreak Hotel", was released in 1956, and was one of the first popular rock and roll songs.

In 1957 Presley bought Graceland on Highway 51 South in Memphis which was officially renamed Elvis Presley Boulevard in 1972.

In 1958 Presley entered the military and was stationed in Germany. He was honourably discharged from the military, and returned to the United States in 1960. In Germany, he met Priscilla Beaulieu who lived abroad with her family until 1963. They got married in 1967 and had a female child named Lisa Marie in 1968.

In 1971 Presley was honored by the United States Junior Chamber as one of the Ten Outstanding Young Men in America.

In 1972, Priesley filed for divorce which was finalized in 1973. He lived with Linda Thompson until November 1976 when he met Ginger Alden who was in Graceland when he passed away in 1977. His father Vernon, Grandmother Minnie Mae and his Aunt Delta stayed until their last breath in Graceland where guards used to be uncles of Presley. His double cousin Patsy Presley was his secretary. Dick Grob and Al Strada were two security members from his entourage nicknamed "the Memphis Mafia" who kept on working for Presley's father whom Presley's will appointed as executor and trustee.

Presley's rise to enormous worldwide success in 1956 changed the field of popular music forever. It also had a great effect on popular culture. Presley was one of the first celebrities in the era of mass communication: at age 21, within a year of his first appearance on the American television network, he was already one of the most famous men in the world. He is one of the best-selling music artists in history, with worldwide sales of 500 million records, His name, image and voice are instantly recognisable worldwide. It has inspired many imitators. Being an Elvis impersonator can be a professional job. In polls and surveys, he is recognised as one of the most important and influential American musical artists. Presley's fans always used to gather at the gates of Graceland which, after his death became the second most visited house in the United States.

On August 16, 1977, Presley was scheduled on an evening flight out of Memphis to Portland, Maine, to begin another tour. That afternoon, however, his fiancée Ginger Alden discovered him unresponsive on the bathroom floor of his Graceland mansion. Attempts to revive him failed and he died on August 16, 1977 from heart disease. Elvis Presley's autopsy report, sealed for 50 years, is scheduled to be released in 2027.

A mathematical equation is a mathematical object containing two or more expressions connected by equals signs (=). The equals sign says that all of the expressions describe the same mathematical object.

An equation should not be confused with an expression. An expression is one piece of an equation, and does not have the equals sign. Equations are the most common type of formula.

The second kind is often used to solve problems in which finding the value of some variables is involved. For example, if

Equations can be classified by the types of operations and quantities involved. For example:

Evolution is a biological process. It is how living things change over time and how new species develop. The theory of evolution explains how evolution works, and how living and extinct things have come to be the way they are.

The theory of evolution is an essential idea in biology. Theodosius Dobzhansky, a well-known evolutionary biologist, said: "Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution".

Evolution has been happening since life started on Earth and is happening now. Evolution is caused mostly by natural selection. Living things are not identical to each other. Even living things of the same species look, move, and behave differently to some extent. Some differences make it easier for living things to survive and reproduce.

Differences may make it easier to find food, hide from danger, or give birth to offspring which survive. The offspring will have some of the things which made it easier for their parents to have and raise them. Over time, these good differences continue and are spread through the population. Many generations pass and living things change enough to become new species.

Individuals who have differences that make it harder to find food, have offspring or avoid being eaten are likely not to have offspring at all and so will not be parents of future generations.

It is known that living things have changed over time, because their  can be seen in the rocks.  These remains are called 'fossils'.  They prove that the animals and plants of today are different from those of long ago.  The older the fossils, the bigger the differences from modern forms.   Evolution is what made this happen.  Evolution is a fact, and there is a lot of evidence that shows it is true. Scientists continue to study evolution to learn more about it.

Comparing DNA sequences helps scientists group living things based on how similar their DNA is. In 2010, a study compared DNA to family trees of evolution. This showed that all life comes from a common ancestor. Now, there is clear proof that life is connected through evolution.

The evidence for evolution is given in a number of books. Some of this evidence is discussed here.

The realization that some rocks contain fossils was a very important event in natural history. There are three parts to this story:

1. The realization that things in rocks which looked organic actually were the altered remains of living things. This was settled in the 16th and 17th centuries by Conrad Gessner, Nicolaus Steno, Robert Hooke and others.

2. The realization that many fossils represented species which do not exist today. It was Georges Cuvier, the comparative anatomist, who proved that extinction occurred and that different strata contained different fossils.p108

3. The realization that early fossils were simpler organisms than later fossils. Also, the later the rocks, the more like the present day are the fossils.

Where species live is a topic which fascinated both Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace. When new species occur, usually by the splitting of older species, this takes place in one place in the world. Once it is established, a new species may spread to some places and not others.

Australasia has been separated from other continents for many millions of years. In the main part of the continent, Australia, 83% of mammals, 89% of reptiles, 90% of fish and insects, and 93% of amphibians are endemic. Its native mammals are mostly marsupials like kangaroos, bandicoots, and quolls. By contrast, marsupials are today totally absent from Africa and form a small portion of the mammalian fauna of South America, where opossums, shrew opossums, and the monito del monte occur (see the Great American Interchange).

The only living representatives of primitive egg-laying mammals (monotremes) are the echidnas and the platypus. They are only found in Australasia, which includes Tasmania, New Guinea, and Kangaroo Island. These monotremes are totally absent in the rest of the world. On the other hand, Australia is missing many groups of placental mammals that are common on other continents (carnivora, artiodactyls, shrews, squirrels, lagomorphs), although it does have indigenous bats and rodents, which arrived later.

The evolutionary story is that placental mammals evolved in Eurasia, and wiped out the marsupials and monotremes wherever they spread. They did not reach Australasia until more recently. That is the simple reason why Australia has most of the world's marsupials and all the world's monotremes.

The evolution of the horse family (Equidae) is a good example of the way that evolution works. The oldest fossil of a horse is about 52 million years old. It was a small animal with five toes on the front feet and four on the hind feet. At that time, there were more forests in the world than today. This horse lived in woodland, eating leaves, nuts and fruit with its simple teeth. It was only about as big as a fox.

About 30 million years ago the world started to become cooler and drier. Forests shrank; grassland expanded, and horses changed. They ate grass, they grew larger, and they ran faster because they had to escape faster predators. Because grass wears teeth out, horses with longer-lasting teeth had an advantage.

For most of this long period of time, there were a number of horse types (genera). Now only one genus exists: the modern horse, Equus. It has teeth which grow all its life, hooves on single toes, great long legs for running, and the animal is big and strong enough to survive in the open plain. Horses lived in western Canada until 12,000 years ago, but all horses in North America became extinct about 11,000 years ago. The causes of this extinction are not yet clear. Climate change and over-hunting by humans are suggested.

So, scientists can see that changes have happened. They have happened slowly over a long time. How these changes have come about is explained by the theory of evolution.

In about , the Hawaiian Islands have the most diverse collection of Drosophila flies in the world, living from rainforests to mountain meadows. About 800 Hawaiian fruit fly species are known.

Genetic evidence shows that all the native fruit fly species in Hawaii have descended from a single ancestral species that came to the islands, about 20 million years ago. Later adaptive radiation was caused by a lack of competition and a wide variety of vacant niches. Although it would be possible for a single pregnant female to colonise an island, it is more likely to have been a group from the same species.

The combination of continental drift and evolution can explain what is found in the fossil record. Glossopteris is an extinct species of seed fern plants from the Permian period on the ancient supercontinent of Gondwana.

Glossopteris fossils are found in Permian strata in southeast South America, southeast Africa, all of Madagascar, northern India, all of Australia, all of New Zealand, and scattered on the southern and northern edges of Antarctica.

During the Permian, these continents were connected as Gondwana. This is known from magnetic striping in the rocks, other fossil distributions, and glacial scratches pointing away from the temperate climate of the South Pole during the Permian.p103

When biologists look at living things, they see that animals and plants belong to groups which have something in common. Charles Darwin explained that this followed naturally if "we admit the common parentage of allied forms, together with their modification through variation and natural selection".p402p456

For example, all insects are related. They share a basic body plan, whose development is controlled by master regulatory genes. They have six legs; they have hard parts on the outside of the body (an exoskeleton); they have eyes formed of many separate chambers, and so on. Biologists explain this with evolution. All insects are the s of a group of animals who lived a long time ago. They still keep the basic plan (six legs and so on) but the details change. They look different now because they changed in different ways: this is evolution.

It was Darwin who first suggested that all life on Earth had a single origin, and from that beginning "endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been, and are being, evolved".p490 Evidence from molecular biology in recent years has supported the idea that all life is related by common descent.

Strong evidence for common descent comes from vestigial structures.p397 The useless wings of flightless beetles are sealed under fused wing covers. This can be simply explained by their descent from ancestral beetles which had wings that worked.p49

Rudimentary body parts, those that are smaller and simpler in structure than corresponding parts in ancestral species, are called vestigial organs. Those organs are functional in the ancestral species but are now either nonfunctional or re-adapted to a new function. Examples are the pelvic girdles of whales, halteres (hind wings) of flies, wings of flightless birds, and the leaves of some xerophytes (e.g. cactus) and parasitic plants (e.g. dodder).

However, vestigial structures may have their original function replaced with another. For example, the halteres in flies help balance the insect while in flight, and the wings of ostriches are used in mating rituals and aggressive displays. The ear ossicles in mammals are former bones of the lower jaw.

In 1893, Robert Wiedersheim published a book on human anatomy and its relevance to man's evolutionary history. This book contained a list of 86 human organs that he considered vestigial. This list included examples such as the appendix and the 3rd molar teeth (wisdom teeth).

The strong grip of a baby is another example. It is a vestigial reflex, a remnant of the past when pre-human babies clung to their mothers' hair as the mothers swung through the trees. Human babies' feet curl up when they are sitting down, while primate babies can grip with their feet as well. All primates except modern man have thick body hair which an infant can grasp, unlike modern humans. The grasp reflex allows the mother to escape danger by climbing a tree using both hands and feet.

Vestigial organs often have some selection against them. The original organs take resources to build and maintain. If they no longer have a function, reducing their size improves fitness. There is direct evidence of selection. Some cave crustacea reproduce more successfully with smaller eyes than do those with larger eyes. This may be because the nervous tissue dealing with sight now becomes available to handle other sensory input.p310

From the eighteenth century, it was known that embryos of different species were much more similar than the adults. In particular, some parts of embryos reflect their evolutionary past. For example, the embryos of land vertebrates develop gill slits like fish embryos. Of course, this is only a temporary stage, which gives rise to many structures in the neck of reptiles, birds, and mammals. The proto-gill slits are part of a complicated system of development: that is why they persisted.

Another example is the embryonic teeth of baleen whales. They are later lost. The baleen filter is developed from different tissue, called keratin. Early fossil baleen whales did actually have teeth as well as the baleen.

A good example is the barnacle. It took many centuries before natural historians discovered that barnacles were crustacea. Their adults look so unlike other crustacea, but their larvae are very similar to those of other crustacea.

Charles Darwin lived in a world where animal husbandry and domesticated crops were vitally important. In both cases, farmers selected individuals for breeding that had desirable characteristics and prevented the breeding of individuals with less desirable characteristics. The eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries saw growth in scientific agriculture. Some of that growth was due to artificial breeding.

Darwin discussed artificial selection as a model for natural selection in the 1859 first edition of his work On the Origin of Species, in Chapter IV: Natural selection:

Nikolai Vavilov showed that rye, originally a weed, came to be a crop plant by  selection. Rye is a tougher plant than wheat: it survives in harsher conditions. Having become a crop like wheat, rye was able to become a crop plant in harsh areas, such as hills and mountains.

There is no real difference in the genetic processes underlying artificial and natural selection, and the concept of artificial selection was used by Charles Darwin as an illustration of the wider process of natural selection. There are practical differences. Experimental studies of artificial selection show that "the rate of evolution in selection experiments is at least two orders of magnitude (that is 100 times) greater than any rate seen in nature or the fossil record".p157

Some have thought that artificial selection could not produce new species. It now seems that it can.

New species have been created by domesticated animal husbandry, but the details are not known or not clear. For example, domestic sheep were created by hybridisation, and no longer produce viable offspring with Ovis orientalis, one species from which they are descended. Domestic cattle, on the other hand, can be considered the same species as several varieties of wild ox, gaur, yak, etc., as they readily produce fertile offspring with them.

The best-documented new species came from laboratory experiments in the late 1980s. William Rice and G.W. Salt bred fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster, using a maze with three different choices of habitat such as light/dark and wet/dry. Each generation was put into the maze, and the groups of flies that came out of two of the eight exits were set apart to breed with each other in their respective groups.

After thirty-five generations, the two groups and their offspring were isolated reproductively because of their strong habitat preferences: they mated only within the areas they preferred, and so did not mate with flies that preferred the other areas.

Diane Dodd was also able to show how reproductive isolation can develop from mating preferences in Drosophila pseudoobscura fruit flies after only eight generations using different food types, starch, and maltose.

Dodd's experiment has been easy for others to repeat. It has also been done with other fruit flies and foods.

Some biologists say that evolution has happened when a trait that is caused by genetics becomes more or less common in a group of organisms. Others call it evolution when new species appear.

Changes can happen quickly in smaller, simpler organisms. For example, many bacteria that cause disease can no longer be killed with some antibiotic medicines. These medicines have only been in use since the 1940s, and at first, they worked extremely well. The bacteria have evolved so that they are less affected by antibiotics. The drugs killed off all the bacteria except a few which had some resistance. These few resistant bacteria reproduced, and their offspring had the same drug resistance.

The Colorado beetle is famous for its ability to resist pesticides. Over the last 50 years it has become resistant to 52 chemical compounds used in insecticides, including cyanide. This is natural selection sped up by artificial conditions. However, not every population is resistant to every chemical. The populations only become resistant to chemicals used in their area.

Although there were a number of natural historians in the 18th century who had some idea of evolution, the first well-formed ideas came in the 19th century. Four biologists are considered the most important.

Jean-Baptiste de Lamarck (1744–1829), a French biologist, claimed that animals changed according to natural laws. He said that animals could pass on traits they had acquired during their lifetime to their offspring, using inheritance. Today, his theory is known as Lamarckism. Its main purpose is to explain adaptations by natural means. He proposed a tendency for organisms to become more complex, moving up a ladder of progress, plus use and disuse.

Lamarck's idea was that a giraffe's neck grew longer because it tried to reach higher up. This idea failed because it conflicts with heredity (Mendel's work). Mendel made his discoveries about half a century after Lamarck's work.

Charles Darwin (1809–1882) wrote his On the Origin of Species in 1859. In this book, he put forward much evidence that evolution had occurred. He also proposed natural selection as the way evolution had taken place. But Darwin did not understand genetics and how traits were actually passed on. He could not accurately explain what made children look like their parents.

Nevertheless, Darwin's explanation of evolution was fundamentally correct. In contrast to Lamarck, Darwin's idea was that the giraffe's neck became longer because those with longer necks survived better.p177/9 These survivors passed their genes on, and in time the whole species got longer necks.

Alfred Russel Wallace OM FRS (1823–1913) was a British naturalist, explorer, biologist, and social activist. He proposed a theory of natural selection at about the same time as Darwin. His idea was published in 1858 together with Charles Darwin's idea.

An Austrian monk called Gregor Mendel (1822–1884) bred plants. In the mid-19th century, he discovered how traits were passed on from one generation to the next.

He used peas for his experiments: some peas have white flowers and others have red ones. Some peas have green seeds and others have yellow seeds. Mendel used artificial pollination to breed the peas. His results are discussed further in Mendelian inheritance. Darwin thought that the inheritance from both parents blended together. Mendel proved that the genes from the two parents stay separate, and may be passed on unchanged to later generations.

Mendel published his results in a journal that was not well-known, and his discoveries were overlooked. Around 1900, his work was rediscovered. Genes are bits of information made of DNA which work like a set of instructions. A set of genes are in every living cell. Together, genes organise the way an egg develops into an adult. With mammals, and many other living things, a copy of each gene comes from the father and another copy from the mother. Some living organisms, including some plants, only have one parent, so get all their genes from them. These genes produce the genetic differences that evolution acts on.

Darwin's On the Origin of Species has two themes: the evidence for evolution, and his ideas on how evolution took place. This section deals with the second issue.

The first two chapters of the Origin deal with variations in domesticated plants and animals, and variations in nature.

All living things show variation. Every population which has been studied shows that animals and plants vary as much as humans do.p90 This is a great fact of nature, and without it evolution would not occur. Darwin said that, just as man selects what he wants in his farm animals, so in nature the variations allow natural selection to work.

The features of an individual are influenced by two things, heredity and environment. First, development is controlled by genes inherited from the parents. Second, living brings its own influences. Some things are entirely inherited, others partly, and some not inherited at all.

The colour of eyes is entirely inherited; they are a genetic trait. Height or weight is only partly inherited, and language is not at all inherited. The fact that humans can speak is inherited, but what language is spoken depends on where a person lives and what they are taught. Another example: a person inherits a brain of somewhat variable capacity. What happens after birth depends on many things such as home environment, education, and other experiences. When a person is an adult, their brain is what their inheritance and life experience have made it.

Evolution only concerns the traits which can be inherited, wholly or partly. The hereditary traits are passed on from one generation to the next through genes. A person's genes contain all the characteristics that they inherit from their parents. The accidents of life are not passed on. Each person lives a somewhat different life, which increases the differences.

Organisms in any population vary in reproductive success.p81 From the point of view of evolution, 'reproductive success' means the total number of offspring which live to breed and leave offspring themselves.

Variation can only affect future generations if it is inherited. Because of the work of Gregor Mendel, we know that much variation is inherited. Mendel's 'factors' are now called genes. Research has shown that almost every individual in a sexually reproducing species is genetically unique.p204

Genetic variation is increased by gene mutations. DNA does not always reproduce exactly. Rare changes occur, and these changes can be inherited. Many changes in DNA cause faults; some are neutral or even advantageous. This gives rise to genetic variation, which is the seed corn of evolution. Sexual reproduction, by the crossing over of chromosomes during meiosis, spreads variation through the population. Other events, like natural selection and drift, reduce variation. A population in the wild always has variation, but the details are always changing.p90

Evolution mainly works by natural selection. What does this mean? Animals and plants which are best suited to their environment will, on average, survive better. There is a struggle for existence. Those who survive will reproduce and create the next generation. Their genes will be passed on, and the genes of those who did not reproduce will not. This is the basic mechanism which changes the characteristics of a population and causes evolution.

Natural selection explains why living organisms change over time, and explains the anatomy, functions, and behavior that they have. It works like this:

There are now many cases where natural selection has been proved to occur in wild populations. Almost every case investigated of camouflage, mimicry and polymorphism has shown strong effects of selection.

The force of selection can be much stronger than was thought by the early population geneticists. The resistance to pesticides has grown quickly. Resistance to warfarin in Norway rats (Rattus norvegicus) grew rapidly because those that survived made up more and more of the population. Research showed that, in the absence of warfarin, the resistant homozygote was at a 54% disadvantage to the normal wild type homozygote.p182 This great disadvantage was quickly overcome by the selection for warfarin resistance.

Mammals normally cannot drink milk as adults, but humans are an exception. Milk is digested by the enzyme lactase, which switches off as mammals stop taking milk from their mothers. The human ability to drink milk during adult life is supported by a lactase mutation which prevents this switch-off. Human populations have a high proportion of this mutation wherever milk is important in the diet. The spread of this 'milk tolerance' is promoted by natural selection, because it helps people survive where milk is available. Genetic studies suggest that the oldest mutations causing lactase persistence only reached high levels in human populations in the last ten thousand years. Therefore, lactase persistence is often cited as an example of recent human evolution. As lactase persistence is genetic, but animal husbandry a cultural trait, that is gene–culture coevolution.

Adaptation is one of the basic phenomena of biology. Through the process of adaptation, an organism becomes better suited to its habitat.

Adaptation is one of the two main processes that explain the diverse species we see in biology.  The other is speciation (species-splitting or cladogenesis). A favourite example used today to study the interplay of adaptation and speciation is the evolution of cichlid fish in African rivers and lakes.

When people speak about adaptation they often mean something which helps an animal or plant survive. One of the most widespread adaptations in animals is the evolution of the eye. Another example is the adaptation of modern horses' teeth to grinding grass. Camouflage is another adaptation; so is mimicry. The better-adapted animals are the most likely to survive and reproduce successfully (natural selection).

An internal parasite (such as a fluke) is a good example: it has a very simple bodily structure, but still the organism is highly adapted to its particular environment. From this we see that adaptation is not just a matter of visible traits: in such parasites, critical adaptations take place in the life cycle, which is often quite complex.

Not all features of an organism are adaptations.p251 Adaptations tend to reflect the past life of a species. If a species has recently changed its life style, a once valuable adaptation may become useless, and eventually become a dwindling vestige.

Adaptations are never perfect. There are always tradeoffs between the various functions and structures in a body. It is the organism as a whole that lives and reproduces, therefore it is the complete set of adaptations that is passed on to future generations.

In populations, there are forces that add variation to the population (such as mutation), and forces that remove it. Genetic drift is the name given to random changes which remove variation from a population. Genetic drift gets rid of variation at the rate of 1/(2N) where N = population size.p29 It is therefore "a very weak evolutionary force in large populations".p55

Genetic drift explains how random chance can affect evolution in surprisingly big ways, but only when populations are quite small.  Overall, its action is to make the individuals more similar to each other, and hence more vulnerable to disease or to chance events in their environment.

How species form is a major part of evolutionary biology. Darwin interpreted 'evolution' (a word he did not use at first) as being about speciation. That is why he called his famous book On the Origin of Species.

Darwin thought most species arose directly from pre-existing species. This is called anagenesis: new species by older species changing. Now we think most species arise by previous species splitting: cladogenesis.

Two groups that start the same can become very different if they live in different places. When a species gets split into two geographical regions, a process starts. Each adapts to its own situation. After a while, individuals from one group can no longer reproduce with the other group. Two separate species have evolved from one.

A German explorer, Moritz Wagner, during his three years in Algeria in the 1830s, studied flightless beetles. Each species is confined to a stretch of the north coast between rivers which descend from the Atlas mountains to the Mediterranean. As soon as one crosses a river, a different but closely related species appears. He wrote later:

This was an early account of the importance of geographical separation. Another biologist who thought geographical separation was critical was Ernst Mayr.

One example of natural speciation is the three-spined stickleback, a sea fish that, after the last ice age, invaded freshwater, and set up colonies in isolated lakes and streams. Over about 10,000 generations, the sticklebacks show great differences, including variations in fins, changes in the number or size of their bony plates, variable jaw structure, and colour differences.

The wombats of Australia fall into two main groups, common wombats and hairy-nosed wombats. The two types look very similar, apart from the hairiness of their noses. However, they are adapted to different environments. Common wombats live in forested areas and eat mostly green food with lots of moisture. They often feed in the daytime. Hairy-nosed wombats live on hot dry plains where they eat dry grass with very little water or nutrition in it. Their metabolic rate is slow and they sleep most of the day underground.

When two groups that started the same become different enough, then they become two different species. Part of the theory of evolution is that all living things started the same, but then split into different groups over billions of years.

This was an important movement in evolutionary biology, which started in the 1930s and finished in the 1950s. It has been updated regularly ever since.

The synthesis explains how the ideas of Charles Darwin fit with the discoveries of Gregor Mendel, who found out how we inherit our genes. The modern synthesis brought Darwin's idea up to date. It bridged the gap between different types of biologists: geneticists, naturalists, and palaeontologists.

When the theory of evolution was developed, it was not clear that natural selection and genetics worked together. But Ronald Fisher showed that natural selection would work to change species. Sewall Wright explained genetic drift in 1931.

Co-evolution is where the existence of one species is tightly bound up with the life of one or more other species.

New or 'improved' adaptations which occur in one species are often followed by the appearance and spread of related features in the other species. The life and death of living things is intimately connected, not just with the physical environment, but with the life of other species.

These relationships may continue for millions of years, as it has in the pollination of flowering plants by insects. The gut contents, wing structures, and mouthparts of fossilized beetles and flies suggest that they acted as early pollinators. The association between beetles and angiosperms during the Lower Cretaceous period led to parallel radiations of angiosperms and insects into the late Cretaceous. The evolution of nectaries in Upper Cretaceous flowers signals the beginning of the mutualism between hymenoptera and angiosperms.

Charles Darwin was the first to use this metaphor in biology. The evolutionary tree shows the relationships among various biological groups. It includes data from DNA, RNA and protein analysis. Tree of life work is a product of traditional comparative anatomy, and modern molecular evolution and molecular clock research.

The major figure in this work is Carl Woese, who defined the Archaea, the third domain (or kingdom) of life. Below is a simplified version of present-day understanding.

Macroevolution: the study of changes above the species level, and how they take place. The basic data for such a study are fossils (palaeontology) and the reconstruction of ancient environments. Some subjects whose study falls within the realm of macroevolution:

It is a term of convenience: for most biologists it does not suggest any change in the process of evolution.p87 For some palaeontologists, what they see in the fossil record cannot be explained just by the gradualist evolutionary synthesis. They are in the minority.

Altruism – the willingness of some to sacrifice themselves for others – is widespread in social animals. As explained above, the next generation can only come from those who survive and reproduce. Some biologists have thought that this meant altruism could not evolve by the normal process of selection. Instead a process called "group selection" was proposed. Group selection refers to the idea that alleles can become fixed or spread in a population because of the benefits they bestow on groups, regardless of the alleles' effect on the fitness of individuals within that group.

For several decades, critiques cast serious doubt on group selection as a major mechanism of evolution.

In simple cases it can be seen at once that traditional selection suffices. For example, if one sibling sacrifices itself for three siblings, the genetic disposition for the act will be increased. This is because siblings share on average 50% of their genetic inheritance, and the sacrificial act has led to greater representation of the genes in the next generation.

Altruism is now generally seen as emerging from standard selection. The warning note from Ernst Mayr, and the work of William Hamilton are both important to this discussion.

Hamilton's equation describes whether or not a gene for altruistic behaviour will spread in a population. The gene will spread if rxb is greater than c:

At first, sexual reproduction might seem to be at a disadvantage compared with asexual reproduction. In order to be advantageous, sexual reproduction (cross-fertilisation) has to overcome a two-fold disadvantage (takes two to reproduce) plus the difficulty of finding a mate. Why, then, is sex so nearly universal among eukaryotes? This is one of the oldest questions in biology.

The answer has been given since Darwin's time: because the sexual populations adapt better to changing circumstances. A recent laboratory experiment suggests this is indeed the correct explanation.

In the main experiment, nematode worms were divided into two groups. One group was entirely outcrossing, the other was entirely selfing. The groups were subjected to a rugged terrain and repeatedly subjected to a mutagen. After 50 generations, the selfing population showed a substantial decline in fitness (= survival), whereas the outcrossing population showed no decline. This is one of a number of studies that show sexuality to have real advantages over non-sexual types of reproduction.

An important activity is artificial selection for domestication. This is when people choose which animals to breed from, based on their traits. Humans have used this for thousands of years to domesticate plants and animals.

More recently, it has become possible to use genetic engineering. New techniques such as 'gene targeting' are now available. The purpose of this is to insert new genes or knock out old genes from the genome of a plant or animal. A number of Nobel Prizes have already been awarded for this work.

However, the real purpose of studying evolution is to explain and help our understanding of biology. After all, it is the first good explanation of how living things came to be the way they are. That is a big achievement. The practical things come mostly from genetics, the science started by Gregor Mendel, and from molecular and cell biology.

In 2010 the journal Nature selected 15  as 'Evolution gems'. These were:

The idea that all life evolved had been proposed before Charles Darwin published On the Origin of species. Even today, some people still discuss the concept of evolution and what it means to them, their philosophy, and their religion. Evolution does explain some things about our human nature. People also talk about the social implications of evolution, for example in sociobiology.

Some people have the religious belief that life on Earth was created by a god. In order to fit in the idea of evolution with that belief, people have used ideas like guided evolution or theistic evolution. They say that evolution is real, but is being guided in some way.

There are many different concepts of theistic evolution. Many creationists believe that the creation myth found in their religion goes against the idea of evolution. As Darwin realised, the most controversial part of the evolutionary thought is what it means for human origins.

In some countries, especially in the United States, there is tension between people who accept the idea of evolution and those who do not accept it. The debate is mostly about whether evolution should be taught in schools, and in what way this should be done.

Other fields, like cosmology and earth science also do not match with the original writings of many religious texts. These ideas were once also fiercely opposed. Death for heresy was threatened to those who wrote against the idea that Earth was the center of the universe.

Evolutionary biology is a more recent idea. Certain religious groups oppose the idea of evolution more than other religious groups do. For instance, the Roman Catholic Church now has the following position on evolution: Pope Pius XII said in his encyclical Humani Generis published in the 1950s:

Pope John Paul II updated this position in 1996. He said that Evolution was "more than a hypothesis":

The Anglican Communion also does not oppose the scientific account of evolution.

Many of those who accepted evolution were not much interested in biology. They were interested in using the theory to support their own ideas on society.

Some people have tried to use evolution to support racism. People wanting to justify racism claimed that certain groups, such as black people, were inferior. In nature, some animals do survive better than others, and it does lead to animals better adapted to their circumstances. With humans groups from different parts of the world, all evolution can say is that each group is probably well suited to its original situation. Evolution makes no judgements about better or worse. It does not say that any human group is superior to any other.

The idea of eugenics was rather different. Two things had been noticed as far back as the 18th century. One was the great success of farmers in breeding cattle and crop plants. They did this by selecting which animals or plants would produce the next generation (artificial selection). The other observation was that lower class people had more children than upper-class people. If (and it's a big if) the higher classes were there on merit, then their lack of children was the exact reverse of what should be happening. Faster breeding in the lower classes would lead to the society getting worse.

The idea to improve the human species by selective breeding is called eugenics. The name was proposed by Francis Galton, a bright scientist who meant to do good.  He said that the human stock (gene pool) should be improved by selective breeding policies. This would mean that those who were considered "good stock" would receive a reward if they reproduced. However, other people suggested that those considered "bad stock" would need to undergo compulsory sterilization, prenatal testing and birth control. The German Nazi government (1933–1945) used eugenics as a cover for their extreme racial policies, with dreadful results.

The problem with Galton's idea is how to decide which features to select. There are so many different skills people could have, you could not agree who was "good stock" and who was "bad stock". There was rather more agreement on who should not be breeding. Several countries passed laws for the compulsory sterilisation of unwelcome groups. Most of these laws were passed between 1900 and 1940. After World War II, disgust at what the Nazis had done squashed any more attempts at eugenics.

Some equations can be  using algorithms that simulate evolution. Evolutionary algorithms work like that.

Another example of using ideas about evolution to support social action is social Darwinism. Social Darwinism is a term given to the ideas of the 19th century social philosopher Herbert Spencer. Spencer believed the survival of the fittest could and should be applied to commerce and human societies as a whole.

Again, some people used these ideas to claim that racism, and ruthless economic policies were justified. Today, most biologists and philosophers say that the theory of evolution should not be applied to social policy.

Some people disagree with the idea of evolution. They disagree with it for a number of reasons. Most often these reasons are influenced by or based on their religious beliefs instead of science. People who do not agree with evolution usually believe in creationism or intelligent design.

Despite this, evolution is one of the most successful theories in science. People have discovered it to be useful for different kinds of research. None of the other suggestions explain things, such as fossil records, as well. So, for almost all scientists, evolution is not in doubt.

Ethiopia has one of the longest  known histories as a country in Africa. Ethiopia was one of the few countries in Africa that escaped the Scramble for Africa. It avoided being colonized until 1935, when it was invaded by the Italians under Benito Mussolini, who took over the country for a brief time. Ethiopia used to be called Abyssinia.  The word "Ethiopia" is the combination of two words,"Eth" and "Yop". The word "Eth" was taken from the first king of Ethiopia named "Etheal" (meaning: Gift of God) and "Yop" (meaning: Yellow Gold) was the place where Etheal was appointed.  And "ia" shows that Ethiopia is a country name.  Thus, Ethiopia means "Gift of yellow gold for God".  It is the most populous landlocked country in the world.  It  lost its Red Sea ports when Eritrea gained independence in 1993.

The idea of an Ethiopian nation became important  with the Kingdom of Aksum in the 4th century A.D. The Aksumite Kingdom was a mainly Christian state. At its biggest it controlled what is now the Ethiopian Highlands, Eritrea, and the coastal regions of Southern Arabia.  The Aksumite Kingdom was responsible for the development of the religious movement that became the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. The expansion of Islam in the 7th century caused the decline of the Aksumite Kingdom. Most of the lowland populations converted to Islam, while the highland people remained Christian. Since the Aksumite people became divided between Christian highlands and Islamic lowlands, religious and tribal tensions and rivalries between the people intensified. The Aksumite society changed into a loose confederation of city-states that maintained traditions and languages influenced by Aksum.

After the fall of Aksum due to declining sea trade from fierce competition by Muslims and changing climate, the power base of the kingdom moved south. The capital moved to Kubar (near Agew). The Axumite Kingdom welcomed and protected the companions of Prophet Muhammad in Ethiopia. They came as refugees to escape the persecution of the ruling families of Mecca and earned the friendship and respect of the Prophet.

Their friendship deteriorated when South-Arabians invaded the Dahlak islands through the port of Adulis and destroyed it. That was the economic backbone for the prosperous Aksumite Kingdom. After a second golden age in the early 6th century the Aksumite empire began to decline in the mid 6th century, eventually ceasing its production of coins in the early 7th century. The Aksumite population was forced to go farther inland to the highlands for protection, abandoning Aksum as the capital. Arab writers of the time continued to describe Ethiopia (no longer referred to as Aksum) as an extensive and powerful state, though they had lost control of most of the coast and their tributaries. While land was lost in the north, it was gained in the south. Though Ethiopia was no longer an economic power, it still attracted Arab merchants. The capital was moved to a new location, currently unknown, though it may have been called Ku'bar or Jarmi.

Under the reign of Degna Djan, during the 10th century, the empire kept expanding south. It sent troops into the modern-day region of Kaffa, while at the same time undertaking missionary activity into Angot and Amhara.

Local history holds that, around 960, a Jewish Queen named Yodit (Judith) or "Gudit" defeated the empire and burned its churches and literature. While there is evidence of churches being burned and an invasion around this time, her existence has been questioned by some western authors. Another possibility is that the Aksumite power was ended by a southern pagan queen named Bani al-Hamwiyah, possibly of the tribe al-Damutah or Damoti of the Sidama people. It is clear from contemporary sources that a female usurper did rule the country at this time, and that her reign ended some time before 1003. After a short Dark Age, the Aksumite Empire was succeeded by the Agaw Zagwe dynasty in the 11th or 12th century (most likely around 1137), although limited in size and scope. However, Yekuno Amlak, who killed the last Zagwe king and founded the modern Solomonic dynasty around 1270 traced his ancestry and his right to rule from the last emperor of Aksum, Dil Na'od. The end of the Aksumite Empire didn't mean the end of Aksumite culture and traditions. The architecture of the Zagwe dynasty at Lalibela and Yemrehana Krestos Church shows heavy Aksumite influence.

Axum shifted its capital near Agew In the middle of the sixteenth century. Adal Sultanate armies led by Harar leader Ahmed Gragn invaded the Ethiopian Highlands in what is known as the "Conquest of Habasha". Following Gragn invasions the southern part of the Empire was lost to Ethiopia.   Several groups like the Gurage people were cut off from the rest of Abyssinia. In the late sixteenth century the nomadic Oromo people penetrated the Abyssinian plains occupying large territories during the Oromo migrations. Abyssinian warlords often competed with each other. The Amharas seemed to gain the upper hand with the accession of Yekuno Amlak of Ancient Bete Amhara in 1270, after defeating the Agaw lords of Lasta.

The Gondarian dynasty, which since the 16th century had become the centre of Royal pomp and ceremony of Abyssinia, finally lost its influence as a result of the emergence of powerful regional lords, following the murder of Iyasu I, also known as Iyasu the Great. The decline in the prestige of the dynasty led to the semi-anarchic era of Zemene Mesafint ("Era of the Princes"), in which rival warlords fought for power.  The Yejju Oromo enderases ("regents") had effective control. The emperors were considered to be figureheads. A  young man named Kassa Haile Giorgis also known as Emperor Tewodros brought end to Zemene Mesafint by defeating all his rivals and took the throne in 1855. The Tigrayans made only a brief return to the throne in the person of Yohannes IV in 1872. His death in 1889 resulted in the power base shifting back to the dominant Amharic-speaking elite prior to Yejju Oromo and Tigrayan rule. His successor Menelik II an Emperor of Amhara origin seized power. Lij Iyasu, emperor from 1913 until 1917 became the only Muslim emperor who with Sultan Diiriye Guure, allied with the Central Powers. But, later, both Sultan Diiriye Guure the king of the Dervish Kingdom, and Iyasu were removed from power, with help from the British Empire. League of Nations in 1935 reported that after the invasion of Menelik's forces into non Abyssinian-proper lands of Somalis, Harari, Southern Oromo, Sidama, Shanqella etc., the inhabitants were enslaved and heavily taxed by the gebbar-feudal system leading to depopulation.

Some scholars consider the Amhara to have been Ethiopia's ruling elite for centuries, represented by the Solomonic line of Emperors ending in Haile Selassie I. Marcos Lemma and other scholars argue that other ethnic groups have always been active in the country's politics. This confusion may largely stem from the mislabeling of all Amharic-speakers as "Amhara" even though they were from a different ethnic group, and the fact that many people from other ethnic groups have adopted Amharic names. Another is the claim that most Ethiopians can trace their ancestry to multiple ethnic groups, including the last self-proclaimed emperor Haile Selassie I and his Empress Itege Menen Asfaw of Ambassel  having both Amhara and Oromo linage.

Oromo migrations, occurred with the movement of a large pastoral population from the southeastern provinces of the Empire. A contemporary account was recorded by the monk Abba Bahrey, from the Gamo region. The empire organization changed progressively, with faraway provinces taking more independence. A remote province such as Bale is last recorded paying tribute to the imperial throne during Yaqob reign (1590-1607).

By 1607, Oromos were also major players in the imperial politics, when Susenyos I, raised by a clan through gudifacha(or adoption), took power. He was helped by fellow Luba age-group generals Mecha, Yilma and Densa, who were rewarded by Rist feudal lands, in the present-day Gojjam districts of the same name.

The reign of Iyasu I the Great (1682-1706) was a major period of consolidation. It also saw the dispatching of embassies to Louis XIV's France and to Dutch India. During the reign of Iyasu II (1730-1755), the Empire was strong enough to undertake a war on the Sennar Sultanate, where the emperor leading its army to Sennar itself, was afterwards forced to retreat upon defeat along the Setit river. Iyasu II also conferred the dignity of Kantibai of the Habab (northern Eritrea) after homage by a new dynasty.

The Wallo and Yejju clans of the Oromo people rise to power culminated in 1755, when Emperor Iyoas I ascended to the imperial throne in Gondar. They would be one of the major factions contending for imperial power during the ensuing Zemene Mesafint, starting from 1769, when Mikael Sehul, Ras of Tigray killed Iyoas I and replaced him with Yohannes II.

The establishment of modern Ethiopia was led by the Shawan people (which included both Amharas and Oromos), particularly Amhara emperors Tewodros II of Gondar, who governed from 1855 to 1868. Yohannis IV, who was from Tigray governed from 1869 to 1889 and managed to expand his authority into Eritrea. Menelik II, governed from 1889 to 1913 and repelled the Italian invasion of 1896.

From 1874 to 1876, the Empire, under Yohannes IV, won the Ethiopian-Egyptian War, decisively beating the invading forces at the Battle of Gundet, in Hamasien province (in modern-day Eritrea). In 1887 Menelik king of Shewa invaded the Emirate of Harar after his victory at the Battle of Chelenqo.

Beginning in the 1890s, under the reign of the Emperor Menelik II, the empire's forces set off from the central province of Shoa to conquor inhabited lands to the west, east and south. The territories that were annexed included those of the Western Oromo (non-Shawan Oromo), Sidama, Gurage, Wolayta, and Dizi. Among the imperial troops was Ras Gobena's Shewan Oromo militia. Many of the lands that they annexed had never been under the empire's rule.  The newly incorporated territories resulting in the modern borders of Ethiopia.

Ethiopia, unlike the rest of Africa, had never been colonized. Ethiopia was accepted as the first independent African-governed state at the League of Nations in 1922. Ethiopia was occupied by Italy after the Second Italo-Abyssinian War, but it was liberated by the Allies during World War II.

After the war, Ethiopia annexed Eritrea. However, ethnic tensions surged between the Amhara and the various ethnic groups of Eritrea, as well as Oromo, Somali, and Tigray peoples, in Ethiopia proper. They each formed separatist movements dedicated to leaving Ethiopia. After the overthrow of the Ethiopian monarchy by the Derg military junta, the country was aligned with the Soviet Union and Cuba after the United States failed to support it in its military struggle with Somali separatists in the Ogaden region. After the end of military government in Ethiopia in 1993, Eritrea separated from Ethiopia.

The Kingdom of Aksum, the first known kingdom of great power to rise in Ethiopia, rose during the first century AD. The Persian religious figure Mani listed Axum with Rome, Persia, and China as one of the four great powers of his time. It was in the early 4th century that a Syro-Greek castaway, Frumentius, was taken to the court and over time changed King Ezana to Christianity, making Christianity Ethiopia's religion. For this, he received the title "Abba Selama". At different times, including a time in the 6th century, Axum ruled most of modern-day Yemen just across the Red Sea.

The line of rulers of the actual Axumite kings ended around 950 AD when they were overthrown by the Jewish Queen Gudit; then it was followed by the Zagwe dynasty for around 300 years. Around 1270 AD, the Solomonid dynasty came to control Ethiopia, claiming that they were related to the kings of Axum ( they were southern Ethiopia people, from Shewa). They called themselves Neguse Negest ("King of Kings," or Emperor), basing their claims on their direct relation to king Solomon and the queen of Sheba.

During the rule of Emperor Lebna Dengel, Ethiopia made its first good contact with a European country, Portugal in 1520. When the Empire was attacked by Somali General and Imam, Ahmad ibn Ibrihim al-Ghazi, Portugal responded to Lebna Dengel's request for help with 400 musketeers, helping his son Gelawdewos beat al-Ghazi and remake his rule. Jesuit missionaries over time offended the Orthodox faith of the local Ethiopians, and in the mid-17th century Emperor Fasilidos got rid of these missionaries. Oromo people began to question the Ethiopian Christian authorities in the Abyssinian territories, and wanted to keep their own religion.

All of this led to Ethiopia's isolation during the 1700s. The Emperors became figureheads, controlled by warlords like Ras Mikael Sehul of Tigray.  Ethiopian isolationism ended following a British mission that made friendship between the two nations.  It was not until the reign of Tewodros II that Ethiopia began to take part in world matters once again.

In 1896 Italy was decisively defeated in the battle of Adwa by Emperor Menelik; an Amhara Emperor from the province of Shewa. This battle dispelled the notion that Europeans were superior and could not be defeated by a black army. It gave rise to the Pan African movement, and hope to other African countries who were conquered. This victory made Ethiopia the only African country to successfully repel a European power during the Scramble of Africa. In 1936 Italy again attacked, and succeeded in occupying Ethiopia until 1941. With British help the 5 year occupation ended and Emperor Haile Selassie regained the throne.

Revolutionaries overthrew and killed the emperor in 1974. The resulting civil war lasted until 1991. Eritrea became independent and later fought the Eritrean–Ethiopian War.

Ethiopians constitute several component ethnic groups, many of which are closely related to ethnic groups in neighboring Eritrea and other parts of the Horn of Africa.

Ethiopia's population is highly diverse with different languages and ethnic groups. Most of its people speak a Semitic or Cushitic language which are both part of the Afroasiatic language family, while others speak Nilo-Saharan languages. The Oromo, Amhara, Somali and Tigrayans make up more than three-quarters of the population, but there are more than 80 different ethnic groups within Ethiopia. Some of these have as few as 10,000 members.

Before 1996, Ethiopia was divided into 13 provinces. Ethiopia now has ethnically based regional states, zones, districts, and neighborhoods.

There are nine regions, sixty-eight zones and two chartered cities. Ethiopia is further divided into 550 woredas and several special woredas.

Esperanto is a constructed auxiliary language. Its creator was L. L. Zamenhof, a Polish eye doctor. He created the language to make international communication easier. His goal was to design Esperanto so that people can learn it much more easily than any national language.

At first, Zamenhof called the language , which means "The International Language" in Esperanto. Soon, people began calling it by the simpler name , which means "one who hopes". That name comes from  ("A doctor who hopes"), which is what Zamenhof called himself in his first book about Esperanto.

There are people who speak Esperanto in many countries and in all the major continents. No one knows exactly how many people now speak Esperanto in the world. Most sources say that there are between several hundred thousand and two million Esperanto speakers.  A few people grew up speaking Esperanto as their first language. There may be around 2,000 of these people. Therefore, Esperanto is the most-used constructed language in the world.

A person who speaks or supports Esperanto is often called an "Esperantist".

L. L. Zamenhof created Esperanto. He grew up in Białystok, a town that was in the Russian Empire,  but is now in Poland. People in Białystok spoke many languages. Zamenhof saw conflicts between individual ethnic groups living there (Russians, Poles, Germans and Jews). He thought that lack of a common language caused these conflicts, so he began creating a language people could share and use internationally. He thought this language should be different from national languages. He wanted it to be culturally neutral and easy-to-learn. He thought people should learn it along with national languages and use Esperanto for communication between people with different native languages.

First, Zamenhof thought about bringing Latin back into use. Although he learned it in school, he realized it was too difficult for normal use. He also studied English and understood that languages did not need to conjugate verbs by person or number. Once he saw two Russian words: швейцарская (, derived from швейцар - ) and кондитерская (, derived from кондитер - ). These words with the same ending gave him an idea. He decided that regular prefixes and suffixes could decrease the number of word roots, which one would need for a communication. Zamenhof wanted the root words to be neutral, so he decided to use word roots from Romance and Germanic languages. Those languages were taught in many schools in many places around the world at that time.

Zamenhof did his first project Lingwe uniwersala (Universal Language) in 1878. But his father, a language teacher,  his son's work as . So, he destroyed the original work. Between 1879 and 1885 Zamenhof studied medicine in Moscow and Warsaw. In these days he again worked on an international language. In 1887 he published his first textbook  ("The International Language"). According to Zamenhof's pen-name  ("Doctor who hopes"), many people started calling the language as Esperanto.

Zamenhof received a lot of  letters. In the letters, people wrote their suggestions for changes to the language. He noted all of the suggestions. He published them in the magazine La Esperantisto. In this magazine, Esperanto speakers could vote about the changes. They did not accept them. The magazine had many subscribers in Russia. It was eventually banned (stopped) there because of an article about Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy. Publishing of the magazine ended after that. The new magazine Lingvo Internacia replaced it.

In the first years of Esperanto's life, people used it only in written form, but in 1905 they organized the first (1st) World Congress of Esperanto in Boulogne-sur-Mer, France. This was the first notable use of Esperanto in international communication. Because of the success of the congress, it is organized each year (except years of the World Wars) to this day.

In 1912 Zamenhof resigned his leading position in the movement during the eighth (8th) World Congress of Esperanto in Kraków, Poland. The tenth (10th) World Congress of Esperanto in Paris, France, did not take place because of the start of World War I. Nearly 4000 people signed up for this congress.

During World War I the World Esperanto Association had its main office in Switzerland, which was neutral in the war. Hector Hodler's group of volunteers with support of Romain Rolland helped send letters between the enemy countries through Switzerland. In total, they helped with 200,000 cases.

After World War I there was new hope for Esperanto because of the desire of people to live in peace. Esperanto and its community grew in those days. The first World Congress after the war took place in Hague, Netherlands, in 1920. An Esperanto Museum was opened in Vienna, Austria, in 1929. Today it is part of the Austrian National Library.

World War II stopped this growing of the language. Many Esperantists were sent into the battle. Nazis broke up Esperanto groups because they saw the language as a part of a worldwide Jewish conspiracy. Many Esperanto speakers died in concentration camps. The Soviet Union also treated Esperantists badly when Stalin was their leader.

After World War II many people supported Esperanto. 80 million people signed a petition supporting Esperanto for use in the United Nations.

Every year they organize big Esperanto meetings such as the World Congress of Esperanto, International Youth Congress of Esperanto and SAT-Congress (meeting of Sennacieca Asocio Tutmonda - World Non-national Association).

In 1990, the Holy See published the document Norme per la celebrazione della Messa in esperanto, allowing the use of Esperanto in Masses without special permission. Esperanto is the only constructed language which received a permission like this one from the Roman Catholic Church.

Esperanto has many web pages, blogs, podcasts, and videos. People also use Esperanto in social media and online discussions and in their private communication through e-mail and instant messaging. Several (especially open source and free software) programmes have their own language version in Esperanto. Internet radio station Muzaiko has been broadcasting 24 hours a day in Esperanto since 2011.

Zamenhof wanted to make an easy language to increase international understanding. He wanted Esperanto to be a universal second language. In other words, although he did not want Esperanto to replace national languages, he wanted a majority of people around the world to speak Esperanto. Many Esperantists initially shared this goal. General Assembly of UNESCO recognized Esperanto in 1954. Since then World Esperanto Association has got official relations with UNESCO. However, Esperanto was never chosen by the United Nations or other international organizations and it has not become a widely accepted second language.

Some Esperanto speakers like Esperanto for reasons other than its use as a universal second language. They like the Esperanto community and culture. Developing the Esperanto culture is a goal for that people.

People who care more about Esperanto's current value than about its potential for universal use are sometimes called raŭmistoj in Esperanto. The ideas of these people can together be called , or "Raumism" in English. The names come from the name of the town of Rauma, in Finland. The International Youth Congress of Esperanto met there in 1980 and made a big statement. They said that making Esperanto a universal second language was not their main goal.

People who have goals for Esperanto that are more similar to Zamenhof's are sometimes called  in Esperanto. The name comes from , an Esperanto phrase which means "final victory". It refers to a theoretical future in which nearly everyone on Earth speaks Esperanto as a second language.

The Prague Manifesto (1996) states the ideas of the ordinary people of the Esperanto movement and of its main organization, the World Esperanto Association (UEA).

German town Herzberg am Harz uses nickname die Esperanto-Stadt/la Esperanto-urbo ("the Esperanto town") since July 12, 2006. They also teach the language in elementary schools and do some other cultural and educational events using the Esperanto language together with the Polish twin town Góra.

Esperanto is the only constructed language that the Roman Catholic Church recognises as a liturgical language. They allow Masses in the language and Vatican Radio broadcasts in Esperanto every week.

Many people use Esperanto to communicate by mail, email, blogs or chat rooms with Esperantists in other countries. Some travel to other countries to meet and talk in Esperanto with other Esperantists.

There are annual meetings of Esperantists. The largest is the  ("World Congress of Esperanto"), which is held in a different country each year. In recent years around 2,000 people have attended it, from 60 or more countries. For young people there is  ("International Youth Congress of Esperanto").

A lot of different cultural activities take place during Esperanto meetings: concerts of Esperanto musicians, dramas, discos, presentations of the culture of the host country and culture of the countries of the participants, lectures, language-courses, and so on. At the location of Esperanto meetings there is also a pub, a tearoom, a bookstore, etc. with Esperanto-speaking workers. The number of activities and possibilities depends on the size or on the theme of the meeting.

There are books and magazines written in Esperanto. Much literature has been translated into Esperanto from other languages, including famous works, like the Bible (first time in 1926) and plays by Shakespeare. Works that are less famous have also been translated into Esperanto, and some of these do not have English translations.

Important Esperanto writers are for example: Trevor Steele (Australia), István Nemere (Hungary) and Mao Zifu (China). William Auld was a British writer of poetry in Esperanto and honorary president of the Esperanto PEN Centre (Esperanto part of International PEN). Some people recommended him for the Nobel Prize in Literature.

There is music of different genres in Esperanto, including folk songs, rock music, cabaret, songs for solo singers, choirs and opera. Among active Esperanto musicians is for example Swedish socio-critical music group La Perdita Generacio, Occitan singer JoMo, the Finnish group Dolchamar, Brazilian group Supernova, Frisian group Kajto or Polish singer-songwriter Georgo Handzlik. Also some popular music writers and artists, including Elvis Costello and American singer Michael Jackson recorded songs in Esperanto, composed songs inspired by the language or used it in their promotional materials. Some songs from the album Esperanto from Warner Bros., which released - all in Esperanto - in Spain, in November 1996, reached a high position in the Spanish record charts; similarly, in 1999, in Germany, hip-hop music group Freundeskreis became famous with their single Esperanto. Classical works for orchestra and choir with texts in Esperanto are La Koro Sutro by Lou Harrison and The First Symphony by David Gaines. In Toulouse, France, there is Vinilkosmo, which produces Esperanto music. The main internet Esperanto songbook KantarViki has got 3,000 songs in May 2013, both original and translated.

They play dramas from different writers such as Carlo Goldoni, Eugène Ionesco and William Shakespeare also in Esperanto. Filmmakers sometimes use Esperanto in the background of films, for example in The Great Dictator by Charlie Chaplin, in the action film , in comedy sci-fi television series Red Dwarf or in comedy film Captain Fantastic. Feature films in Esperanto are not very common, but there are about 15 feature films, which have Esperanto themes.

The 1966 film Incubus is notable because its dialogues are in Esperanto only. Today some people translate subtitles of different films to Esperanto. The website Verda Filmejo collects these subtitles.

Radio stations in Brazil, China, Cuba and Vatican broadcast regular programmes in Esperanto. Some other radio programmes and podcasts are available on the Internet. Internet radio station Muzaiko broadcasts Esperanto programmes on the Internet 24 hours a day since July 2011. Between 2005 and 2006 there was also a project of international television "Internacia Televido" in Esperanto. Esperanto TV broadcasts on the Internet from Sydney, Australia, since April 5, 2014.

On the Internet there are many online discussions in Esperanto about different topics. There are many websites, blogs, podcasts, videos, television, and radio stations in Esperanto (see above). Google Translate supports translations from and into Esperanto since February 22, 2012 as its 64th language.

Apart from websites and blogs of esperantists and Esperanto organizations, there is also an Esperanto Wikipedia (Vikipedio) and other projects of Wikimedia Foundation which has also got their Esperanto language version or they use Esperanto (Wikibooks, Wikisource, Wikinews, Wikimedia Commons and Wikidata). People can also use an Esperanto version of social networks, for example Facebook, Diaspora and other websites.

Several computer programmes also have an Esperanto version, such as web browser Firefox and office suite (set of programmes for use in an office) LibreOffice.

Esperanto uses grammar and words from many natural languages, such as Latin, Russian, and French. Morphemes in Esperanto (the smallest parts of a word that can have a meaning) cannot be changed and people can combine them into many different words. The language has got common attributes with isolating languages (they use word order to change the meaning of a sentence) such as Chinese, while the inner structure of Esperanto words has got common attributes with agglutinative languages (they use affixes to change the meaning of a word), such as Turkish, Swahili and Japanese.

Esperanto's grammar (rules of language) is meant to be simple. The rules in Esperanto never change and can always be applied in the same way

The Esperanto alphabet is based on the Latin script. It has six letters with diacritics: ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ, ŝ (with circumflex), and ŭ (with breve). The alphabet does not have the letters q, w, x, or y.

Even though the world uses Unicode, the letters with diacritics (found in the "Latin-Extended A" section of the Unicode Standard) can cause problems with printing and computing, because they are not found on the keyboards we use.

There are two  of this problem, both of which use digraphs for the letters with diacritics. Zamenhof, the inventor of Esperanto, devised an "h-system", which replaces ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ, ŝ, and ŭ with ch, gh, hh, jh, sh, and u, respectively. A more recent "x-system" has also been used, which replaces ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ, ŝ, and ŭ with cx, gx, hx, jx, sx, and ux, respectively.

There are computer keyboard layouts that support the Esperanto alphabet, for example,  for Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux,  for Windows Phone, and Gboard & AnySoftKeyboard for Android.

Some of the criticism of Esperanto is common for any project of constructed international language: a new language has little chance to replace today's international languages like English, Arabic and others.

The criticism, which is specific for Esperanto, targets various parts of the language itself (the special Esperanto letters, the -n ending, sound of the language, and so on).

Some people say that use of the diacritics (the letters ĉ, ĝ, ĥ, ĵ, ŝ, ŭ) make the language less neutral than it would be using only the basic letters of Latin alphabet. No other language uses the letters ĉ, ĥ and ĵ. The letter ĥ is the least used letter in Esperanto and ĵ is not used frequently either, leading people to question how necessary they are.

Critics of Esperanto also say that the same ending of an adjective and a noun (such as "", "", "") is unnecessary. English, for example, does not have the requirement that an adjective and noun must agree in tense, and has no indicator for accusative cases.

They also criticize the fact that most of the words in Esperanto come from Indo-European languages, which makes the language less neutral.

One of the common criticisms from both non-Esperanto-speakers and those who speak Esperanto, is that there is language sexism in Esperanto. Some words by default refer to males, and the feminine counterparts have to be constructed by adding the -in- suffix to the masculine root. Such a words are words like  (father) and  (mother),  (son) and  (daughter),  (uncle) and  (aunt), and so on. The majority of all Esperanto words have no specific meaning on the basis of sex. Some people proposed the suffix -iĉ- with male meaning in order to make the meaning of the basic word neutral. However this proposal is not widely accepted by Esperanto speakers.

Criticism of some parts of Esperanto motivated the creation of various new constructed languages like Ido, Novial, Interlingua and Lojban. However, none of these constructed languages have as many speakers as Esperanto does.

Normal sample: Ĉiuj homoj estas denaske liberaj kaj egalaj laŭ digno kaj rajtoj. Ili posedas racion kaj konsciencon, kaj devus konduti unu la alian en spirito de frateco.

Version in h-system: Chiuj homoj estas denaske liberaj kaj egalaj lau digno kaj rajtoj. Ili posedas racion kaj konsciencon, kaj devus konduti unu la alian en spirito de frateco.

Version in x-system: Cxiuj homoj estas denaske liberaj kaj egalaj laux digno kaj rajtoj. Ili posedas racion kaj konsciencon, kaj devus konduti unu la alian en spirito de frateco.

Simple English translation: All people are free and equal in dignity and rights. They are reasonable and moral, and should act kindly to each other.

People sometimes use the word "Esperanto" in a metaphoric way (not in its literal sense). They use it to say that something aims to be international or neutral, or it uses a wide mixture of ideas. They say the programming language Java is "independent of specific computer systems [e.g. Windows, Android] like Esperanto is independent of ... nations". Similarly, they call the font Noto "the Esperanto of fonts" because it tries to work well for every culture's writing.

Pigs or domestic pigs are mammals in the genus Sus. Pigs are in the Suidae family of even-toed ungulates.

Related, but outside the genus, are the babirusa and the warthog. Pigs, like all suids, are native to the Old World. Baby pigs are called piglets or pups. Pigs are omnivores and are very social and intelligent animals. Its ancestor is the common Eurasian wild boar (Sus scrofa).

The flesh of domestic pigs is eaten as food and is called pork. The Jewish and Muslim religions, and some Christian denominations, believe eating pork is wrong. Pig farmers take care that the animals do not get diseases or parasites which might harm humans.

Domestic pigs come in different colours, shapes and sizes. They are usually pink, but little pigs kept as pets (pot-bellied pigs) are sometimes other colours. Pigs roll in mud to protect themselves from sunlight.  Many people think that pigs are dirty and smell. In fact, they roll around in the mud to keep bugs and ticks away from their skin. This also helps to keep their skin moist and lower their body temperature on hot days. They are omnivores, which means that they eat both plants and animals.

Pigs are smart animals. They are even able to learn how to play video games.

Pigs are commonly used as working animals. They are used to hunt for truffles, pull carts and sniff out landmines. Pig races exist.

Pigs need a warm, clean area under a roof to sleep, and they should not be crowded. They need to be checked for sickness regularly. Pigs need lots of water. Over half their body weight is made up of water. Pigs should be given all the feed they will eat, which is usually four to five pounds a day for adult pigs. Corn is a good food for pigs, but they should also have protein supplements as well.

Pigs can be found throughout the world living on farms and in the wild, and they are also popular pets. Pigs are kept and slaughtered for their flesh, pork.

The ear is the part of the body which allows animals (including people) to hear. People and most mammals have ears. Non-mammals, such as lizards or frogs, can also hear, but may have holes instead of external ears. The ear works by directing sound waves to the inner ear. These vibrations are sent to the brain by an organized group of nerves. This system is called the auditory system — auditory meaning relating to hearing and how we hear. The ear is self-cleaning. It uses muscles (such as when the person is chewing or talking) and part of the head or face to push earwax like a "conveyor belt" out of the ear, to the outer ear.

The inner ear is in most vertebrates, but mammals have special adaptations for hearing which even other land vertebrates do not have. These include the external ear and the three little bones which transmit sounds to the brain (the ossicles). The part of the ear that sticks out and can be seen is called the pinna.

Ears are also used in other ways. African elephants use their large ears to cool themselves when it is very hot. Bats rely on their ears to find prey by echolocation. Some animals use their ears for signalling (sending messages) to each other.

In ordinary language, "ear" refers to this receptor which conducts sound and sends signals to the brain. It does not refer to the many other methods of hearing found in fish and invertebrates. Many animals do not hear through ears. Spiders have small hairs on their legs that they can hear with.

A disability is a condition that a person has which limits them in some way. These conditions may be  (present at birth), cognitive (associated with the brain), developmental (appears as the person develops) and physical, which can be caused by an accident or infection.

The United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities defines disability in Article 1 as:

Invisible disabilities, or hidden disabilities, are disabilities that may not be immediately obvious, such as intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), mental disorders, asthma, epilepsy, allergies, migraines, arthritis and chronic fatigue syndrome.

People with disabilities may use special equipment, often called assistive technology, that can help them. These can include:

Wide doorways and accessible toilets also make it easier for people with physical disabilities to use.

Hatred of the disabled is widespread, ranging from the far left to far right, which is called ableism. People biased against the disabled are called ableists.

Electromagnetic waves are waves that contain an electric field and a magnetic field and carry energy. They travel at the speed of light (299,792,458 meters per second).

Quantum mechanics developed from the study of electromagnetic waves. This field includes the study of both visible and invisible light. Visible light is the light one can see with normal eyesight in the colours of the rainbow. Invisible light is light one can't see with normal eyesight and includes more energetic and higher frequency waves, such as ultraviolet, x-rays and gamma rays. Waves with longer lengths, such as infrared, micro and radio waves, are also explored in the field of Quantum mechanics.

Some types of electromagnetic radiation, such as X-rays, are ionizing radiation and can be harmful to your body. Ultraviolet rays are near the violet end of the light spectrum and infrared are near the red end. Infrared rays are used as heat rays and ultraviolet rays cause sunburn.

The various parts of the electromagnetic spectrum differ in wavelength, frequency and quantum energy.

Sound waves are not electromagnetic waves but waves of pressure in air, water or any other substance.

In physics, it is well known that the wave equation for a typical wave is

The problem now is to prove that Maxwell's equations explicitly prove that the electric and magnetic fields create electromagnetic radiation. Recall that two of Maxwell's equations are given by

By  evaluating the curl of the above equations and vector calculus one can prove the following equations

The equations above are analogous to the wave equation, by replacing f with E and B. The above equations mean that propagations through the magnetic (B) and electric (E) fields will produce waves.

Diplomacy is about relations between countries. For example, countries can make an agreement together, such as a treaty. Diplomacy is the talk between the representatives of states, such as their heads of state. Sometimes, these talks are about trade or business, and sometimes they are about war and peace. Diplomacy happens a lot when two or more countries fight.

Diplomacy can be an action, a skill, or a job. The skill of diplomacy uses tact, like choosing words that are friendly and polite when writing to other countries. People doing diplomacy as a job find solutions to a common problem between countries, or put their country in a better strategic position among other countries.

The people doing the job of diplomacy are called diplomats. They are sent from their home country, to meet with and talk to diplomats and leaders of foreign countries. An important type of diplomat is called an ambassador. An ambassador lives in a foreign country and works in an embassy to be available for meetings with the government of that country.

Euclid of Alexandria  () (about 325 BC–265 BC) was a Greek mathematician who lived in Alexandria, Egypt and worked at the Library of Alexandria. Little is known about this person, but people think he lived there when Ptolemy I was Pharaoh. It is not known where and when he was born.

Euclid collected together all that was known of geometry, which is part of mathematics. His Elements is the main source of ancient geometry. Textbooks based on Euclid have been used up to the present day. In the book, he starts out from a small set of axioms (that is, a group of things that everyone thinks are true). Euclid then shows the properties of geometric  and of whole numbers, based on those axioms.

The Elements also includes works on perspective, conic sections, spherical geometry, and possibly quadric surfaces. Apart from geometry, the work also includes number theory. Euclid came up with the idea of greatest common divisors. They were in his Elements. The greatest common divisor of two numbers is the greatest number that can fit evenly in both of the two numbers.

The geometrical system described in the Elements was long known simply as geometry, and was considered to be the only geometry possible. Today that system is referred to as Euclidean geometry to distinguish it from other so-called non-Euclidean geometries which mathematicians developed in the 19th century.

In addition to the Elements, at least five works of Euclid have survived to the present day. They follow the same logical structure as Elements, with definitions and proved propositions.

The city of Dubai is the largest and most populated city in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the capital city of the emirate of Dubai, UAE. The city is sometimes called "Dubai City" to prevent it from being mixed up with the emirate.

Dubai is a city and emirate in the United Arab Emirates known for luxury shopping, ultramodern architecture and a lively nightlife scene. Burj Khalifa, an 828m-tall tower, dominates the skyscraper-filled skyline. At its foot lies Dubai Fountain, with jets and lights choreographed to music. On artificial islands just offshore is Atlantis, The Palm, a resort with water and marine-animal parks.

There are records of the town of Dubai from 1799. The city was a dependent of Abu Dhabi until 1833. The town of Dubai was an important port of call for foreign tradesmen (chiefly Indians), who settled in the town. Until the 1930s, the town was known for its pearls.

Dubai has a hot desert climate. Summers are extremely hot, windy, and humid. The highest recorded temperature in the UAE is 52.1 °C (126 °F), recorded in July 2002.

According to the UN, about 14 percent of the world population will face water scarcity by the year 2025. This shortage of water is expected to be worse in arid countries like the UAE. The UAE cloud seeding initiative is part of the government’s attempt to deal with the existing and future water needs of the country’s growing population.

Ethanol, also known as ethyl alcohol, grain alcohol or just alcohol, is a flammable, colorless chemical compound whose chemical formula is C2H5OH, also written as C2H6O. It is the active part of alcoholic drinks, which are drunk in most cultures worldwide. Ethanol is also used as a solvent because it can dissolve many other chemicals and is not very toxic. Yeast makes most of the ethanol that people use.

Ethanol fuel can be used instead of gasoline in cars and other engines. Engines can use pure ethanol or ethanol mixed with gasoline.

In Brazil, ethanol fuel made from sugar cane provides 18% of the fuel for cars. Therefore, the country does not have to buy petroleum from other countries.To do so, much of the rainforest has been cut down to grow more sugarcane, which is then fermented into ethanol.

Most cars in the United States can run on fuels that have of up to 10% ethanol in them. Carmakers like Ford, DaimlerChrysler, and GM also make vehicles specifically designed to run on higher ethanol blends. Some of their engines can run on up to 85% ethanol (E85). By mid-2006, there were about six million E85-compatible vehicles on the country's roads, which can run on fuel wth 85% ethanol.

A drum is a musical instrument. It is played with the hands, sometimes using a drum stick (a stick for hitting a drum). A collection of drums and cymbals is called a drum kit, or drum set.

Drums are used to keep a steady beat in a song. They give music of many kinds a sense of feeling. For example, to make a song to be slow or fast, the drums play slower or faster. A drum is a percussion instrument, which means it makes a noise by being hit.  There are many types such as cymbals and bells; even a simple piece of wood can be used as a percussion instrument. The drum kit is a group of drums and cymbals to make beats for music. Drum kits are used in most types of popular music, including rock, jazz, country, blues, and many others.

Acoustic drum kit is a set of drums and cymbals designed to be played as one instrument. A standard drum kit is made from a bass drum, snare drum, set of tom toms, hi hat cymbals, a ride cymbal and a crash cymbal. The sound is produced by striking the drums or cymbals with a drum stick or mallet.

An electric drum kit is essentially a collection of sample pads set up in the same way as an acoustic drum kit. The pads themselves are designed to produce little acoustic sound, other than the dead sound of the wooden drum sticks hitting rubber. The drum kit sends electrical signals to an amplifier, speaker, or pair of headphones to be heard.  This makes them ideal for practicing quietly.  Recording electronic drums is very easy.  They may be connected using a USB cable or an audio interface.

Diego Velázquez (baptized 6 June 1599 – 6 August 1660) was a Spanish painter, the leading artist in the court of King Philip IV.

Velázquez began his career as an apprentice to the Spanish painter Francisco Pacheco. In 1623 Velázquez painted portrait of King Philip IV of Spain. The king was impressed with the painting. The king appointed Velázquez as a painter of the royal court.

Velázquez had a successful career as a painter. He traveled to Italy two times.  He painted royal portraits and religious scenes. Velázquez was also honored as a Knight of Santiago.

Most of royal portraits are now in the Prado Museum, in Madrid.

A dome is a building or roof that usually looks like the upper half of a sphere.

As a roof feature, domes make many religious and government buildings stand out, because if someone is speaking to others inside or under a dome, the voice sounds louder. Also a dome makes it easier to identify an important building, for example a temple or a palace.

A large stadium with a roof over the playing field is often called a "dome". One example of that usage is the Metrodome.

Electromagnetism is one of the four fundamental forces of nature. The others are gravity, and the strong and weak interactions of particle physics.

The electromagnetic force pushes or pulls anything that has an electric charge, like electrons and protons. It includes the electric force, which pushes all charged particles, and the magnetic force, which only pushes moving charges.

There are two types of electric charge: positive and negative. The electric force pulls opposite charges (positive and negative) towards each other. It pushes similar charges (both positive, or both negative) away from each other.

The electromagnetic force comes from something called an electromagnetic field. In physics, a field is how we keep track of things that might change in space and time. It is like a set of labels for every point in space. For instance, the air temperature in a room could be described by a field, where the labels are just numbers saying how hot it is at that point in the room. We could have more complicated labels as well. On a map of wind speeds, the label could be a number saying how strong the wind is and also an arrow saying which way it is blowing. We call this a vector field because each label is a vector - it has a direction (the arrow) and a magnitude (its strength).

Electric and magnetic fields are also fields. Instead of keeping track of temperature or wind speed, they tell us how much push or pull a charged particle will feel at that point in space, and which direction it will be pushed. Like wind speeds, electric fields are also vector fields, so they can be drawn as arrows. The arrows point which way a positive particle, like a proton, will be pushed if it is in the field. Negative particles, like electrons, will go in the opposite direction as the arrows. In an electric field, arrows will point away from positive particles and towards negative ones. So a proton in an electric field would move away from another proton, or towards an electron. Similar charges repel (push away from each other), while opposite charges attract (are pulled together).

Magnetic fields are a little different. They only push on moving charges, and they push more on charges that are moving faster. But they do not push at all on charges that are sitting still. However, a changing magnetic field can produce an electric field, and an electric field can push on any charges. This idea, called electromagnetic induction, is used to make electric generators, induction motors, and transformers work. Together, electric and magnetic fields make up the electromagnetic field.

Before 1800, people thought that electricity and magnetism were two different things. However, this changed during the 19th century when scientists like Hans Christian Ørsted and Michael Faraday proved that electricity and magnetism are actually connected. In 1820, Ørsted found that when he turned the electric current from a battery on and off, it moved the needle on a nearby compass. When he studied this effect more carefully, he discovered that the electric current was producing a magnetic field. That is, when electric charges are moving, they can produce a force that pushes on magnets. Ørsted had found one of the first connections between electricity and magnetism.

Faraday continued studying this connection, running tests with loops of wire and magnets. He found that if he set up two loops of wire and ran electricity through just one of them, he could (for a little while) produce an electric current in the other loop as well. Faraday also discovered that he could produce a current by moving a magnet through a loop of wire, or by moving the wire over a magnet. What Faraday had shown was that magnets could push back on moving electric charges, and that moving magnets could push on charges sitting still. This was like what Ørsted had found, but in reverse.

in 1873, James Clerk Maxwell summed up these connections in his theory of "classical electromagnetism," electricity and magnetism together.  This theory was based on a set of four equations called Maxwell's equations, and the Lorentz force law. Maxwell's equations told us how to relate electricity and magnetism. They said that charges sitting still could push on other charges, but moving charges could produce magnetic fields that push on magnets. On the other hand, magnets sitting still can only push on moving charges, but moving magnets can push on any electric charges.

What's more, Maxwell's studies showed that light could be described as a ripple in the electromagnetic field. That is, light moves like a wave. However, Maxwell's work did not agree with classical mechanics, the description of forces and motion originally developed by Newton. Maxwell's equations predicted that light always moves through empty space at the same speed. This was a problem because in classical mechanics, velocities are "additive"-- if a person A on a train moving at speed X throws a ball with speed Y, then a person B on the ground sees the ball moving with speed X+Y. According to Maxwell, if person A turns on a flashlight, they will see the light moving away from them at speed c. But person B on the ground must also see the light moving at speed c, not c+X. This led to the development of the theory of special relativity by Einstein, which explained how the speed of light could be the same for everyone, and why classical mechanics does not work for things moving very fast.

Albert Einstein's work with the photoelectric effect and Max Planck's work with blackbody radiation did not work with the traditional view of light as a continuous wave. This problem would be solved after the development of quantum mechanics in 1925. This development led to the development of quantum electrodynamics which was developed by Richard Feynman and Julian Schwinger.  Quantum electrodynamics was able to describe the interactions of particles in detail.

Electromagnetic radiation is thought to be both a particle and a wave. This is because it sometimes acts like a particle and sometimes acts like a wave. To make things easier we can think of an electromagnetic wave as a stream of photons (symbol γ).

A photon is an elementary particle, meaning that it cannot be broken down into smaller particles. It is the particle that light is made up of. Photons also make up all other types of electromagnetic radiation such as gamma rays, X-rays, and UV rays. The idea of photons was thought up by Einstein. Using his theory for the photoelectric effect, Einstein said that light existed in small "packets" or parcels which he called photons.

Photons have energy and momentum. When two charged objects push or pull on each other, they send photons back and forth. So photons carry the electromagnetic force between charged objects. Photons are also known as messenger particles in physics because these particles often carry messages between objects. Photons send messages saying "come closer" or "go away" depending on the charges of the objects that are being looked at. If a force exists while time passes, then photons are being exchanged during that time.

Fundamental electromagnetic interactions occur between any two particles that have an electric charge. These interactions involve the exchange or production of photons. Thus, photons are the carrier particles of electromagnetic interactions.

Electromagnetic decay processes can often be recognized by the fact that they produce one or more photons (also known as gamma rays). They proceed less rapidly than strong decay processes with comparable mass differences, but more rapidly than comparable weak decays.

An electric current is a flow of electric charge through a conductor.  The equation of current is:

The SI unit of electric current is the ampere (A). This is equal to one coulomb of charge in one second. Electric current can be found in wires, batteries, and lightning.

In conducting materials, some electrons are very loosely bound to the atoms of the material.  When large amounts of these atoms come together, there is a sort of electron cloud that "hovers" near the atoms of the material.  If you examine a cross-section of the piece of conducting material, the electrons will move very quickly through it.  This motion is caused by temperature, and electrons flowing in one direction tend to equal the electrons flowing from the other direction, so this is not what causes current to flow.  Electrons flow from one atom to another, a process has been compared to the passing of water buckets from one person to another in a bucket brigade.

When an electric field is put on the wire, the electrons respond almost instantly by drifting slightly in the opposite direction of the field.  They gain energy from the field, which is lost very quickly when they bump into other electrons in the material.  As long as the field is in place, however, the electrons will gain back that energy that they lost, and the process will continue.  This "jolt" that electrons receive from the electric field is the source of current, not the overall flow of electrons themselves.  From this discussion, we can see two things that current is not:

When current is flowing in a wire circuit, it accelerates when there is no resistance in the circuit. Resistors are used to increase resistance in the circuit so it slows down the current. The relationship between resistance, current, and voltage (another part of the circuit) is shown by Ohm's law.

Ernest Rutherford, 1st Baron Rutherford of Nelson  OM PC FRS (30 August 1871 – 19 October 1937) was a New Zealand-born British scientist. He won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1908 for his work on nuclear physics, and for his theory of the structure of the atom.

Rutherford was one of the first researchers in nuclear physics, after the discovery of radiation by the French physicist Henri Becquerel in 1896. Rutherford discovered the radioactive half-life, and the three parts of radiation which he named Alpha, Beta, and Gamma. He also discovered that alpha particles were the nuclei of Helium. Rutherford's Geiger–Marsden experiment led to what we know today about the atomic structure, where the atom is a nucleus and electrons orbit around it.

In 1919, Rutherford made the world's first artificial nuclear reaction, where he put alpha particles with nitrogen gas and created particles of oxygen isotopes and protons. This was nuclear transmutation, changing nitrogen gas into oxygen gas.

Rutherford was the leader of the Cavendish Laboratory in Cambridge. He proved the existence of the nucleus and that is was composed of protons and neutrons. In 1932 James Chadwick made an experiment at the Cavendish Lab that showed Rutherford was right.

Rutherford College, a school in Auckland, New Zealand, was named after him.

Electronic music is music which is made with electronic equipment such as synthesizers or computers. Sometimes electronic music artists create special sounds using tape recorders too.

After World War II, when tape recorders had been invented and were becoming popular, composers started to use them to make music. The tape recorder was needed for the performance. Composers used them to combine lots of different sounds. Sometimes it was music played on ordinary (acoustic) instruments which was then changed in some way by the tape recorder. Sometimes they took sounds from everyday life such as the sound of water, traffic noise or bird song. All these noises were put together in the way the composer wanted by using the tape recorder. Tapes of sounds were often cut into pieces, then the pieces were 'spliced' – put back together in a different order. The results were often very interesting, but there were problems. Some people asked: “Is it music?” Others thought it was boring to just look at a tape recorder during a concert instead of being able to watch live musicians play.

Composers in Paris were experimenting with electronic music in the 1940s. They called it “Musique concrète” because they used natural, concrete sounds. (“Concrete” in this sense meant the opposite of “abstract” music which was written down for performance).  The sounds were played back at different speeds, combined in lots of ways, played backwards or played continuously (repeated in a 'loop'), or played into a mixer and re-recorded onto another tape recorder.  The sounds could be filtered. Effects such as vibrato or echo could be added. Sometimes composers used synthesizers which were machines that could make electronic music in real time. They sounded more like normal instruments than the sound effects on a tape recorder.

Computers have often been used for composing electronic music.

Composers who have used these ways of making music include John Cage (1912-1992), Bruno Maderna (1920-1973), Pierre Boulez (1925-2016), Karlheinz Stockhausen (1928-2007), Martin Garrix (2009-2019) with songs like "Pizza", "Forever" and "Scared to be lonely". Very often composers combined electronic music with ordinary instruments being played.

Bands like Twenty One Pilots, Taylor Swift, and Vance Joy among many others employ electronic sounds amongst their music.

Kendrick Lamar, Eminem, Lil Wayne and many other have added electronic music into their rap music.

In popular music, the use of electronics to create new sounds began in the 1960s. Producer Joe Meek and inventor Bob Moog both expanded the range of sounds that could be used in pop music, and by the end of that decade electronics had become accepted in the industry. In the next few years the work of people like Giorgio Moroder, Jean-Michel Jarre, Brian Eno and Kraftwerk made electronic music famous.

In the early 1980s electronic music became fashionable, and bands like New Order, The Human League, Pet Shop Boys and Depeche Mode became famous. Sometimes these bands would mix electronic music with rock music.

In the 21st Century electronics are so much a part of popular music that using it is no longer strange - in fact, many artists use nothing else.

A subgenre of electronic music is electronic dance music, or EDM. Electronic dance music is a form of electronica which is generally made with the intention of being danced to, thus making it generally club-friendly and often (but not always) up-tempo in nature. Whilst a lot of electronic genres are also classified as EDM, not all forms of electronic music fall within the specific category. Examples of EDM genres include post-disco, deep house, techno, Eurodance, trance, trip hop, drum and bass and dubstep, as well as several others.

In 2018, Billboard released a market statistic that proved the value and worth of the electronic dance music market. In this statistical statement, the company shows a 12-percent growth within one year where many changes took place with this musical revolution. One of the biggest helpers in this EDM market growth was YouTube.

All sorts of genres of music even whale songs, ambient music, sounds of nature and sound effects have been distorted by some electronic sound, also to record sounds from space astronauts use electronic equipment to compress noise into a singularity.

Domestication is a change that happens in wild animals or plants, when they are kept by humans for a long time. The Latin term literally means "to make it suitable for home".

If humans take wild animals and plants and keep and breed them, over time the animals and plants may change. The animals and plants become dependent on the humans who keep them, and they change in ways that are better for human use. This change (domestication) happens by humans choosing which animals will breed the next generation. Biologists call this method artificial selection.

The first domestication of plants happened during the first use of agriculture. Humans first domesticated dogs. In the Neolithic revolution, people domesticated sheep and goats, and later cattle and pigs.

Domesticated plants are crops or ornamental plants. People use domesticated animals as livestock, that is for food, clothing, and work. Otherwise, the domesticated animals may be kept as pets.

The first evidence of plant domestication comes from wheat found in pre-Pottery Neolithic villages in Southwest Asia. They are dated at 10,500 to 10,100 BC. The Fertile Crescent, Egypt, and India were sites of the earliest planned sowing and harvesting of plants.

Agriculture developed independently in a number of places at different times. The eight Neolithic founder crops (emmer wheat, einkorn wheat, barley, peas, lentils, bitter vetch, chickpeas and flax) had all appeared by about 7000 BC.

The origin of the domestic dog (Canis lupus familiaris) began with the domestication of the grey wolf (Canis lupus) several tens of thousands of years ago. Domesticated dogs provided early humans with a guard animal, a source of food, fur, and a working animal (hunting, pulling sleds). The process continues to this day.

Archaeology has placed the earliest known domestication at possibly 30,000 BC, and with certainty at 7,000 BC. Other evidence suggests that dogs were first domesticated in East Asia.

Perhaps the earliest clear cultural evidence for this domestication is the first dog found buried together with humans, 12,000 years ago in Palestine.

Cats were also domesticated quite early. At the beginning of agriculture, people started to domesticate sheep and goats, and later pigs and cattle. Other animals that were domesticated early are camels, donkeys and horses. Some animals, like the domestic rabbit, were only domesticated in recent times.

Many other animals which have been artificially selected by humans over a long period, not simply living with humans. The list is not intended to be complete.

Self-domestication refers to an evolutionary process in which aggressive behavior is selected against, which makes a species less aggressive and more friendly and social. Bonobos, who share a common ancestor with chimpanzees, show far less aggression than chimpanzees. It is thought that bonobos have become 'self domesticated' due to female bonobos only reproducing with the more gentle males. This process may also apply to humans, who are very social compared to other species.

El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO in short, English for The Boy) is a term for a natural event that takes place in the Pacific Ocean. It is also called El Niño and La Niña. In Spanish, they mean "The boy" and "The girl."

El Niño happens when the sea water temperature rises in surface waters of the tropical Pacific Ocean. Every two to five years, the Pacific Ocean has this event. A weak, warm current starts around Christmas along the coast of Ecuador and Peru. It lasts for only a few weeks to a month or more. Every three to seven years, an El Niño event may last for many months. This can change the weather and have important effects around the world. Australia and Southeast Asia can have drought, but the deserts of Peru can have very heavy rainfall. East Africa can have both. In a La Niña event, the weather patterns are reversed.

The Southern Oscillation was discovered by Sir Gilbert Walker in 1923. It is a "seesaw" of atmospheric pressure between the Pacific and Indian Oceans. There is an inverse relationship between the air pressure measured at two sites: Darwin, Australia, in the Indian Ocean and the island of Tahiti in the South Pacific. The Southern Oscillation Index (SOI) is the difference in sea-level pressure measured at Tahiti and Darwin. The Cold Tongue (CT) Index measures how much the average sea-surface temperature in the central and eastern Pacific near the equator varies from the annual cycle. The two measurements are anti-correlated, so that a negative SOI is usually together with an unusual warm ocean wind known as El Niño.

By the early 1980s, it was clear that El Niño and the Southern Oscillation were related, and the acronym ENSO is used to describe this large-scale event.

The 2010–2011 Queensland floods were caused by a La Niña event which brought very heavy rain to the east coast of Australia. Other big floods in Australia have also happened during a La Niña, 1916, 1917, 1950, 1954-1956, and 1973-1975. The cost of the 2010-2011 Queensland floods has been worked out to A$30 billion.

Not all El Niños happen in the Eastern Pacific. During recent decades, Central Pacific El Niños have been discovered. When these happen, the effects from Central Pacific El Niños are very different from traditional El Niños. Central Pacific El Niños took place in 1986–88, 1991–94, 2002–03, 2004–05, 2006–07, 2009–10 and 2015–16. In fact, multiple pieces of information say that the moderate-to-strong El Niño events began in January 1991 and lasted until about the mid-summer in 1992, a similar El Niño between spring and fall 1993 and the final Central Pacific El Niño from spring to late summer 1994, after which there was a neutral 1994–1995 season and then the 1995–1996 La Niña period. In other words: There was not one single extended Central Pacific El Niño between the 1991 through 1994 period. Rather, it was several such El Niños over the Central to Western Pacific.

Explosives are chemical compounds that cause explosions; they flare up and burst with a loud sound. Explosive material has many special characteristics: it is a chemically unstable material, it changes its form very fast and, while changing its form, it explodes by bursting and making loud sounds.

There are two types of explosives: low explosives and high explosives. This classification depends on their rate of explosion. Low explosives conflagrate (burn very fast). High explosives detonate (explode with a shock wave). A low explosive is a material, which burns very fast, but does not explode generally. For exploding them, people mix them with high explosives. Sometimes, even a low explosive may detonate. A high explosive bursts and explodes very fast. High explosives produce more pressure than low explosives but low explosives are more safe to use. People use low explosives in fuses, rocket engines and fireworks, and high explosives in mining and demolition (destroying old bridges and buildings). Guns use low explosives as propellants; most bombs use high explosives.

High explosives may belong to different groups: primary explosives and secondary explosives. Primary explosives are very unstable and rapidly react to shock, friction, and heat. Any shock, friction, or heat makes primary explosives to burn or blast fast. Secondary explosives are much more safe to use and do not react very fast to shock, friction, and heat. Any shock, friction, or heat may burn such explosives, but not make them to burst and blast. Some people call secondary explosives as base explosives. Some people also tell about another group of explosives. These are tertiary explosives. These explosives do not react to shock, friction, and heat. For explosion, tertiary explosives may need a mixture with secondary explosives.

Primary explosives are used as detonators: that is, to cause the secondary explosives to explode. Mercury fulminate, picric acid, lead azide, nitroglycerine and nitrogen triiodide are examples of primary explosives. TNT, dynamite, hexogen, HMX and Torpex are examples of secondary explosives.

While sending explosives from one place to another, the packs containing different types of explosives may have different types of markings on the boxes. The United Nations has advised use of such markings. Some examples are:

Digestion is the process of breaking down food to absorb it. Food is broken down into smaller pieces, which are soluble in water. Only then can the food be absorbed into the bloodstream.

Mechanical digestion is the physical breakdown of large pieces of food into smaller pieces, which are made by digestive enzymes. In chemical digestion, enzymes break down food into the small molecules the body can use. Finally, the nutrients are absorbed into the blood stream. Once in the blood stream, the nutrients are taken to the liver, which is a kind of chemical factory for the body.

After we swallow food, it travels down a muscular tube to the stomach. There, it is mashed into soupy fluid called chyme. The mixture passes into the small intestine, where tiny bits of food pass into the bloodstream. The food that is still left goes into the large intestine. Finally, waste products leave the body.

Digestion usually takes about 18 hours. Food stays in the stomach for about three hours. If uncoiled, the small intestine would be about six meters (20 feet) long. Many digestive tracts are about as long as a bus.

Food slowly enters the small intestine from the stomach. This is where nutrients are taken into the blood. It then enters the large intestine. Water is taken away from it. The food that is left is called feces. The feces are stored in the rectum until the waste can leave the body through the anus.

Erwin Schrödinger (Erwin Rudolf Josef Alexander Schrödinger, 12 August 1887, Vienna-Erdberg  4 January 1961, Vienna) was an Austrian physicist and theoretical physicist and biologist. He was one of the founding fathers of quantum theory and won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1933.

Schrödinger went to the Academic Gymnasium from 1898 to 1906.

Afterwards he studied mathematics and physics in Vienna and wrote his habilitation up from 1910.

He was a soldier in World War I. Afterwards he got professorships in Zürich, Jena, Breslau and Stuttgart. In 1920 he married.

After the take-over of power by the Nazis, Schrödinger left Germany and got a new professorship in Oxford.

Three years later he returned to Austria and became professor in Graz.

In 1938 he had to leave Austria, because the Nazis had taken over government.

He went to Dublin and became director of the School for Theoretical Physics.

In 1956 he returned to Vienna and got a professorship for Theoretical Physics.

Schrödinger's most important work is the wave mechanics – a formulation of quantum mechanics, and especially the Schrödinger equation. He also worked on the field of biophysics. He invented the concept of negentropy and helped to develop molecular biology.

Dmitri Ivanovich Mendeleev (born 8 February  (O.S. 27 January) 1834 near Tobolsk – 2 February (O.S. 20 January 20) 1907 in Saint Petersburg) was a Russian chemist who created the periodic table of elements. Many of the predictions made in his periodic table (such as the properties of elements undiscovered at the time) were later proved correct by experiments. Chemical element 101 was named Mendelevium in his honor.

Mendeleev was born in the village of Verkhnie Aremzyani, near Tobolsk in Siberia,to Ivan Pavlovich Mendeleev and Maria Dmitrievna Mendeleeva (née Kornilieva). His grandfather was Pavel Maximovich Sokolov, a priest of Russian Orthodox Church from the Tver region. Ivan, with his brothers and sisters, got new family names while attending theological seminary. Later in life, he invented the periodic table of elements in the year 1861,

Mendeleev is thought to be the youngest of 14 siblings, but the exact number differs between sources. At the age of 13, after the death of his father and the destruction of his mother's factory by fire, Mendeleev attended the Gymnasium in Tobolsk.

In 1849, the now poor Mendeleev family went to Saint Petersburg, where he entered the Main Pedagogical Institute in 1850. After graduation, tuberculosis caused him to move to the Crimean Peninsula on the northern coast of the Black Sea in 1855. While there he became a science master of the Simferopol gymnasium №1. He returned with fully restored health to Saint Petersburg in 1857.

Others in the 1860s suggested that elements group together. For example, John Newlands, published his Law of Octaves in 1865. The lack of spaces for undiscovered elements and the placing of two elements in one box were criticized and his ideas were not accepted. Another was Lothar Meyer, who published a work in 1864, describing 28 elements. Neither attempted to predict new elements. In 1863 there were 56 known elements with a new element being discovered at a rate of approximately one each year.

Mendeleev made other important contributions to chemistry. The Russian chemist and science historian L.A. Tchugayev called him "a chemist of genius, first-class physicist, a fruitful researcher in the fields of hydrodynamics, meteorology, geology, certain branches of chemical technology (explosives, petroleum, and fuels, for example) and other disciplines adjacent to chemistry and physics, a thorough expert of chemical industry and industry in general, and an original thinker in the field of economy". Mendeleev was one of the founders, in 1869, of the Russian Chemical Society. He worked on the theory and practice of protectionist trade and on agriculture.

A differential equation is a mathematical equation that involves variables like  or , as well as the rate at which those variables change. Differential equations are special because the solution of a differential equation is itself a function instead of a number.

In applications of mathematics, problems often arise in which the dependence of one parameter on another is unknown, but it is possible to write an expression for the rate of change of one parameter relative to another (derivative). In this case, the problem is reduced to finding a function by its derivative related to some other expressions.

If a differential equation only involves  and its derivative, the rate at which  changes, then it is called a first order differential equation. A higher-order differential equation has derivatives of other derivatives. If there are more variables than just  and , then it is said to be a partial differential equation. Sometimes, something will obey several differential equations at the same time. These are said to be modeled by coupled differential equations.

Some differential equations can be solved exactly, and some cannot. Sometimes one can only be estimated, and a computer program can do this very fast. Although they may seem overly-complicated to someone who has not studied differential equations before, the people who use differential equations tell us that they would not be able to figure important things out without them. Most scientists and engineers (as well as mathematicians) take at least one course in differential equations while in college. Some mathematicians devote their career to investigating differential equations that are difficult to solve.

Differential equations are used in many fields of science since they describe real-world things:

The endocrine system includes those organs of the body which produce hormones.

It helps to regulate metabolism, growth and development, tissue function, and plays a part also in mood.

The field of medicine that deals with disorders of endocrine glands is endocrinology.

In physiology, the endocrine system is a system of glands, each of which secretes a type of hormone directly into the bloodstream to regulate the body.

The endocrine system is in contrast to the exocrine system, which secretes its chemicals using . The endocrine system is an information signal system like the nervous system, yet its effects and mechanism are different.

The endocrine system's effects are slow to start, and long-lasting in their response. The nervous system sends information quickly, and responses are generally short lived. Hormones are complex chemicals released from endocrine tissue into the bloodstream where they travel to target tissues and  a .

Features of endocrine glands are, in general, they have no ducts, they have a good blood supply, and usually they have vacuoles or granules inside their cells, storing their hormones.

An endangered species is a  group of animals or plants which is threatened by becoming extinct. This could happen because there are few of that animal left, its predators have grown in number, or the climate that it lives in is changing, or the places it lives in have been destroyed.

The World Conservation Union (IUCN) has worked out that endangered species are 40% of all organisms.

Many countries have laws to protect these plants and animals. These laws, if obeyed, can save species by stopping hunting, land development or making parks and reserves. Poaching and other illegal activities, however, can still destroy them.

Only a few plants and animals at risk of extinction, mostly vertebrates, are put on the lists and get legal protection. Many more species become extinct, or will become extinct, without people knowing about it.

This is a list of some mammals that are endangered. They include:

Enrico Fernando Fermi (September 29, 1901 — November 28, 1954) was an Italian-American physicist who worked on the first nuclear reactor and helped make quantum theory. He also was important to particle physics, and statistical mechanics. Fermi won the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1938 for his work on induced radioactivity. He built the world's first nuclear reactor. Fermi also worked on the Manhattan Project. Fermi was one of the greatest scientists of the 20th century.

Fermi was born in Rome and went to a local grammar school. He was very good at maths and science and won a prize from Scuola Normale   Superiore of Pisa. He went to the University of Pisa where he studied physics. In 1923 he was given a scholarship from the Italian government and went to Göttingen for more study. He was given a Rockefeller scholarship in 1924 and studied in Leyden. He came back to Italy at the end of 1924 and became Lecturer in Mathematical Physics and Mechanics at the University of Florence.

In 1926, Fermi discovered the statistical laws, now called Fermi statistics. These laws explain the actions of the particles which are subject to the Pauli exclusion principle, which are now called fermions. These are different to the particles called bosons which are explained by Bose-Einstein statistics. In 1927 he became Professor of Theoretical Physics at the University of Rome. He spent time studying electrodynamics, and began to closely look at the atomic nucleus. In 1934, using discoveries made by Wolfgang Pauli, Frédéric Joliot, Irène Joliot-Curie, he was able to show changes in almost every element bombarded with neutrons. This led to the discovery of slow neutrons, nuclear fission and making elements that were not in the Periodic Table.

Fermi moved from Italy to the United States after winning the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1938 because Italy’s leader Benito Mussolini was close to Adolf Hitler, and Fermi’s wife and children were Jews.

Fermi worked at Columbia University where he studied Nuclear fission, which is to say how atoms break apart and he then moved to Chicago where he built a Nuclear reactor in 1942. Then Dr. Julius Robert Oppenheimer got Fermi to work with him on the Manhattan Project and Fermi helped Oppenheimer and the others to build an Atomic bomb. It was used against Japan at the end of the Second world war.

Fermi expressed his concerns about the dangers of nuclear energy at one of the meetings of the University of Chicago before the end of the WWII.

In the 1950s, Fermi and Dr. Edward Teller, Dr. Herbert York and Dr. Emil Konopinski talked about how according to statistics it makes no sense for Extraterrestrial life not to exist. So Fermi asked “Where is everybody?” This is called the Fermi paradox, the idea that if aliens exist then we should have seen them but it doesn't make sense for aliens not to exist either. Scientists today still wonder and argue about what the answer to the Fermi Paradox is.

The Empire State Building is a skyscraper in Midtown Manhattan, New York City.  It is  tall and has 102 floors. Named after the popular nickname for New York, the Empire State, it is one of the most famous landmarks in the US. When the Empire State Building opened on May 1, 1931, it was the world's tallest building.

Designed by the architects named Shreve, Lamb & Harmon Associates, it was built at a time when many people were trying to make the world's tallest building, but the Empire State Building won. The old Waldorf-Astoria Hotel was destroyed so that the Empire State Building could be built. The Empire State Building was completed in 410 days. It opened on May 1, 1931, when United States President Herbert Hoover pushed a button in Washington, D.C. to turn on the lights. The Empire State Building's design was based on the 21-story Reynolds Building in Winston-Salem, built in 1929. In the 1930s, the Empire State Building was called the "Empty State Building" because few people worked in the building.

The Empire State Building became the tallest building in New York City and the world until the first World Trade Center towers passed it in 1970. When these towers were brought down in the September 11, 2001 attacks, the Empire State Building was again the tallest building in New York. It stopped being New York's tallest building in 2012 when the new One World Trade Center was built.

On Saturday, July 28, 1945, a plane crashed into the building due to heavy fog and started a fire.  The building was only slightly damaged, but 14 people (3 in the plane) were killed.

On January 24, 2000, an elevator cable snapped, causing one of the building's elevators to crash from the 44th floor, stopping on the 4th floor. Both passengers in the elevator were only slightly injured.

The Empire State Building is at 350 Fifth Avenue. The building has its own ZIP code, 10118. There is a big Art Deco  with shops at Fifth Avenue. People can also go to a lobby on 34th Street. The Empire State Building has 73 elevators.

The 80th, 86th, and 102nd floors have places where people can look at the city from high above. There is a steel mast on the top of the Empire State Building. The builders wanted to have an airship station on the roof, but the station was not opened. Today, people cannot go to the mast.  The mast has radio transmitters. The Empire State Building also lights up at night.

The Epic of Gilgamesh is an epic poem from ancient Mesopotamia. It is one of the earliest works of literary fiction known.

The most complete version that exists today was preserved on twelve clay tablets in the library collection of the 7th century BC Assyrian king Ashurbanipal.

A series of Sumerian legends and poems about the mythological hero-king Gilgamesh were probably gathered into a longer Akkadian poem some time before the 7th century BC.

The essential story is about the relationship between Gilgamesh, a king who has become distracted and disheartened by his rule, and a friend, Enkidu, who is half-wild and who undertakes dangerous quests with Gilgamesh. Much of the epic focuses on Gilgamesh's thoughts of loss following Enkidu's death. It is often credited as being one of the first literary works with emphasis on immortality.

The epic is widely read in translation, and the hero, Gilgamesh, has become an icon of popular culture.

Gilgamesh was the fifth king of Uruk, an ancient city of Sumer. His supposed historical reign is believed to lie within the period 2700 to 2500 BC, 200–400 years before the earliest known written stories. His father was the third king, Lugalbanda.

A diode is an electronic component with two electrodes (connectors) that allows electricity to go through it in one direction and not the other direction.

Diodes can be used to turn alternating current into direct current; One way to do this is called a diode bridge. They are used in power supplies and sometimes to decode AM radio signals (like in a crystal radio). Light-emitting diodes (LEDs) are a type of diode that produce light.

Today, the most common diodes are made from semiconductor materials such as silicon or sometimes germanium.

The first types of diodes were called Fleming valves. They were vacuum tubes. They used glass tubes (much like a lightbulb). Inside the glass bulb there was a small metal wire and a large metal plate. The small metal wire would heat up and emit electricity, which was captured by the plate. The large metal plate was not heated, so electricity could go in one direction through the tube but not in the other direction. Fleming valves are not used much anymore because they have been replaced by semiconductor diodes, which are smaller than Fleming valves and need less electricity to work. Thomas Edison also discovered this property when working on his light bulbs.

Semiconductor diodes are made of two types of semiconductors connected to each other. One type has atoms with extra electrons (called the n-side). The other type has atoms that want electrons (called the p-side). Because of this, the electricity will flow easily from the side with too many electrons to the side with too few. However, electricity will not flow easily in the reverse direction. These different types are made by doping (semiconductor). Silicon with arsenic dissolved in it makes a good n-side semiconductor, while silicon with aluminum dissolved in it makes a good p-side semiconductor. Other chemicals can also work.

The connector to the n-side is called the cathode, the connector to the p-side is called the anode.

If you give positive voltage to the p-side and negative voltage to the n-side, the electrons in the n-side will want to go to the positive voltage at the p-side and the holes of the p-side will want to go to the negative voltage at the n-side. Because of this, current flow is able to exist, but it takes a certain amount of voltage to get this started (very small amount of voltage is not enough to get the electric current to flow). This is called the cut-in voltage. The cut-in voltage of a silicon diode is at about 0.7 V. A germanium diode needs a cut-in voltage at about 0.3 V.

If you instead give negative voltage to the p-side and positive voltage to the n-side, the electrons of the n-side want to go to the positive voltage source instead of the other side of the diode. Same thing happens on the p-side. So, current will not flow between the two sides of the diode. Increasing the voltage will eventually force electric current to flow (this is the break-down voltage). Many diodes will be destroyed by a reverse flow but some are made that can survive it.

When the temperature increases, the cut-in voltage goes down. This makes it easier for electricity to pass through the diode.

There are many types of diodes. Some have very specific uses and some have a variety of uses.

Here are some common semiconductor diode symbols used in schematic diagrams:

This changes A/C (alternating current, like in a wall plug in a house) to D/C (direct current, used in electronics). The standard rectifier diode has specific requirements. It should handle high current, not be much affected by temperature, have a low cut-in voltage and support quick changes in the direction of current flow. Modern analog and digital electronics use such rectifiers.

An LED produces light when electricity flows through it. It is a longer lasting and more efficient way of creating light than incandescent light bulbs. Depending on how it was made, the LED can make different colors. LEDs were first used in the 1970's. The light-emitting diode may eventually replace the light bulb as developing technology makes it brighter and cheaper (it is already more efficient and lasts longer). In the 1970's the LEDs were used to show numbers in appliances such as calculators, and as a way to show the power was on for larger appliances.

A photodiode is a photo detector (the opposite of a light-emitting diode). It responds to light that comes in. Photodiodes have a window or optical fiber connection, which lets light in to the sensitive part of the diode. Diodes usually have strong resistance; the light reduces the resistance. The physics that makes photodiodes work is called the photoelectric effect.

A Zener diode is like a normal diode, but instead of being destroyed by a big reverse voltage, it lets electricity through. The voltage needed for this is called the breakdown voltage or the Zener voltage. Because engineers using this kind of diode know its breakdown voltage, they can use it to supply a known voltage in electronic devices.

A Zener diode works because of the Zener effect, discovered by Clarence Melvin Zener.

The varicap or varactor diode is used in many appliances. It uses the region between the p-side and n-side of the diode where electrons and holes balance each other. This is called the depletion zone. By changing the amount of reverse voltage, the size of the depletion zone changes. There is some capacitance in this area, and it changes based on the size of the depletion zone. This is called variable capacitance, or varicap for short. It is used in PLLs (Phase-locked loops) which are used to control the high-speed frequency a chip runs at.

The symbol is the symbol of a diode with a kind of snag. It is used in circuits with high frequencies up to GHz. It turns off very quickly when the forward voltage stops. It uses the current that flows after the polarity was reversed to do this.

The construction of this diode has an intrinsic (normal) layer between the n- and the p-sides. At slower frequencies, it acts much like a standard diode. But at high speeds it can not keep up with fast changes and starts to act like a resistor. The intrinsic layer also lets it handle high power inputs, and can be used as a photodiode.

The symbol of this is the diode symbol, with an ‘S’ at the peak. Instead of both sides being a semiconductor (like silicon), one side is metal, like aluminum or nickel. This reduces the cut-in voltage to about 0.3 volt. This is about half of the threshold voltage of a usual diode.

The function of this diode is that no minority carriers are injected - the n-side only has holes, not electrons, and the p-side only has electrons, not holes. Because this is cleaner, it can react faster, without diffusion capacitance that can slow it down. It also creates less heat and is more efficient. But it does has some current leakage with reverse voltage.

When a diode switches from moving current to not moving current, this is known as switching. It takes dozens of nanoseconds in a typical diode; this creates some radio noise, which temporarily degrades radio signals. The Schottky diode switches in a small fraction of that time, less than a nanosecond.

When some semiconductors touch some kinds of metal, as in the Schottky diode, the way they pass electricity is called a Schottky barrier. The physicist Walter Schottky investigated these kinds of metal-semiconductor junctions and described how they worked.

In the symbol of the tunnel diode there is a kind of additional square bracket at the end of the usual symbol.

A tunnel diode consists of a highly doped pn-junction. Because of this high doping, there is only a very narrow gap where the electrons are able to pass through. This tunnel-effect appears in both directions.

After a certain quantity of electrons have passed, the current through the gap decreases, until the normal current through the diode at the threshold voltage begins. This causes an area of a negative resistance.

These diodes are used to deal with really high frequencies (100 GHz). It is also resistant to radiation, so they are used in spacecraft. They are also used in microwaves and refrigerators.

The symbol has at the end of the diode a sign that looks like a big I. It is made similar to the tunnel diode, but the n- and the p-layer are not doped as high. It allows current to flow backwards with small negative voltages. It can be used to rectify low voltages (less than 0.7 volts).

Instead of being made of two layers of semiconductors like a normal diode, this one is made of four layers. A silicon-controlled rectifier is basically two diodes put together, with a gate in the middle. When voltage goes between the gate and the cathode the lower transistor will turn on. This lets the current go through, which activates the upper transistor, and then the current will not need to be turned on by a gate voltage.

Dream of the Red Chamber (also Red Chamber Dream, Hung Lou Meng or A Dream of Red Mansions) (), originally The Story of the Stone (), is thought to be a great work of Chinese literature and is one of the Chinese Four Great Classical Novels. The novel was written in the middle of the 18th century during the Qing Dynasty. Its author is thought to be Cao Xueqin (Chinese: 曹雪芹). Redology is the study of the book.

The book is based on Cao's family. It is meant to be a memorial to the women that he met when he was young, including friends, relatives and servants. This novel is thought to be one of the first feminist novels. It is also one of the first novels to be written in vernacular, not classical, Chinese. This means that it was written in the same way people spoke at the time, rather than in a posh way. This helped to make vernacular Chinese an acceptable way of writing literature.

France ( or ; ), officially the French Republic (, ), is a country in Western Europe. It also includes various departments and territories of France overseas.

Mainland France extends from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel and the North Sea, and from the Rhine to the Atlantic Ocean. It is sometimes referred to as L’Hexagone ("The Hexagon") because of the shape of its territory.

France is a unitary semi-presidential republic. The head of state is the President, who is also a politician. The Prime Minister is secondary to the President.

Metropolitan France is bordered (clockwise from the North) by Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Andorra, and Spain. The overseas departments and collectives of France share land borders with Brazil and Suriname (bordering French Guiana), and the Netherlands Antilles (bordering Saint Martin). France is linked to the United Kingdom by the Channel Tunnel, which passes under the English Channel.

France is the largest country in the European Union and the second largest in Europe. It has been a major global power for centuries. During the 17th and 18th centuries, France colonized much of North America. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, France built one of the largest colonial empires of the time. This included large parts of North, West and Central Africa, Southeast Asia, and many Pacific Islands. France is a developed country and has a large economy.

It is the most visited country in the world, with 82 million foreign visitors every year.

France was one of the first members of the European Union, and has the largest land area of all members. It is also a founding member of the United Nations, and a member of the Francophonie, the G8, NATO, and the Latin Union. It is one of the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. France has the largest number of nuclear weapons with active warheads, and the largest number of nuclear power plants, in the European Union.

France's official language is French, which is also official in 29 other countries.

France is in Western Europe. France shares its borders with Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Andorra, and Spain. France has two mountain ranges near its borders: the Alps in the east and the Pyrenees in the south. France has a Mediterranean climate. The climate of southern France is similar to that of Greece. There are many rivers in France, including the Seine and the Loire. In the north and the west of France, there are low hills and river valleys.

In France there are many different climates. The Atlantic has a major effect on the weather in the north and west. This means the temperature is about the same most of the year. It is in the marine west coast climate region. In the east, winters are cold and the weather is good. Summers are hot and stormy. In the south, winters are cool and wet. Summers are hot and dry. The north has a temperate climate similar to that of the United Kingdom and other Northern European countries.

France has the second-largest exclusive economic zone (EEZ) in the world. It covers 11,035,000 km2 (4,260,637 sq mi). Only the United States has a larger one.

The name "France" comes from the Latin word Francia, which means "land of the Franks".

The borders of modern France are about the same as those of ancient Gaul in which Celtic Gauls inhabited. Julius Caesar conquered Gaul for Rome in the 1st century BC. Eventually, the Gauls adopted the Romans' language,Latin, from which French evolved, and culture. Christianity first appeared in the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD and became firmly established by the 4th and 5th centuries.

In the 4th century AD, the Germanic tribes, principally the Franks, invaded the Gauls, when the name Francie appeared. The modern name "France" comes from the name of the Capetian Kings of France around Paris. The Franks were the first tribe of Europe after the fall of the Roman Empire to convert to the pope's Christianity, rather than Arianism. The French called themselves "the most Christian Kingdom of France".

The Treaty of Verdun (843), divided Charlemagne's Empire into three parts. The largest area was Western Francia and had borders that were similar to those of modern France.

The Carolingian dynasty ruled France until 987, when Hugh Capet became King of France. His descendants, the Direct Capetians, the House of Valois and the House of Bourbon, unified the country with many wars and dynastic inheritance.

One of the most famous kings, Louis XIV, ruled from 1643 to 1715, the longest in French history.

The monarchy was the most powerful during the 17th century and the reign of Louis XIV. At the time, France had the largest population in Europe. The country had a large influence over European politics, economy, and culture. French became the common language of diplomacy in international affairs. Much of the Age of Enlightenment happened in France. French scientists made big scientific discoveries in the 18th century. France also conquered many overseas possessions in the Americas and Asia.

France had a monarchy until the French Revolution caused King Louis XVI and his wife, Marie Antoinette, to be executed in 1793. Maximilien Robespierre was a dictator until he was executed himself in 1794. Thousands of other French citizens were killed. Napoleon Bonaparte took control of the republic in 1799. He later made himself Emperor of the First Empire (1804–1814). His armies conquered most of continental Europe. The metric system was invented by French scientists during the French revolution. That time 3 estates were developed.

After Napoleon's final defeat in 1815 at the Battle of Waterloo, the monarchy was restored. An interesting fact is that the French King Louis XIX was king for only 20 minutes from the time his father Charles X abdicated, to the time the July Monarchy started in 1830. Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte, Napoleon's nephew, came to power in 1848 and started the Second Empire in 1852. He was removed after the French defeat in the Franco-Prussian War in 1870. The Third Republic replaced his regime.

The large French colonial empire in the 19th century included parts of West Africa and Southeast Asia. The culture and the politics of those regions were influenced by France. Many countries that were French colonies still have French as their official language.

The country actively took part in both the World War I and World War II, with many battles against Germany taking place on its soil. During World War I, millions were killed in the trenches, including over a million at the Battle of the Somme. The conditions were extremely difficult for the soldiers on the front. The last surviving veteran was Pierre Picault, who died on 20 November 2008 at the age of 109.

During the World War II, Germany occupied France. The Allies landed in Normandy on 6 June 1944 and began the Battle of Normandy. The German forces lost France in just a few months.

The 13 regions and 96 departments of metropolitan France include Corsica. France is divided into (administrative) regions:

Corsica has a different status than the other 12 metropolitan regions. It is called collectivité territoriale.

These five overseas regions have the same status as the metropolitan ones. They are like the overseas American states of Alaska and Hawaii.

Then France is divided into 101 departments. The departments are divided into 342 arrondissements. The arrondissements are re-divided into 4,032 cantons. The smallest subdivision is the commune (there are 36,699 communes). On 1 January 2008, INSEE counted 36,781 communes in France. 36,569 of them are in metropolitan France and 212 of them are in overseas France.

The government of France is a semi-presidential system determined by the constitution of the French Fifth Republic. It provides for a separation of powers.

The main ideals are expressed in the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen. The constitution declares the nation to be "an indivisible, secular, democratic, and social Republic". With a Prime Minister subordinate to the President, this slightly strange system was chosen by General Charles de Gaulle in 1958.

France has about 359,000 military personnel. France spends 2.6% of its gross domestic product (GDP) on defense. This is the highest in the European Union. France and the UK spend 40% of the EU defense budget. About 10% of France's defense budget is for its nuclear weapons force.

France is a member of the G7 (previously G8) , group of   countries and G20. France has the eighth-largest economy in the world by Gross domestic product (GDP) (which takes into account how much it costs to live in different countries and inflation rates). France and 11 other European Union members jointly launched the euro on 1 January 1999 and started using it in 2002.

France's economy has nearly 2.9 million registered companies. The government has a considerable influence over railway, electricity, aircraft, and telecommunications firms (as it owns big companies like SNCF and EDF (French electricity)). France has an important aerospace (design of aircraft and spacecraft) industry led by Airbus. It can also launch rockets from French Guiana.

France has invested a lot in nuclear power. This made France the smallest producer of carbon dioxide among the seven most industrialized countries in the world. As a result, 59 nuclear power plants generate most of the electricity produced in the country (78% in 2006, up from only 8% in 1973, 24% in 1980, and 75% in 1990).

France is the leading agricultural producer and exporter in Europe. France exports wheat, poultry, dairy products, beef, and pork. It is also famous for its wine industry. France received 10 billion euros in 2006 from the European Community as subsidies to its farmers.

At one time, the Factory Act of 1833 limited the workday for women and children to 11 hours a day.

On 1 January 2008, it was estimated that 63.8 million people live in France, including in the Overseas Regions of France. 61,875,000 of these live in metropolitan France, the part of the country that is within Europe.

The major ethnic groups living in France today are descended from Celtic people and Roman people. The significant minority groups living in France are:

Racism takes various forms: discrimination, violence, prejudice, segregation, etc., some on the rise, others on the decline. Moreover, it only takes one attack to succeed, or fail, for the figures for racist violence to skyrocket or, on the contrary, stagnate in France.

French is the official language of France. It belongs to the Romance language group, which includes Italian and Spanish. Many regional dialects are also used in France. Alsatian, a German dialect, is spoken in Alsace and in parts of Lorraine in eastern France. French was the language of diplomacy and culture in Europe between the 17th and 19th century and is still widely used.

Some people in France also speak Basque, Breton, Catalan, Corsican, German, Flemish, and Occitan.

There is around 200,000 Romani speakers in France, 950,000 speakers of different Arabic dialects (plus 220,000 occasional speakers) and 1.5 – 2 million speakers of different Berber dialects.

France is a secular country and the constitution guarantees freedom of religion. The population is about 51% Roman Catholic, and 31% of people are agnostics or atheists. 5% are Muslim, 3% say they are Protestant and 1% say they are Jewish. 10% are from other religions or do not have an opinion about religion. There are also Zoroastrian, Unitarian Universalist, Jain and Wiccan communities. Religions founded in France include Raelism.

French literature began in the Middle Ages. French was divided into several dialects at the time. Some authors spelled words differently from one other.

During the 17th century, Pierre Corneille, Jean Racine, Molière, Blaise Pascal and René Descartes were the main authors.

In the 18th and 19th centuries, French literature and poetry reached its best. The 18th century saw writings of authors, essayists and moralists as Voltaire and Jean-Jacques Rousseau.

As for French children's literature in those times, Charles Perrault wrote stories such as "Little Red Riding Hood", "Beauty and the Beast", "Sleeping Beauty" and "Puss in Boots".

Many famous French novels were written in the 19th century by authors such as Victor Hugo, Alexandre Dumas and Jules Verne. They wrote popular novels like The Three Musketeers, The Count of Monte-Cristo, Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea, The Hunchback of Notre-Dame and Les Misérables. Other 19th century fiction writers include Emile Zola, Guy de Maupassant, Théophile Gautier and Stendhal.

Famous novels were written during the 20th century by Marcel Proust, Antoine de Saint-Exupéry, Albert Camus, Jean-Paul Sartre and Michel Houellebecq.

The Tour de France cycling race in July is one of the best-known sporting events. It is a three-week race of around 3,500 km that covers most of France and ends in the center of Paris, on the Avenue des Champs-Elysées. Football is another popular sport in France. The French team won the FIFA World Cup in 1998 and 2018. They also won the UEFA European Football Championship in 1984 and 2000. France also hosts the 24 Hours of Le Mans car race. France also hosted the Rugby World Cup in 2007 and finished fourth.

France is closely associated with the Modern Olympic Games. At the end of the 19th century, the Baron Pierre de Coubertin suggested having the Olympic Games again. France hosted the Summer Olympics twice, in 1900 and 1924, in Paris. France will host the Summer Olympics in 2024, in Paris. France also hosted the Winter Games three times: in 1924 in Chamonix, in 1968 in Grenoble, and in 1992 in Albertville.

French cuisine has influenced the style of cooking throughout Europe, and its chefs work in restaurants throughout the world.

The roots of modern haute cuisine lie in chefs like La Varenne (1615–1678) and the notable chef of Napoleon, Marie-Antoine Carême (1784–1833). These chefs developed a lighter style of food compared to the food of the Middle Ages. They used fewer spices, and more herbs and creamy ingredients.

Typical ingredients like roux and fish stock, and techniques such as marinading, and dishes such as ragout, were invented. Carême was an expert pâtissier (pastry-maker), and this is still a mark of French cooking. He developed basic sauces, his 'mother sauces'; he had over a hundred sauces in his repertoire, based on the half-dozen mother sauces.

French cuisine was introduced in the 20th century by Georges Auguste Escoffier (1846–1935). He was a genius at organization. He worked out how to run large restaurants, as in a big hotel or a palace; how the staff should be organized; how the menu was prepared. He had methods for everything. Escoffier's largest contribution was the publication of Le Guide Culinaire in 1903, which established the fundamentals of French cookery. Escoffier managed the restaurants and cuisine at the Savoy Hotel and Carlton Hotel in London, the Hôtel Ritz Paris, and some of the greatest cruise ships.

Escoffier, however, left out much of the culinary character to be found in the regions of France.

Gastro-tourism and the Guide Michelin helped to make people familiar with the rich bourgeois and peasant cuisine of the French countryside in the 20th century. Gascon cuisine has also had great influence over the cuisine in the southwest of France. Many dishes that were once regional have become common all over the country. Cheese and wine are a major part of the cuisine, playing different roles regionally and nationally. In the north of France, people often prefer to use butter to . In the south, they prefer olive oil and garlic. In France, each region has its own special dish; choucroute in Alsace, quiche in Lorraine, cassoulet in the Languedoc-Roussillon, and tapenade in Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur.

In November 2010, French gastronomy was added by UNESCO to its lists of the world's 'intangible cultural heritage'.

France is the number one tourist destination in the world. In 2007, 81.9 million foreign tourists visited France. Spain comes second (58.5 million in 2006) and the United States comes third (51.1 million in 2006).

Some of the most famous attractions in Paris, are the Eiffel Tower and the Arc de Triomphe. Another one is Mont Saint Michel, in Normandy.

A European Disneyland is located in a suburb east of Paris. The resort opened in 1992 and is also a popular tourist destination in Europe.

France is a member of the United Nations. It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council and has veto rights. It is also a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO). It hosts the headquarters of the OECD, UNESCO and Interpol. In 1953, the United Nations asked France to choose a coat of arms to represent them internationally. The French emblem is now on their passports.

France was a founding member of the European Union. In the 1960s, France wanted to exclude the United Kingdom from the organization. It wanted to build its own economic power in continental Europe. France and Germany became closer after World War II. This was to try to become the most influential country in the EU. It limited the influence of the new Eastern European members. France is a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). However, under President de Gaulle, it left the joint military command. In the early 1990s, France received criticism for its underground nuclear tests in French Polynesia. France vigorously opposed the 2003 invasion of Iraq. France retains strong political and economic influence in its former African colonies. For instance it has supplied economic aid and troops for peace-keeping missions in the Ivory Coast and Chad.

France–Russia relations. The French president was not on the phone with Russian president, for the three first 3 years of the Russian invasion of Ukraine; In July 2025 they spoke by phone.

Geography (from Greek: , geographia, literally  "earth description") is the study of earth and its people. It is one of the social sciences. Its features are things like continents, seas, rivers and mountains. The 'inhabitants' of Earth are all the people and animals that live on it. Its phenomena are the things that happen like tides, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and more.

A person who is an expert in geography is called a geographer. A geographer tries to understand the world and the things that are in it, how they started and how they have changed.

There are two main parts of geography. These types are Physical geography and human geography. Physical geography studies the natural environment and human geography studies the human environment. The human environmental studies includes things such as the population in a country, how a country's economy is doing, and more. There is also environmental geography.

Maps are used in geography to see what land looks like. Geographers spend much time making maps and studying them. Making maps is called cartography, and people who specialize in making maps are called cartographers.

Physical geography (or physiography) focuses on geography as an Earth science. It tries to understand the physical problems and the issues of lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere, pedosphere, and global flora and fauna (types of plants) patterns (biosphere).

Physical geography can be divided into many broad categories, including:

Human geography is the social science that covers the study of people and their communities, cultures, economies, and their interaction with the environment. Geographers studying the human environment may look at:

The oldest known world map dates back to ancient Babylon from the 9th century BC. The best known Babylonian world map is the Imago Mundi of 600 BC. Star charts (maps of the sky) are of a similar age.

During the Middle Ages, people in Europe made less maps. People in the eastern countries made more maps. Abū Zayd al-Balkhī created the "Balkhī school" of mapping in Baghdad.

Western Europe became known as the leader of geographic thought during the European Renaissance and The Age of Exploration (1400–1600). The printing press made maps and information about the world available to everyone. In 1650, the first edition of Geographia Generalis was published.

In the 1700s and 1800s, scientists started to study the relationship between the environment and its people.

A galaxy is a group of many stars, with gas, dust, and dark matter. The name 'galaxy' is taken from the Greek word galaxia meaning milky, a reference to our own galaxy, the Milky Way. Most galaxies look very misty, like small micro-droplets of milk, when looked through a telescope.

Gravity holds galaxies together against the general expansion of the universe. In effect, the expansion of the universe takes place between groups of galaxies, not inside those groups. Gravity holds the galaxy together. The same applies to  groups and clusters of galaxies, such as our Local Group where the Milky Way is, and the Virgo Cluster, a collection of more than 1,000 (might even be 2,000) galaxies. The gravitation is produced by the matter and energy in a galaxy or group of galaxies. Everything in a galaxy moves around a centre of mass, which is also an effect of gravity.

There are various types of galaxies: elliptical, spiral and lenticular galaxies, which can all be with or without bars. There are also irregular galaxies.

All galaxies exist inside the universe. The observable Universe contains more than 2 trillion (1012) galaxies and, overall, as many as an estimated  stars (more stars than all the grains of sand on planet Earth).

There are galaxies of different sizes and type. Typical galaxies range from dwarfs with as few as ten million (107) stars up to giants with a hundred trillion (1014) stars, all orbiting the galaxy's center of mass. Galaxies may contain many multiple star systems, star clusters, and various interstellar clouds. The Sun is one of the stars in the Milky Way galaxy; the Solar System includes the Earth and all the other objects that orbit the Sun.

Star clusters are not galaxies, they are inside galaxies. Globular clusters are spherical-shaped star clusters which are part of the outer halo of the Milky Way. One of the largest (and oldest) known star clusters, Messier 15, has several million stars, packed closely together, with a black hole at its centre. The stars are too closely packed to get an accurate count, but it certainly has more stars than some of the smaller galaxies.

Within galaxy clusters, galaxies move relative to other galaxies. They sometimes collide. When this happens, the stars generally move past each other, but gas clouds and dust interact, making a Starburst galaxy with a burst of new stars. Gravity pulls both galaxies into somewhat new shapes, forming bars, rings or tail-like structures.

Many galaxies continue to form new generations of stars. The Milky Way, and all spiral shaped galaxies like it (see right side image of NGC 2997), produce new stars at a rate of one or two stars per year. This star formation happens in the vast interstellar clouds that account for about 1% to 10% of the mass of these galaxies. Globular star clusters, on the other hand, are not currently forming stars because this activity happened billions of years ago and then stopped once all of the gas and dust clouds were used up.

In the astronomical literature, the word 'Galaxy' with a capital G is used for our galaxy, the Milky Way. The billions of other galaxies are written as 'galaxy' with a lowercase g. The term Milky Way first came out in the English language in a poem by Chaucer.

When William Herschel wrote his  of deep sky objects, he used the name spiral nebula for objects like the Andromeda Galaxy. 200 years later astronomers discovered that they are made of stars as the Milky Way is, so the term 'nebula' is now only used for diffuse structures in a galaxy.

There are two main kinds of galaxies, spiral galaxy and elliptical galaxy. They are classified according to the Hubble Sequence.

A spiral galaxy is a galaxy that has a spiral shape. Most of the galaxies in the universe observed by astronomers are spiral galaxies (about 77%).

NGC 1300 and NGC 1672 are examples of barred spiral galaxies. The Whirlpool galaxy and Messier 81 are examples of unbarred spiral galaxies.

The identifying characteristics of a spiral galaxy are disk-shaped rotating, spiral arms, and a bulge in the galactic core.  The spiral arms are where new hot stars are born.  "Bulge" in the galactic core has old stars.  This feature is common to the most spiral galaxies.

An elliptical galaxy is a galaxy that has a ellipsoid (3D of ellipse) shape.  This type of galaxy are dominant in universe, especially in galaxy clusters.  The shape ranges from circle, ellipse, and cigar-shaped.  In Hubble Sequence, this shape can be represented as class :

Elliptical galaxies have a large range in size. The giant elliptical galaxy can be over a more 1 million light years and the smallest (know as "dwarf elliptical galaxy") are less than one-tenth the size of Milky Way The effective radius defines the area from which half its light comes. The mass of elliptical galaxy is also large. A giant elliptical galaxy can have mass of 1013 (many trillions) of solar masses.

A lenticular galaxy is a galaxy seen as a disc shape.  The shape of a lenticular galaxy is between spiral galaxy and elliptical galaxy.  The shape can be known by looking at the bulge of the galactic center.  If the bulge is very bright, it is a spiral galaxy.

Geometry (from Ancient Greek: Γεωμετρία (romanized: Geometria (English: "Land measurement") derived from Γη (romanized: Ge; English: "Earth" or "land") and also derived from Μέτρον) (romanized: Métron; English: "A measure")) is a branch of mathematics that studies the size, shapes, positions and dimensions of things. We can only see shapes that are  (2D) or solid (3D), but mathematicians (people who study math) are able to study shapes that are 4D, 5D, 6D, and so on.

Squares, circles and triangles are some of the simplest shapes in flat geometry. Cubes, cylinders, cones and spheres are simple shapes in solid geometry.

Plane geometry can be used to measure the area and perimeter of a flat shape. Solid geometry can measure a solid shape's volume and surface area.

Geometry can be used to calculate the size and shape of many things. For example, geometry can help people find:

Geometry is one of the oldest branches of mathematics. Geometry began as the art of surveying of land so that it could be shared fairly between people. The word "geometry" is from a Greek word that means "to measure the land". It has grown from this to become one of the most important parts of mathematics. The Greek mathematician Euclid wrote the first book about geometry, a book called The Elements.

Plane and solid geometry, as described by Euclid in his textbook Elements, is called "Euclidean Geometry". This was simply called "geometry" for centuries. In the 19th century, mathematicians created several new kinds of geometry that changed the rules of Euclidean geometry. These and earlier kinds were called "non-Euclidean" (not created by Euclid). For example, hyperbolic geometry and elliptic geometry come from changing Euclid's parallel postulate.

Non-Euclidean geometry is more complicated than Euclidean geometry but has many uses. Spherical geometry for example is used in astronomy and cartography.

Geometry starts with a few simple ideas that are thought to be true, called axioms. Such as:

A game is something that people often do for fun. It is different from work. Many sports are games, and there are many professional sports. In those cases, people can make money, because it is a type of entertainment.

There are different kinds of games using many kinds of equipment. For example, in video games, people often use controllers or their keyboard to control what happens on a screen, such as television, mobile screens and computer ones too.  In card games, players use playing cards.  There are also games that use your body, such as the Kinect. Most games need equipment, but not always. Children's street games often need no equipment.

In board games, players may move pieces on a flat surface called a board. The object of the game varies. In race-type games like ludo, the object is to reach the end first. In go, the object is to surround more space. In soccer, also known as football, it is to score more goals. Some games have complicated rules, some have simple rules.

Ludwig Wittgenstein was most likely the first academic philosopher to talk about the meaning of the word game. In his Philosophical Investigations, Wittgenstein showed that the elements (parts) of games, such as play, rules, and competition, all fail to really define what games are. He decided that people apply the term game to a range of different human things that are related, but not closely related .

Homo Ludens (Playing Man) is a book written in 1938 by Dutch historian Johan Huizinga. It discusses the importance of the play element in culture and society. Huizinga suggests that play is a condition for the generation of culture. Indian tevar simulator

French sociologist Roger Caillois, in his book Les jeux et les hommes (Games and Men), said that a game is an activity which is these things:

Computer game designer Chris Crawford tried to define the word game using a series of comparisons:

Crawford's definition of a game is: an interactive, goal-oriented activity, with opponents to play against, and where players and opponents can interfere with each other.

The first writer of history was Herodotus, an ancient Greek historian. He wrote a book called “The Histories” around 440 BC, which is nearly 2500 years ago. Some of the stories he wrote were not true, and it is unknown if this is one of those.

Herodotus wrote about king Atys; he ruled about 5,500 [five thousand five hundred] years ago in a country called Lydia. His country was in western Asia Minor, near modern Greece. Atys had a serious problem; his lands had very little food because the climate was not good for agriculture. The people of Lydia demonstrated patience and hoped that the good times of plenty would return.

But when things failed to get better, the people of Lydia thought up a strange solution for their problem. The path they took to fight their natural need to eat – the hungry times caused by the unusually hard climate - was to play games for one entire day so that they would not think about food. On the next day they would eat, so eating occurred every second day. In this way they passed 18 years, and in that time they invented dice, balls, and other the games commonly played today.

Games appear in all cultures all over the world, an ancient custom that brings people together for social opportunities. Games allow people to go beyond the limit of the immediate physical experience, to use their imagination. Common features of games include a finish that cannot be predicted, agreed upon rules, competition, separate place and time, imaginary elements, elements of chance, established goals and personal enjoyment. Games are used to teach, to build friendships, and to indicate status.

In his 1938 history book the Dutch writer, Johan Huizinga, says that games are older than human culture. He sees games as the beginning of complex human activities such as language, law, war, philosophy and art. Ancient people used bones to make the first games. Dice are very early game pieces. Games began as part of ancient religions. The oldest gaming pieces ever found – 49 [forty nine] small painted stones with pictures cut into them from 5,000 [five thousand] years ago – come from Turkey, so perhaps the history of Herodotus is true. One of the first board games, Senet, appears in ancient Egypt around 3,500 [three thousand five hundred] years ago. The ancient Greeks had a board game similar to checkers, and also many ball games.

The first reference to the game of Go occurs in Chinese records from around 2,400 [two thousand four hundred] years ago. Go is a two-player game of strategy. Players compete to win more territory by placing black and white “stones” on a board made up of 19 [nineteen] lines by 19 [nineteen] lines. Originally the game Go was used by political leaders to develop skill in strategy and mental skill. Knowing how to play Go was required by a Chinese gentleman, along with the skills of artistic writing or calligraphy, painting and the ability to play a musical instrument. These were regarded as the four most important skills. In ancient China, a gentleman had to pass a test in these four key skills in order to get a good paying job in the government. The Chinese brought Go to Korea, and it entered Japan around 1,500 [one thousand five hundred] years ago, and it has been popular ever since.

In March 2016 a DeepMind computer program beat the best Go players in the world. Go is believed to be the most complex board game ever created. The computer beat the South Korean Go master Lee Se-dol, and Lee was surprised by the result.  He acknowledged defeat after three and a half hours of play. Demis Hassabis, who made the DeepMind program, called it an important moment in history, because a machine beat the best person in the world in an intelligent game.  Such computer programs rely on what is called artificial intelligence.

The first computer game that was ever created was probably the game OXO by Alexander Douglas in 1952.  It was a version of tic-tac-toe. Most people consider the first true computer game where players actually participate to be Tennis for Two developed in 1958 by the physics scientist William Higginbotham. He wanted to teach about gravity, the force of attraction between masses. These men who created the early computer games did not predict the potential for the popular use of games, because at that period in modern history it took a small room full of computers to make these games work. Another early game was Spacewar!, developed in 1961 by MIT university student Steve Russell. In 1972 the company Atari produced the Pong game which was a huge commercial success; being a commercial success means that it made a lot of money. This was the true beginning of computer games that could be played at home.

In physics, a force is a push or pull or a twist between objects. It is called an  because if one object acts on another, its action  is matched by a reaction from the other object. This idea is known as Newton's third law, where action and reaction are "equal and opposite"  (matched).

The objects are just the things the force acts between. Different forces act between different sorts of objects. For example, gravity acts between objects with mass, like the sun and the earth. Another example is electromagnetic force, which acts between objects with charge, like an electron and the nucleus of an atom. Gravity and electromagnetic force are two examples of forces.

A force changes the state of an object (some physical quantity changes) or, strictly, the states of two objects, since the force is an interaction. For example, a force causes an affected object to be pushed or pulled in a certain direction. This  changes the object's momentum. Forces cause objects to accelerate, add to the object's overall pressure, change direction, or change shape. Because the magnitude and direction of a force are both important, force is a vector quantity. The strength of a force is measured in newtons (N).  There are four fundamental forces in physics.

A force is always a push, pull, or a twist, and it affects objects by pushing them up, pulling them down, pushing them to a side, or by changing their motion or shape in some other way.

According to Newton's Second Law of Motion, the formula for finding force is:

His second law defines a force to be equal to change in momentum (mass times velocity) per change in time. Momentum is defined to be the mass m of an object times its velocity V.

Gravity is an acceleration. Everything that has a mass is being pulled toward the Earth because of that acceleration. This pull is a force called weight.

One can take the equation above and change  to the standard gravity g, then a formula about the gravity on earth can be found:

and  is the acceleration due to gravity at sea level. It is about .

This formula says that when you know the mass of an object, then you can calculate how much force there is on the object because of gravity.

You must be on earth to use this formula. If you are on the moon or another planet, then you can use the formula but g will be different.

Force is a vector, so it can be stronger or weaker and it can also point in different directions.

Gravity always points down into the ground (if you are not in space).

is force;  is the gravitational constant, which is used to show how gravity accelerates an object;  is the mass of one object;  is the mass of the second object; and  is the distance between the objects.

This equation is used to calculate how the earth moves around the sun and how the moon moves around the earth. It is also used to calculate how other planets, stars and objects in space move around.

The equation says that if two objects are very heavy then there is a strong force between them because of gravity.

Objects and particles in the Universe interact. How the particles and object interact is governed by four forces of nature. They are:

The Fermilab in the U.S. is a particle accelerator. They are investigating results which suggest a possible fifth force of nature.

A gas is one of the main forms, or states, of matter, like solids, liquids, and plasmas. What makes gases special is that they do not have a fixed shape or a set volume. Instead, gas particles, tiny atoms or molecules, are spread out, move freely, and have a lot of energy. Because the particles are so far apart and do not stick to each other much, gases can spread out to fill any space or container they are in. Gases can also be squeezed into smaller spaces, which is called compression. Gases are really important in science. They help us understand how heat, pressure, and motion work. Gases are all around us, from the air we breathe to the fuel in engines, and they play big roles in nature and technology.

Gases have special physical properties that make them different from solids and liquids. For example, gases can be easily compressed (squeezed into a smaller space), they have low density (they are much lighter than the same volume of solid or liquid), and they can spread out and mix with other gases easily (this is called diffusion). Gases also push against the walls of whatever container they are in. This push is called pressure and comes from gas particles bouncing around and hitting the container’s walls. Scientists use a formula called the ideal gas law to describe how gases behave. It is written as PV = nRT, where:

This formula helps predict how a gas will act if you change its temperature, pressure, or volume. But it is not perfect. Real gases do not always follow this rule, especially when they are under very high pressure or low temperature. In those cases, the gas particles get closer together and start to interact, which changes how they behave. Scientists use more detailed equations, like the van der Waals equation, to describe real gas behavior more accurately.

Gases can change into other forms of matter, like liquids or solids, when the temperature or pressure changes. For example, when a gas cools down or gets squeezed tightly (compressed), it can turn into a liquid in a process called condensation. If the conditions are right, a gas can even turn directly into a solid without becoming a liquid first. This is called deposition. The opposite can also happen. If you heat a liquid, it can become a gas through vaporization (like boiling water turning into steam). And sometimes, if you heat a solid, it can turn straight into a gas without melting first. This process is called sublimation (like dry ice turning into carbon dioxide gas). These changes, called phase transitions, are very important. They happen all around us, in cloud formation, breathing, and even during volcanic eruptions. They are also used in many industries, such as refrigeration, distilling liquids, and making chemicals.

Gases can be made of just one kind of element or of different elements combined. Some gases are elemental, meaning they are made of only one type of atom. Examples include hydrogen (H₂), oxygen (O₂), and the noble gases like helium and neon. Other gases are compounds, which means they are made of two or more different atoms joined together. Examples of these include carbon dioxide (CO₂), methane (CH₄), and ammonia (NH₃). Gases can also be mixtures, where many gases are blended together. A good example is air, which we breathe every day. Air is mostly made of nitrogen and oxygen, but it also contains small amounts of other gases like argon and carbon dioxide. These gas mixtures are super important. The mix of gases in Earth’s atmosphere helps regulate the planet’s temperature and makes breathing possible. In factories and hospitals, special gas mixtures are used for welding, surgery, and even to keep food fresh.

Some gases belong to special groups because of how they behave or affect the world around us. Noble gases are a group of gases like helium, neon, and argon that do not easily react with other substances. This is because their atoms have a “full” outer shell of electrons, which makes them chemically stable or inert. That means they usually do not join with other atoms to form compounds. Greenhouse gases, like carbon dioxide (CO₂) and methane (CH₄), are gases that trap heat in Earth’s atmosphere. They let sunlight in but stop some of the heat from escaping, like a blanket. This helps keep the planet warm, but too much of these gases leads to global warming and climate change. There are also toxic gases, which can make people sick or be dangerous to breathe, and flammable gases, which can catch fire easily. These types of gases must be handled carefully to avoid accidents. To study and work with gases, scientists use special tools like gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. These tools help them identify what gases are present, measure how much there is, and even separate or analyze them in great detail.

In a pure gas, each molecule may be made of an individual atom. It may be elemental, where each molecule is made of more than one of the same atom bound together. It may be compounds where molecules are made of many types of atoms together. An example of a monoatomic gas is neon, an example of an elemental gas is hydrogen and an example of a compound gas is carbon dioxide.

A gas mixture contains a mix of any of the above types. air comprises 78% nitrogen, 21% oxygen, less than 1% argon, around 0.03% carbon dioxide and more other in very small quantities.

All gases can flow, like liquids. This means the molecules move about independently of each other. Most gases are colourless, like hydrogen. Gas particles will spread about, or diffuse, in order to fill all the space in any container such as a bottle or a room. Compared to liquids and solids, gases have a very low density and viscosity. We cannot directly see most gases since they aren't coloured. However it is possible to measure their density, volume, temperature and pressure.

Pressure is the measure of how much pushing force something is putting on another object. In a gas, this is usually the gas pushing on the container of the object or, if the gas is heavy, something inside the gas. Pressure is measured in pascals. Because of Newton's third law, we can change the pressure of a gas by putting force on the object containing it. For example, squeezing a bottle with air inside pressurises the air inside.

When talking about gas, pressure is often related to the container. A lot of gas in a small container would have very high pressure. A small amount of a gas in a big container would have low pressure.

Gas can create pressure itself when there is a lot of it. The weight of the gas creates pressure on anything underneath it, including other gas. On a planet, this is called atmospheric pressure.

The temperature of a gas is how hot or cold it is. In physics it is usually measured in Kelvin although degrees Celsius are used more elsewhere. In a gas, the average velocity, i.e. how fast they move, of the molecules is related to the temperature. The faster the gas molecules are moving, the more they collide, or smash into each other. These collisions release energy, which in a gas comes in the form of heat. Conversely if the temperature around the gas becomes hotter then the gas particles will convert the thermal energy to kinetic energy, making them move faster and making the gas hotter.

A gas can go through two different state changes. If the temperature is low enough the gas can condense and turn into a liquid. Sometimes, if the temperature is low enough it can go through deposition, where it changes straight to a solid. Normally a gas must first condense to a liquid, and then freeze to become a solid, but if the temperature is very low it can skip the liquid stage and instantly become solid. Frost on the ground in winter is caused by this. Water vapour – a gas – goes into the air which is very cold, and instantly becomes ice due to deposition.

A gun (also called a firearm) is a weapon used to shoot one or more metal projectiles called bullets. Guns made of wood or bamboo are thought to have been made in China around 1000 AD. In the next few centuries they spread to other parts of Asia and to Europe where they were made of metal. Guns largely replaced catapults and bows and arrows when they became strong enough to reach out over longer distances to reliably hit a target. They are of many different sizes. Some are small enough to hold in one hand. Others are large enough to sink a warship.

In military usage, the word "firearm" is used for the type of weapons that soldiers carry. Most of them are either pistols or rifles. These small arms can be carried and used by one person. They have the same basic parts: a trigger, a barrel, and a handgrip or stock. The shooter's finger pulls the trigger to fire the weapon which releases a bullet. The barrel guides the bullet which then flies to the target. The shooter's hand holds the handgrip.

Guns can be very effective weapons. Their bullets fly faster than an arrow or spear. Their high kinetic energy makes them more lethal. They also shoot from far distances. Bullets are usually non-explosive pieces of metal.

A modern bullet is the front part of a round or cartridge. A cartridge consists of a bullet, propellant and a primer. These are packaged in a metallic, paper, or plastic case which is sized exactly for the chamber of the firearm being used. When the rear of the case (containing the primer) is struck, an explosion in the back of the cartridge ignites the propellant. The controlled explosion forces the bullet out of the barrel. Cartridges have different ways of being loaded into different kinds of weapons. Cartridges can be loaded directly into a firearm into the chamber. Or, more commonly, into a clip, a magazine or other bullet container which is loaded into the firearm. Handguns known as revolvers have a cylinder with holes that the bullets are loaded into. Modern guns called pistols are handguns loaded with a magazine.

Guns have been used by armies since about the 14th century. Long barreled small arms called muskets, that could be carried and used by one person, were in use by 1350.  They became an important weapon in European armies about the 1600s.

Modern militaries use the word "gun" for larger artillery guns that need several people, and that fire big ammunition. For example, weapons on warships and tanks are called "guns". They may be in a "turret" (a rotating base). Big guns usually fire artillery shells, which explode upon impact.

In almost every country firearms are the main weapons used by armies. In modern armies, every soldier has at least one firearm as standard equipment. Soldiers are trained to use firearms, and to keep them clean and ready for use.

Shooting is a competitive sport involving tests of accuracy and speed. They use various types of guns such as pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns and airguns. Shooting sports are categorized by the type of firearm, targets, and distances at which the targets are shot. Target Shooting is an Olympic sport.

Since the first humans, hunting became a way of life. It was and still is in some places, the key to . Mankind is distinguished from other animals by the use of tools. At least 2 million years ago man learned to hunt animals for meat. They learned to create and use spears and axes. Bows and arrows were used at least 71,000 years ago. Modern hunting still uses more primitive tools. But many subsistence hunters have adapted to use modern firearms. In modern countries hunting is still allowed but is considered a sport. Hunting can be used to control the populations of many animal species. As with many aspects of gun ownership and use, modern hunting remains controversial. Handguns are not generally used for hunting.

Guns can be used to kill other people. For that reason many countries only allow soldiers, policemen, and certain social classes to have them. In some countries, a person must have a special permit (or license) if they want to own a gun.  Depending on the gun, people need to be a certain age and may need to meet other  to get such a permit.

An example of this is that in the United States federal law allows buying rifles and/or shotguns at age 18—if purchased from a licensed firearms dealer.  But a person must be age 21 or older to purchase a handgun—from a licensed firearms dealer. However, if purchased from an unlicensed person, with few s, a handgun may not be sold to anyone under age 18. There is no age restriction on who may buy a rifle or shotgun from an unlicensed person. In the United States and other countries, people can buy guns for self-defense, hunting, and shooting sports like target shooting.

In some countries, such as Australia, people who live on farms are allowed to keep guns, but it is not easy for a person living in the city to get a gun without good reason. In the United Kingdom, access by the general public to firearms is tightly controlled by law. However, this is less restrictive in Northern Ireland. After the Dunblane school massacre in 1996 followed by the Hungerford massacre in 1987, Britain passed the Firearms (Amendment) Act 1988. It required registration for shotguns and banned semi-automatic and pump-action weapons. A further ban on all handguns in mainland Britain came a year and a half later.

A movie or film is a type of visual art that uses images and sounds to tell stories, express ideas, or teach people something. Most people watch movies to entertain themselves or to have fun. Movies can vary significantly in emotional tone both overall as a specific genre type but also within a single work. Some of the most typical approaches are to make people laugh (comedy), make them cry (tragedy or drama), or make them feel afraid (horror). However, there are also movies that combine genres, like horror-comedy.

Most movies are made so that they can be watched at home or on a movie screen at movie theaters. Movies are shown in movie theaters a few weeks or months after or before the movie is released. Movies can be marketed using media. Movies are shown on paid television or cable television or are sold or rented on DVD disks or videocassette tapes so that people can watch the movies at home. Movies can also be downloaded or streamed. Some movies are shown on television broadcasting stations.

Movies are filmed with movie cameras or video cameras. Movie cameras take pictures very quickly, usually 24 or 25 pictures or frames every second. When a movie projector, a computer, or a television shows the pictures at 24 frames a second, it looks like the things shown in the set of pictures are moving. Sound is usually recorded at the same time as the pictures are, but sometimes, they are added later. The sounds in a movie are usually people talking, the soundtrack, and sound effects. In the 20th century, the camera used photographic film.

Most movies start to be made when a screenwriter writes a script, which is the story of the movie with dialogue and words and things that the actors will say and do. A producer hires people to work on the movie and gets the money that will be used to pay for the actors, or actresses, and the equipment. Producers usually get the money by borrowing it from a bank or by asking investors to give money to them. Some producers work for a movie studio, but other producers work by themselves.

Actors, or actresses, and directors read scripts to learn what to say and what to do. The actors learn the words from the script that they will say in the movie and learn the things that the script tells them to do. Then, the director tells the actors what to do and a cameraman takes the film of them saying the words with a film camera.

When the filming is done, an editor makes the film play after each other, which makes a story. Audio engineers and sound engineers record music and singing and  it with the film. When the movie is done, many copies of the movie are made by movie labs and put onto film reels. Then, the reels are sent to movie theaters. A projector shines a very bright light through the film, and people sitting in a dark room see it on a big screen.

A genre means a type of movie. Movies can be  or . Some movies can be two or more genres.

Most movies lose money, but some make up to hundreds of millions or billions of dollars. In the United States, movies have become an enormous part of the economy. The industry has always been led by a few major movie studios like MGM/UA, Warner Bros., Sony Pictures, Paramount, or Disney. The oldest American movie studio is Universal.

There are many large companies that provide all of the services needed to make movies, such as special effects, lighting, and set building companies. Many of these employees belong to trade unions who say how much their members must be paid. A large number of smaller companies also offer services, such as music studios, which record music.

Finally, there are movie distribution companies and advertising companies. Movies with famous stars (actors who are well-known) and large budgets, are designed to have a large appeal (something a person would like about the, so that hopefully, millions of people will pay to see them. The most expensive movies are called blockbusters.

Special effects can add a huge amount to the cost of a movie, especially if the movie uses the newest CGI effects. However, people have come to expect them, and every blockbuster movie tries to outdo the last. Even in 2008, some movies can cost up to $200 million to make.

Very successful movies can make many times that amount in profit, and that's why the studios keep producing them. This kind of movie will have a lot of promotion through television advertising, billboards and internet sites.

In blockbuster movies, there is usually a happy ending, in which all of the problems in the plot (story) are figured out or fixed and almost everyone (except the bad guys) live happily ever after. Some movies have been so successful that the studios keep releasing more and more sequels or movies with the same characters and basic plots.

At the opposite end of the scale to the blockbuster, there is the independent, art, or Indie movie. These are usually made by small movie companies, or even just a small group of people that do not have much money. An example is The Blair Witch Project, which cost only about $60,000, but which has so far taken perhaps $200 million in ticket and DVD sales. Movies like this are very unusual and usually become popular 'underground' (word of mouth advertising), so that they have a cult following, or popular but not mainstream.

Independent movies often tell more creative or unusual (strange) stories or may have sad endings that do not appeal to the big studios because they cannot be sure how the public will react to them. They rarely make a lot of money, but if they are successful, the big studios will quickly try to get the people involved to sign a contract with them, by offering them a lot of money to make another movie.

Some movies receive Oscar nominations, which normally reflect on the qualities of a film's production process. Also, some actors and actresses receive Oscar nominations and wins.

Movies are rated by their age appropriateness. Some examples include G, PG, PG 13, and R.

The eye is a round organ for sensing light so organisms can see. It is the first part of the visual system. About 97 percent of animal species have eyes.  Image-resolving eyes are present in cnidaria, molluscs, vertebrates, annelids and arthropods.

In mammals, two kinds of cells, rods and cones, allow sight by sending signals through the optic nerve to the brain.

Some animals can see light that humans cannot see. They can see ultraviolet or infrared light.

The lens on the front part of the acts like a camera lens. It can be pulled flatter by muscles inside the eye, or allowed to become rounder. As some people get older, they may not be able to do this perfectly. Many people are born with other small problems or get them later in life. Eyeglasses (or contact lenses) may fix the problem.

Like different cameras, different eyes have different abilities. They may have higher or lower resolution, the ability to detect small details. They may have different performance in low light; nocturnal animals can see better at night than daytime animals. They may have different ability to distinguish colours.

The human eye is composed of several different parts. These parts may or may not be the same in other animals. They are:

Today, ten different types of eyes are known. Most ways of capturing an image have evolved at least once.

One way to categorize eyes is to look at the number of "chambers". Simple eyes are made of only one concave chamber, perhaps with a lens. Compound eyes have many such chambers with their lenses on a convex surface.

Eyes also can be grouped according to how the photoreceptor is made. Photoreceptors are either ciliated, or rhabdomic. and some annelids possess both.

Pit eyes are set in a depression in the skin. This reduces the angles at which light can enter. It allows the organism to say where the light is coming from.

Such eyes can be found in about 85% of phyla. They probably came before the development of more complex eyes. Pit eyes are small. They are made of up to about hundred cells, covering about 100 µm. The directionality can be improved by reducing the size of the opening, and by putting a reflective layer behind the receptor cells.

The pinhole eye is an advanced form of pit eye. It has several bits, most notably a small aperture and deep pit. Sometimes, the aperture can be changed. It is only found in the Nautilus. Without a lens to focus the image, it produces a blurry image. Consequently, nautiloids can not discriminate between objects with a separation of less than 11°. Shrinking the aperture would produce a sharper image, but let in less light.

The resolution of pit eyes can be improved a lot by adding a material to make a lens. This will reduce the radius of the blurring, and increase the resolution that can be achieved. The most basic form can still be seen in some gastropods and annelids. These eyes have a lens of one refractive index. It is possible to get a better image with materials that have a high refractive index which decreases towards the edges. This decreases the focal length and allows a sharp image to form on the retina.

This eye creates an image that is sharp enough that motion of the eye can cause significant blurring. To minimize the effect of eye motion while the animal moves, most such eyes have stabilizing eye muscles.

The ocelli of insects have a simple lens, but their focal point always lies behind the retina.They can never form a sharp image.  This limits the function of the eye.  Ocelli (pit-type eyes of arthropods) blur the image across the whole retina. They are very good at responding to rapid changes in light intensity across the whole visual field — this fast response is accelerated even more by the large nerve bundles which rush the information to the brain. Focusing the image would also cause the sun's image to be focused on a few receptors. These could possibly be damaged by the intense light; shielding the receptors would block out some light and  reduce their sensitivity.

This fast response has led to suggestions that the ocelli of insects are used mainly in flight, because they can be used to detect sudden changes in which way is up (because light, especially UV light which is absorbed by vegetation, usually comes from above).

The eyes of most land-living vertebrates (as well as those of some spiders, and insect larvae) contain a fluid that has a higher refractive index than the air. The cornea is sharply curved and refracts light towards the focus. The lens need not do all of the refracting. This lets the lens adjust the focus more easily, for much higher resolution.

Instead of using a lens it is also possible to have cells inside the eye that act like mirrors. The image can then be reflected to focus at a central point. This design also means that someone looking into such an eye will see the same image as the organism which has them.

Many small organisms such as rotifers, copeopods and platyhelminthes use such this design, but their eyes are too small to produce usable images.  Some larger organisms, such as scallops, also use reflector eyes.  The scallop  Pecten has up to 100 millimeter-scale reflector eyes fringing the edge of its shell.  It detects moving objects as they pass successive lenses.

Compound eyes are different from simple eyes. Instead of having one organ that can sense light, they put together many such organs. Some compound eyes have thousands of them. The resulting image is put together in the brain, based on the signals of the many eye units. Each such unit is called ommatidium, several are called ommatidia. The ommatidia are located on a convex surface, each of them points in a slighly different direction. Unlike simple eyes, compound eyes have a very large angle of view. They can detect fast movement, and sometimes the polarization of light.

Compound eyes are common in arthropods, annelids, and some bivalved molluscs.

The evolution of eyes started with simplest light-sensitive patches in unicellular organisms. These eye-spots do nothing but detect if the surroundings are light or dark. Most animals have a biochemical 'clock' inside. These simple eye-spots are used to adjust this daily clock, which is called circadian rhythm. Some snails, for example, see no image (picture) at all, but they sense light, which helps them stay out of bright sunlight.

More complex eyes have not lost this function. A special type of cells in the eye senses light for a different purpose than seeing. These cells are called ganglion cells. They are located in the retina. They send their information about light to the brain along a different path (the retinohypothalamic tract). This information adjusts (synchronizes) the animal's circadian rhythm to nature's light/dark cycle of 24 hours. The system also works for some blind people who cannot see light at all.

Eyes that are a little bit better are shaped like cups, which lets the animal know where the light is coming from.

More complex eyes give the full sense of vision, including color, motion, and texture. These eyes have a round shape that makes light rays focus on the back part of the eye, called the retina.

Good fliers like flies or honey bees, or prey-catching insects like praying mantis or dragonflies, have specialized zones of ommatidia organized into a fovea area which gives sharp vision. In this zone the eyes are flattened and the facets  are larger. The flattening allows more ommatidia to receive light from a spot. This gives a higher resolution.

The body of Ophiocoma wendtii, a type of brittle star, is covered with ommatidia, turning its whole skin into a compound eye. The same is true of many chitons.

Gambling is a contest where a player  on the  of an . The bet is generally in the form of money. The rules and the amount of money bet have to be decided on before the event happens.

Playing cards appeared in the 9th century AD in China. Records trace gambling in Japan back at least as far as the 14th century.

Poker, the most popular U.S. card game associated with gambling, derives from the Persian game As-Nas, dating back to the 17th century.

The first known casino, the Ridotto, started operating in 1638 in Venice, Italy.

There are many types of gambling. Casino games, sports betting (especially horse racing), and state lotteries are some of the most common forms of gambling. Investments, such as stocks, bonds and real estate, are also sometimes considered forms of gambling. Generally, the odds are not in favor of the gambler.

Many people gamble for fun and entertainment. For others it can become an addiction and lead to financial problems.

Gambling addiction is a serious mental health issue which can become life-threatening. People with a gambling problem should seek help. Many organizations are trying to combat gambling addiction. One project to combat addiction is the Global Self-Exclusion Initiative, which helps people stop gambling.

Gambling  differs in different countries. Some have established specific legal institutions. However, some countries have only overseeing laws. A well-known executive institution is The Gambling Commission in the UK. Its main function is controlling commercial gambling in partnership with people in charge of licensing. An example of strict ruling is the Gambling Law in the USA. The law decides gaming rules for local, state, and federal businesses. In the United States, gambling is restricted almost everywhere, except in Las Vegas and in Atlantic City, New Jersey. New Jersey, legalised online gambling and poker in November 2013. In 2018, Swiss citizens voted that gambling should also be allowed on the Internet in the future. A convincing 73% voted in the referendum, in which 1.8 million Swiss people took part. The new Gaming Act was put into effect by the Federal Gaming Board on January 1, 2019. Since then, it has been completely legal for Swiss citizens to play games of chance on the Internet.

In some places, such as mainland China, gambling is illegal. Chinese people cannot do so inside their country, so they go outside of it, such as to Macau, which is known as the "gambling capital of the world" because of its many big casinos. Other countries and local governments, such as Hong Kong, have some kind of gambling control board to make sure people don't gamble too much while allowing them to gamble.

In Denmark, the Danish Gambling Authority, part of the Ministry of Taxation, makes sure gambling is fair and safe. They give out licenses for online and land-based casinos, like betting shops or online gambling sites. To get a license, companies must follow strict rules, like not having a criminal record and being financially stable. There are only a few licenses for physical casinos, but more are available for online gambling. Gambling ads must be honest and not target kids, and there are special rules to help people who gamble too much, including a way for them to exclude themselves from gambling sites. People in Denmark can gamble from age 18.

Galileo Galilei (15 February 1564 – 8 January 1642) was an Italian polymath. Galileo was originally going to be a doctor but became a tutor instead. He was a professor of mathematics and natural science in Padua and Pisa. People most remembered him today for his conflict with the Catholic Church of his day, which led to his trial for heresy by the Inquisition.

Galileo was born on 15 February 1564 in Pisa, Duchy of Florence. He was the eldest of five siblings. His father was Vincenzo Galilei, who was a scholar and a musician.  In 1574, the Galilei family moved to Florence and he started his formal education in the Camaldolese monastery.

Galileo was not the first person to build a telescope. He was the first person to publish his observations of astronomical objects through a telescope. He discovered that the Milky Way is made of many stars. He discovered that the Moon has hills. He discovered the first moons not counting our own moon, these are the four biggest moons of Jupiter: Io, Europa, Ganymade and Callisto. Those moons are now called the Galilean moons. He discovered sunspots, which are dark areas of the Sun. He saw that the planet Venus has light and dark phases just like the Moon. This helped people to know that the Sun is at the center of the Solar System, as Nicolaus Copernicus had said.

Galileo worked more at physics than at astronomy. He studied natural forces, and was one of the most important discoverers of the part of physics that is now called kinematics, including the discovery of the kinematic principle of relativity. However, he is often remembered now for things that either did not happen, or failed.

A legend says that he climbed the Leaning Tower of Pisa, and dropped cannonballs of different weights, to see which would strike the ground first. Even though their weights were not the same, they hit the ground at the same time. Galileo found that objects fall to the ground at the same rate, unless things like wind resistance change the rate. This went against the views of Aristotle, an ancient philosopher whose theory was different. Galileo's findings were ignored by most people, and Aristotle's view was still accepted as correct until Isaac Newton proved Galileo was right. This also led to Newton creating his Law of Gravity.

Galileo also tried to  the speed of light. He climbed a hill, and had an assistant climb another hill, both carrying lanterns with closed shutters. He then opened the shutter of his lantern. His assistant opened his own shutter when he saw Galileo's lantern. Galileo then measured the time it took for his assistant's shutter to open. Knowing the time difference, and the distance between the hills, he tried to estimate the speed of light. However, this did not work.

Galileo came to accept the findings of Copernicus, that the Sun was the center of the then-known universe, and not the Earth. He played a major part in the scientific revolution through this argument. Because he promoted this and other ideas, he came to the notice of the Committee of Propaganda, the dreaded Inquisition. The Church taught that the Earth stood still, while everything in the sky moved around it. The Inquisition ruled in 1616 that other theories could only be discussed as possibilities, not facts. Galileo said he would obey.

Galileo later discussed the question in his most famous work, Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems, published in 1632 by permission of the Inquisition. His scientific writing was usually in Latin for hundreds of scientists around Europe, but this was one of the books he wrote in Italian so thousands of Italians could read it. The book was in the form of conversations between three men. The man representing the Church's point of view was called 'Simplicio'.

Church leaders who liked his earlier books were angry at this one. The Inquisition took action in 1633. He was arrested and put on trial. They found him "vehemently suspect of heresy". They reminded him of the fate of Giordano Bruno, who had been burnt at the stake for heresy on topics such as transubstantiation and the Trinity. Bruno also believed the Earth went round the Sun and stars had planets. The Inquisition forced Galileo to recant (say he was wrong) under the threat of execution, and to withdraw his works from publication. Galileo spent the last ten years of his life under house arrest. Galileo continued to write about physics and other topics, but not astronomy.

Galileo has become synonymous with a warrior for scientific truth. Although he had to retract his writings at his trial, it is widely believed that after the trial he insisted that Earth does move around the sun, saying the famous phrase "Eppur si muove – still it moves. The saying itself became a slogan for science.

Galileo Galilei died on  in Arcetri, Grand Duchy of Tuscany, Italy.

Previously, he was buried in a small room next to the novices' chapel at the end of a corridor. Later, he was reburied in the main body of the basilica in 1737 after a monument had been built there in his honor.

A flood is an overflow of water. Floods are very hard to deal with.

Floods are most commonly made due to an overflowing river, a dam break, snowmelt, or heavy rainfall. Less commonly happening are tsunamis, storm surge.

The most deadly flooding was in 1931 in China and killed between 2,000,000 and 4,000,000 people. The Kerala flood in India was another flood that has destroyed people's houses. During a flood, people try to move themselves and their most precious belongings to higher ground quickly. The process of leaving homes in search of a safe place is called a flood evacuation. Floods have inspired myths and legends, especially the story of the great flood.

During a flood there is plenty of water logging and overflow of water;  it is mostly polluted and not safe to drink. If people drink this dirty water, they may suffer from diseases such as typhoid and cholera, hepatitis and other such diseases. People can get ready to survive a flood by filling many containers with fresh and clean drinking water and storing other emergency supplies like medicine and food. During a flood, people try to go to higher sides because the flood water cannot reach high areas. Also drains overflow and mix with clean water and people who drink it might fall ill.

Flooding is usually caused when a volume of water within a water body, such as a lake, overflows outside it. Sometimes if a dam breaks, it suddenly releases a large amount of water. The result is that some of the water travels to land, and "floods" the area. Many rivers are in a channel, between river banks. They flood when the strength of the river causes it to flow beyond the banks. This is more common at bends or meanders. Flood damage can be prevented by moving away from places that flood. However, people have long liked to have their homes and businesses alongside water because water is good for agriculture and transport and in other ways. Floods are also caused due to improper management of drains.

Rainfall is the most common cause. Snow melt is also a cause of flooding. Tsunamis and Storm Surge are less common ways that floods happen. Coastal Flooding is another common cause of flooding, and this is caused by low pressure systems or storms. There are many ways to control floods, such as improving the drainage and grading in a home, or installing a flood detection system.

George Washington (February 22, 1732 – December 14, 1799) was the first president of the United States from 1789 to 1796. Before he became president, he had been the commander-in-chief of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War and one of the Founding Fathers of the United States.

George Washington was born on February 22, 1732 at his family’s plantation on Pope’s Creek, in Westmoreland County, in the British colony of Virginia, to Augustine Washington (1694–1743) and his second wife, Mary Ball Washington (1708–89). George, the eldest of Augustine and Mary Washington’s six children, spent much of his childhood at Ferry Farm, a plantation near Fredericksburg, Virginia.  As a teenager, Washington, who had shown a talent for mathematics, became a successful surveyor.  His surveying expeditions into the Virginia wilderness earned him enough money to begin buying land of his own.

In 1751, Washington made his only trip outside what whould become the United States, when he traveled to Barbados with his older half-brother Lawrence Washington (1718–52), who was suffering from tuberculosis and hoped that the warm climate would help his health. Shortly after their arrival, George contracted smallpox. He survived, but the illness left him with permanent facial scars. In 1752, Lawrence, who had been educated in England and served as Washington’s mentor, died.

In December 1752, Washington was aged 20 and had no previous military experience, but he was still made commander of a small part of the Virginia militia. He went to Pittsburgh in 1753 with a Seneca leader, named Tanacharison, to tell the French to go away. The French decided not to go and sent him home.

He returned to Pittsburgh a few months later as second in command of a much larger number of troops commanded by General Edward Braddock to force the French out. The French ambushed his troops and killed his commander and many other men. Washington brought the rest of them home, which started the French and Indian War and helped draw Britain into the Seven Years' War.

On January 6, 1759, aged 26, he married Martha Dandridge Custis (1731–1802), a rich 27-year-old widow who had  two children. Washington never had any children himself.

By the late 1760s, Washington had experienced firsthand the effects of rising taxes imposed on the American colonists by the British and came to believe that it was in the best interests of the colonists to declare independence from Britain.

Washington was a delegate to the First Continental Congress, which was created by the Thirteen Colonies to respond to various laws passed by the British government. The Second Continental Congress chose him to be the commanding general of the Continental Army. Washington led the army from 1775 to 1783, when the American Revolutionary War ended. After losing the large Battle of Long Island and being chased across New Jersey, Washington led his troops back across the Delaware River on Christmas Day in 1776 in a surprise attack on the Hessians, who had been sent from Germany by its princes to help Britain, at the small Battle of Princeton and Battle of Trenton. The British had more troops and supplies than Washington, but he kept his troops together and won both small battles. His strength and tactics on the battlefield kept the struggling colonial army together. His troops did not have food, ammunition, or other supplies (soldiers sometimes went without shoes even in the winter). However, Washington gave them direction and motivation. His leadership during the winter of 1777–1778 at Valley Forge showed his power to inspire his men to keep going.

Overall, Washington did not win many battles, but he never let the British destroy his army. With the help of the French army and navy, Washington made the British Army surrender at Yorktown, Virginia, in 1781, after the Americans and the French won the final major battle of the war. The Treaty of Paris officially ended the war in 1783.

When the war ended, Washington was considered a national hero. He was offered a government position that would have been considered a dictatorship over the colonies, but in a surprising move, Washington refused the offer, left the army, and returned to his home in Mount Vernon. He wanted the colonies to have a strong government but did not wish to head that government or the colonies to be run by a tyrant.

Washington was one of the men who said the country needed a new constitution to replace the Articles of Confederation, which gave too little power to the central governemnt. The Constitutional Convention met in 1787, with Washington presiding.  The delegates wrote the Constitution of the United States, and all of the states eventually agreed to it and joined the new government.

On January 7, 1789, aged 56, Washington was elected as the first president of the United States. He did not want the job but thought that the country might fall apart unless he took it. John Adams (1735–1826), who received the second-largest number of votes, became the first vice president. Washington was inaugurated on April 30, 1789 in New York City at the age of 57. Because Washington, D.C., America’s future capital city, had not been decided on as the capital, let alone built, Washington lived in New York City and Philadelphia.

While Washington did not belong to any political party, he agreed with most Federalist Party policies such as that the country should have a standing army, a national bank, and strong federal government. While in office, he signed a bill establishing a future, permanent U.S. capital along the Potomac River, and the city was later named Washington City, in his honor. He was re-elected to a second term. After his second term, Washington decided not to run for re-election although he likely would have won. His choice to stop after two terms set a pattern that every president followed until Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1940.

In Washington's Farewell Address in 1796, which was written by Alexander Hamilton, he warned the country not to divide into political parties and not to get involved in unnecessary foreign wars. Washington's non-interventionism was supported by most Americans for over 100 years. His advice to avoid political parties was completely ignored, and two parties were already active based on support or opposition to Washington's policies..

Washington returned home to Mount Vernon after his second term ended in 1797.

In December 1799, Washington caught a cold after he looked at his properties in the rain. The cold turned into a throat infection, called epiglottitis, and Washington died on the night of December 14, 1799 at the age of 67. He was buried at Mount Vernon, which in 1960 was designated a national and historic landmark.

Some think that the main cause of his death was bloodletting, a treatment that was common at the time.

From his marriage, Washington owned a large amount of farmland, which he used to grow tobacco, wheat, and vegetables. Washington also owned more than 100 slaves, who were freed after his death. He did not have much money in cash and had to borrow money while he was president. At his death, Washington's estate was worth over $500,000.

It is a common error to say that Washington had wooden teeth as false teeth.  He, however, tried many different ways to replace his teeth, including having teeth carved from elk's teeth or ivory. Both ivory and bone have hairline fractures in them, which normally cannot be seen. The fractures started to darken because Washington drank wine. The thin darkened fractures in the bone made the lines look like the grain in a piece of wood.

Washington's teeth started falling out when he was about 22 years old, and he had only one tooth left by the time he became president. It was hard for him to talk or to eat. At some point, he had false teeth with a special hole so that the only tooth that he still had could poke through. He tried to keep them smelling clean by soaking them in wine, but instead, they became mushy and black. In 1796, a dentist had to pull out Washington's last tooth and kept his tooth in a gold locket attached to his watch chain. When the time came for the president to have his portrait painted, cotton was pushed under his lips to make him look as if he had teeth. The cotton made his mouth puff out, as is seen on the picture on the country's one-dollar bill.

Genghis Khan (born Temüjin; August 1227), also known as Chinggis Khan, was the first ruler of the Mongol Empire, which he created in 1206 in his fatherland in what is now Mongolia.

After the death of his father when Temüjin was eight, his family was left behind by the Mongols. They became very poor but did not die. Temüjin was very clever, and people who liked him came to be his soldiers. He made friends with two rulers, Jamukha and Toghrul, and they helped him find his wife Börte, who had been made a prisoner. However, they Temüjin and Jamukha started to dislike each other, and they began a war. Temüjin lost at the start and may have had to run away for years. By 1196, he was back in Mongolia, and many soldiers came to fight for him. Soon, Toghrul started to dislike Temüjin and attacked him in 1203. Temüjin won the war, and both Toghrul and Jamukha died.

Temüjin took the name "Genghis Khan", the meaning of which is unknown, at a large meeting in 1206. He made changes to the society of the Mongols so that it was more stable and killed a powerful shaman who tried to overcome him. His armies then attacked foreign lands: the Western Xia in 1209, the Chinese Jin dynasty in 1211, the Qara Khitai in 1218 and the Khwarazmian Empire in 1219. Many of those countries suffered greatly from those attacks. Genghis Khan died in 1227. His third son, Ögedei, became the second ruler of the Mongol Empire in 1229.

Many people think very different things about Genghis Khan. For his people, he was intelligent and caring. To his enemies, he was a murderer. His soldiers killed millions of people, but also allowed trading and communications to grow across Asia. After his death, the Mongolians made him into a god. Today, they remember him as the father of their country.

Because Mongolian has a different script, its words are spelled in English in different ways. "Genghis" comes from the Mongolian . Some other well-known spellings are "Chinggis", "Chingis", "Jinghis", and "Jengiz". His birth name "Temüjin" ( in Mongolian) is also spelled "Temuchin" in English.

Different historians (people who study history) think that Temüjin was born in different years: 1155, 1162 or 1167; 1162 is the date accepted by most historians. Temüjin himself may not have known. The place that he was born is also unknown. It was on the Onon River, but it could have been in what is now Mongolia or Russia.

Temüjin was born io Mongols. His father was the chief Yesügei. His mother was Yesügei's main wife, Hö'elün. Yesügei had taken Hö'elün by force from the husband she had earlier. Historians do not know what his name means. Some think he was named after an enemy prisoner, Temüchin-uge. Other historians think that "Temüjin" means "blacksmith". Many stories were told about Temüjin's birth. One story says he was born holding a blood clot in his hand. For the Mongols, this was a sign that Temüjin would be a soldier. Other people claimed that his real father was a ray of light, which touched Hö'elün.

Temüjin had three younger brothers and a younger sister. He also had two half-brothers. One of them, named Behter, was older than he was. The children grew up at Yesugei's home next to the Onon River, where they learned how to ride a horse and shoot a bow. When Temüjin was eight years old, his father wanted to arrange his future marriage. They went to Hö'elün's original people with whom the Mongols had arranged marriages many times. Yesügei arranged that Temüjin would marry Börte, the daughter of the powerful chief Dei Sechen. When he was going home, Yesügei was poisoned by the Tatars, his old enemies, and hsoon died.

Yesügei's death caused the people whom he ruled to break apart. Both Temüjin and Behter were too young to rule. The other Mongols found new chiefs and left behind Hö'elün and her family, whose lives became much more difficult. To eat, they were forced to collect roots and nuts, hunt for small animals and catch fish. Both Temüjin and Behter could have been Yesügei's heir. Temüjin was the child of Yesügei's main wife, but Behter was older. Temüjin also feared that Behter would marry Hö'elün when he became an adult. One day, Temüjin and his younger brother Qasar murdered Behter. That crime was absent from official histories of Temüjin's life. Around that time, Temüjin became best friends with another boy, Jamukha. They gave each other presents and promised that they would always be friends.

Temüjin became a prisoner many times because his family was no longer protected by the Mongols. One time, he ran away while the people imprisoning him were having a meal. Another time, he was helped by another boy, Bo'orchu, who soon became Temüjin's first follower.

Temüjin returned to Dei Sechen to marry Börte when he became 15. Dei Sechen was very happy to see Temüjin and organised the marriage. Temüjin wanted to serve Toghrul, the khan (chief) of the Kerait tribe, who had been best friends with Yesügei. Toghrul ruled a large country in central Mongolia but disliked many of his followers. He was happy to accept Temüjin as a new follower. The two liked each other, and Temüjin started to attract followers for himself. Temüjin and Börte had their first child, a daughter named Qojin, around this time.

Soon afterwards, 300 Merkits attacked Temüjin and took Börte prisoner. She was married by force to a Merkit man. Temüjin asked Toghrul and Jamukha, who was now chief of the Jadaran tribe, to help. Both of them took 20,000 soldiers to attack the Merkits and soon won. Börte was found safely but soon gave birth to a son, Jochi. It was never known who Jochi's real father was. Temüjin raised him as his son, but others believed that he was the son of the Merkit man. Over the next fifteen years, Temüjin and Börte had three more sons (Chagatai, Ögedei, and Tolui) and four more daughters (Checheyigen, Alaqa, Tümelün, and Al-Altan).

Although Temüjin and Jamukha stayed friends for a while, they started to like each other less. Hö'elün and Börte told Temüjin that he needed to have more followers. He listened to their advice, and many of Jamukha's people became his followers. Temüjin was known to be more caring than other rulers, and his shamans (priests) claimed that his destiny was very large. Jamukha disliked Temüjin's rise. They fought a battle around 1187, which Temüjin lost clearly. It is likely that Temüjin spent many years as a servant of the Jurchen Jin dynasty, in northern China. Becaue Temüjin later attacked that state, the shameful time was not mentioned by official Mongol historians.

Around 1196, Temüjin returned to Mongolia to fight the Tatars. He also helped Toghrul become khan of the Kereit again. Jamukha had cruelly killed many prisoners after his 1187 victory. Many of his followers defected to Temüjin when he returned. Temüjin and Toghrul fought many battles together against other tribes and became very powerful. Temüjin became the only power in eastern Mongolia by winning battles against the Tatars. He killed the Tatar chiefs and their men became his followers.

Three main peoples were left in Mongolia: the Naimans in the west, the Mongols in the east, and the Kereit in between. Temüjin wanted Jochi to marry one of Toghrul's daughters. Toghrul's son Senggum thought Temüjin was trying to control his Kereit tribe. He made his father believe that Temüjin had to die. Toghrul attacked Temüjin in 1203 and won the Battle of Qalaqaljid Sands. Temüjin was left with very few men. He made a promise to them, the Baljuna Covenant, that he would make them famous if they remained his followers. He gathered all of the friends and followers possible and attacked Toghrul by catching him by surprise. The Mongols won this battle. Toghrul was killed while he was running away.

The Naiman tribe, to which Jamukha had run, was the only enemy left. In May 1204, Temüjin won the Battle of Chakirmaut. Jamukha asked his former friend to kill him without cruelty, which happened.

Temüjin held a large meeting () beside the Onon River in 1206, where, he took the official name "Genghis Khan". No one knows what it means. Some historians think it had no meaning and was just a name for the ruler of the new Mongol Empire. Others think "Genghis" means "strong and just". A third theory claims that "Genghis" meant "Universal Ruler".

Genghis Khan began to reorganise Mongol society. The existing systems worked for small tribes and peoples but were not suited to large countries. Genghis wanted his new country to be stable. Because he had killed many chiefs, he could organise everything as he wanted. His family became the most important people in the new empire. Genghis broke down the tribes and sorted the people into groups of tens, hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands. Each new group was made up of men from many tribes to make sure they did no longer obeyed their old people.

Genghis's early followers also became very important. Both Bo'orchu and Muqali were given ten thousand men to lead. Other followers took control of a thousand soldiers each. Many of these men had been very poor: two were sons of blacksmiths, one was a carpenter, and three were shepherds. However, Genghis made them important because they obeyed him.

From 1204 to 1209, Genghis Khan focused on ruling his new nation. He first dealt with the shaman Kokechu, who wanted more power. Many Mongols thought Kokechu had magic, so he was already an important man. Kokechu first lied about Genghis Khan's brother Qasar. Qasar was almost sent to prison before his mother Hö'elün stepped in. Then Kokechu shamed Temüge, Genghis's youngest brother, in public. Börte saw that Kokechu was becoming powerful enough to attack Genghis. Genghis was scared of Kokechu's magic, but listened to his wife. He allowed Temüge to arrange Kokechu's death. In this way, Genghis Khan took Kokechu's place as the shaman of the Mongols.

The Mongols nation grew slowly. Jochi went north in 1207 to attack the . These were people who lived near the taiga in Siberia. Jochi took over their trade in food, clothing materials, and gold. Mongol armies defeated the Naimans and Merkits again on the River Irtysh in late 1208. Their khan was killed, and Kuchlug fled into Central Asia. The Uyghurs became followers of the Mongols in 1211.

The Mongols began attacking the edge of the Western Xia kingdom in 1205. Most of the Xia army was in the south and east to against attacks from the Song and the Jin kingdoms. Its northern edge was only protected by the Gobi Desert. Genghis decided to attack Western Xia heavily in 1209. The Mongols took control of the castle of Wulahai in May. They attacked the capital city Zhongxing, now Yinchuan. The Mongols could not progress for two months but then won a battle after a feigned retreat. Because they did not have any siege equipment, they couldn't take control of Zhongxing. They tried to redirect the Yellow River into the city but flooded their own camp in January 1210. The ruler of Western Xia gave up and gave the Mongols presents, including his daughter Chaka, so they would go away.

In 1210, Genghis expressed that he wanted to attack the Jin kingdom. He knew the Jin had eight soldiers for every Mongol soldier. Genghis wanted revenge for the death of his relative Ambaghai Khan in the 12th century. He also wanted to give his army the goods in the Jin kingdom.

After calling for a  in March 1211, Genghis launched his invasion of Jin China in May, reaching the outer ring of Jin defences the following month. The border fortifications were guarded by Alaqush's Ongud tribe, whoch allowed the Mongols to pass without difficulty. The three-pronged chevauchée aimed to plunder and burn a vast area of Jin territory to deprive them of supplies and popular legitimacy and to secure the mountain passes, which would allow access to the North China Plain. The Jin lost numerous towns and were hindered by a series of defections, the most prominent of which led directly to Muqali's victory at the Battle of Huan'erzhui in autumn 1211. The campaign was halted in 1212, when Genghis was wounded by an arrow during the unsuccessful siege of Xijing (now Datong). After that failure, Genghis set up a corps of siege engineers, which recruited 500 Jin experts over the next two years.

The defences of Juyong Pass had been strongly reinforced when the conflict resumed in 1213, but a Mongol detachment, led by Jebe, managed to infiltrate the pass and surprise the elite Jin defenders, whch opened the road to the Jin capital, Zhongdu (now Beijing). The Jin administration began to disintegrate: after the Khitans, a tribe subject to the Jin, entered open rebellion, Hushahu, the commander of the forces at Xijing, abandoned his post and staged a coup in Zhongdu, killing Yongji and installing his own puppet ruler, Xuanzong. The governmental breakdown was fortunate for Genghis's forces; emboldened by their victories, they had seriously overreached and lost the initiative. Unable to do more than camp before Zhongdu's fortifications while his army suffered from an epidemic and famine (they resorted to cannibalism according to the historian Giovanni da Pian del Carpine, who may have been exaggerating), Genghis opened peace negotiations despite his commanders' militance. He secured tribute, including 3,000 horses, 500 slaves, a Jin princess and massive amounts of gold and silk before he lifted the siege and set off homewards in May 1214.

As the northern Jin lands had been ravaged by plague and war, Xuanzong moved the capital and imperial court  southwards to Kaifeng. Interpreting that as an attempt to regroup in the south and then to restart the war, Genghis concluded that the terms of the peace treaty had been broken. He immediately prepared to return and capture Zhongdu. According to the historian Christopher Atwood, it was only at this juncture that Genghis decided to conquer all of northern China. Muqali captured numerous towns in Liaodong during the winter of 1214–15. Although the inhabitants of Zhongdu surrendered to Genghis on 31 May 1215, the city was sacked. When Genghis returned to Mongolia in early 1216, Muqali was left in command in China. He waged a brutal but effective campaign against the unstable Jin regime until his death in 1223.

In 1207, Genghis had appointed a man, Qorchi, as governor of the subdued Hoi-yin Irgen tribes in Siberia. Appointed not for his talents but for prior services rendered, Qorchi's tendency to abduct women as concubines for his harem caused the tribes to rebel and tp take him prisoner in early 1216. The following year, they ambushed and killed Boroqul, one of Genghis's highest-ranking  (comrade). The khan was livid at the loss of his close friend and prepared to lead a retaliatory campaign. Eventually dissuaded from this course, he dispatched his eldest son, Jochi, and a Dörbet commander. They managed to surprise and defeat the rebels, which secured control over the economically-important region.

Kuchlug, the Naiman prince who had been defeated in 1204, had usurped the throne of the Qara Khitai dynasty, in Central Asia, between 1211 and 1213. He was a greedy and arbitrary ruler, who probably earned the enmity of the native Islamic populace by attempting their forced conversion to Buddhism. Genghis reckoned that Kuchlug could be a threat to his empire, and Jebe was sent with an army of 20,000 cavalry to the city of Kashgar; he undermined Kuchlug's rule by emphasising the Mongol policies of religious tolerance and gained the loyalty of the local elite. Kuchlug was forced to flee south to the Pamir Mountains but was captured by local hunters. Jebe had him beheaded, paraded his corpse through Qara Khitai amd proclaimed the end of religious persecution in the region.

Genghis had now attained complete control of the eastern portion of the Silk Road, and his territory bordered that of the Khwarazmian Empire, which ruled over much of Central Asia, Persia and Afghanistan. Merchants from both sides were eager to restart trading, which had halted during Kuchlug's rule. The Khwarazmian ruler, Muhammad II, dispatched an envoy shortly after the Mongol capture of Zhongdu, and Genghis instructed his merchants, the , to obtain the high-quality textiles and steel of Central and Western Asia. Many members of the  invested in one particular caravan of 450 merchants, which set off to Khwarazmia in 1218 with a large quantity of wares.

Inalchuq, the governor of the Khwarazmian border town of Otrar, decided to massacre the merchants on grounds of espionage and to seize the goods; Muhammad had grown suspicious of Genghis's intentions and either supported Inalchuq or turned a blind eye. A Mongol ambassador was sent with two companions to avert war, but Muhammad killed him and humiliated his companions. The killing of an envoy infuriated Genghis, who resolved to leave Muqali with a small force in northern China and invade Khwarazmia with most of his army.

Muhammad's empire was large but disunited. He ruled alongside his mother, Terken Khatun, in what the historian Peter Benjamin Golden terms "an uneasy diarchy", and the Khwarazmian nobility and populace were discontented with his warring and the centralisation of government. For thise reasons and others, he declined to meet the Mongols in the field but instead garrisoned his unruly troops in his major cities. That allowed the lightly-armoured, highly-mobile Mongol armies uncontested superiority outside city walls. Otrar was besieged in autumn 1219, and the siege dragged on for five months, but in February 1220, the city fell, and Inalchuq was executed. Genghis had meanwhile divided his forces. Leaving his sons Chagatai and Ögedei to besiege the city, he had sent Jochi northwards down the Syr Darya river and another force southwards into central Transoxiana, while he and Tolui took the main Mongol army across the Kyzylkum Desert and suprised the garrison of Bukhara in a pincer movement.

Bukhara's citadel was captured in February 1220, and Genghis moved against Muhammad's residence Samarkand, which fell the following month. Bewildered by the speed of the Mongol conquests, Muhammad fled from Balkh and was closely followed by Jebe and Subutai. The two generals pursued the Khwarazmshah until he died from dysentry on a Caspian Sea island in winter 1220–1221 afterr he had nominated his eldest son, Jalal al-Din, as his successor. Jebe and Subutai then set out on a  expedition around the Caspian Sea. Later called the "Great Raid", it lasted four years and saw the Mongols come into contact with Europe for the first time. Meanwhile, the Khwarazmian capital, Gurganj, was being besieged by Genghis's three eldest sons. The long siege ended in spring 1221 amid brutal urban conflict. Jalal al-Din moved southwards to Afghanistan, gathered forces on the way and defeated a Mongol unit commanded by Shigi Qutuqu, Genghis's adopted son, in the Battle of Parwan. Jalal al-Din was weakened by arguments among his commanders, and after losing decisively at the Battle of the Indus in November 1221, he was compelled to escape across the Indus River into India.

Genghis's youngest son Tolui was concurrently conducting a brutal campaign in the regions of Khorasan. Every city that resisted was destroyed: Nishapur, Merv and Herat, three of the largest and wealthiest cities in the world, were annihilated. This campaign established Genghis's lasting image as a ruthless, inhumane conqueror. Contemporary Persian historians placed the death toll from the three sieges alone at over 5.7 million. a number that is regarded as grossly exaggerated by modern scholars. Nevertheless, even a total death toll of 1.25 million for the entire campaign, as estimated by John Man, would have been a demographic catastrophe.

Genghis abruptly halted his Central Asian campaigns in 1221. Initially aiming to return via India, Genghis realised that the heat and humidity of the South Asian climate impeded his army's skills, and the omens were additionally unfavourable. Although the Mongols spent much of 1222 repeatedly overcoming rebellions in Khorasan, they withdrew completely from the region to avoid overextending themselves and set their new frontier on the Amu Darya River. During his lengthy return journey, Genghis prepared a new administrative division to govern the conquered territories and appointed  (commissioners,  "those who press the seal") and  (local officials) to manage the region back to normalcy. He also summoned and spoke with the Taoist patriarch Changchun in the Hindu Kush. The khan listened attentively to Changchun's teachings and granted his followers numerous privileges, including tax exemptions and authority over all monks throughout the empire. a grant that the Taoists would later use to try to gain superiority over Buddhism.

The usual reason given for the halting of the campaign is that the Western Xia, having declined to provide auxiliaries for the 1219 invasion, had additionally disobeyed Muqali in his campaign against the remaining Jin in Shaanxi. Timothy May has disputed that by arguing that the Xia fought in concert with Muqali until his death in 1223, when, frustrated by Mongol control and sensing an opportunity with Genghis campaigning in Central Asia, they ceased fighting. In either case, Genghis initially attempted to resolve the situation diplomatically, but when the Xia elite failed to come to an agreement on the hostages whom they were to send to the Mongols, he lost patience.

Returning to Mongolia in early 1225, Genghis spent the year in preparation for a campaign against them. It began in the first months of 1226 with the capture of Khara-Khoto on the Xia's western border. The invasion proceeded rapidly. Genghis ordered for the cities of the Gansu Corridor be sacked to one by one and granted clemency only to a few. Having crossed the Yellow River in the autumn, the Mongols besieged what is now Lingwu, just  south of the Xia capital, Zhongxing, in November. On 4 December, Genghis decisively defeated a Xia relief army; the khan left the siege of the capital to his generals and moved southwards with Subutai to plunder and to secure Jin territories.

Genghis fell from his horse while hunting in the winter of 1226–1227 and became increasingly ill in the following months. That slowed the siege of Zhongxing's progress, as his sons and commanders urged him to end the campaign and return to Mongolia to recover. They argued that the Xia would still be there another year. Incensed by insults from Xia's leading commander, Genghis insisted for the siege to be continued. He died on either 18 or 25 August 1227, but his death was kept a closely-guarded secret, and Zhongxing, unaware, fell the following month. The city was put to the sword, and its population was treated with extreme savagery. The Xia civilisation was essentially extinguished in what Man described as a "very successful ethnocide". The exact nature of the khan's death has been the subject of intense speculation. Rashid al-Din and the History of Yuan mention he suffered from an illness: possibly malaria, typhus, or bubonic plague. Marco Polo claimed that he was shot by an arrow during a siege, and Carpini reported that Genghis was struck by lightning. Legends sprang up around the event; the most famous recounts how the beautiful Gurbelchin, formerly the Xia emperor's wife, injured Genghis's genitals with a dagger during sex.

After his death, Genghis was transported back to Mongolia and buried on or near the sacred Burkhan Khaldun peak, in the Khentii Mountains, a site that he had chosen years earlier. Specific details of the funeral procession and burial were not made public knowledge; the mountain, declared  ( "Great Taboo"; i.e. prohibited zone), was out of bounds to all but its Uriankhai guard. When Ögedei acceded to the throne in 1229, the grave was honoured with three days of offerings and the sacrifice of thirty maidens. Paul Ratchnevsky theorised that the Mongols, who had no knowledge of embalming techniques, may have buried the khan in the Ordos to avoid his body decomposing in the summer heat en route to Mongolia, but Atwood rejects that hypothesis.

The tribes of the Mongol steppe had no fixed succession system but often defaulted to some form of ultimogeniture, the succession of the youngest son, because he would have had the least time to gain a following for himself and needed the help of his father's inheritance. However, that type of inheritance applied only to property, not to titles.

The Secret History records that Genghis chose his successor while he prepared for the Khwarazmian campaigns in 1219; Rashid al-Din, on the other hand, states that the decision came before Genghis's final campaign against the Xia. Regardless of the date, there were five possible candidates: Genghis's four sons and his youngest brother, Temüge, who had the weakest claim and was never seriously considered. Even though there was a strong possibility that was illegitimate, Genghis was not particularly concerned by that, but he and Jochi became increasingly estranged over time because of Jochi's preoccupation with his own appanage. After the siege of Gurganj, he only reluctantly participated in besieging the wealthy city that would become part of his territory, and he failed to give Genghis the normal share of the booty, which exacerbated tensions. Genghis was angered by Jochi's refusal to return to him in 1223 and was considering sending Ögedei and Chagatai to bring him to heel when news came that Jochi had died from an illness.

Chagatai's attitude towards Jochi's possible succession( he had termed his elder brother "a Merkit bastard" and had brawled with him in front of their father) led Genghis to view him as uncompromising, arrogant and narrow-minded, despite his great knowledge of Mongol legal customs. His elimination left Ögedei and Tolui as the two primary candidates. Tolui was unquestionably superior in military terms since his campaign in Khorasan had broken the Khwarazmian Empire, and his elder brother was far less able as a commander. Ögedei was also known to drink excessively even by Mongol standards, which eventually caused his death in 1241. However, he possessed talents that all of his brothers lacked: he was generous and generally well-liked. Aware of his own lack of military skill, he trusted his capable subordinates and, unlike his elder brothers, compromised on issues; he was also more likely to preserve Mongol traditions than Tolui, whose wife Sorghaghtani, herself a Nestorian Christian, was a patron of many religions including Islam. Ögedei was thus recognised as the heir to the Mongol throne.

Serving as regent after Genghis's death, Tolui established a precedent for the customary traditions after a khan's death. They included the halting of all military offensives involving Mongol troops, the establishment of a lengthy mourning period overseen by the regent, and the holding of a  to nominate successors and select them. For Tolui, that presented an opportunity. He was still a viable candidate for succession and had the support of the family of Jochi. However, any general , attended by the commanders whon Genghis had promoted and honoured, would observe their former ruler's desires without question and appoint Ögedei as ruler. It has been suggested that Tolui's reluctance to hold the  was driven by the knowledge of the threat that it posed to his ambitions. In the end, Tolui had to be persuaded by his advisor Yelü Chucai to hold the . In 1229, it crowned Ögedei as khan, with Tolui in attendance.

Börte, whom Temüjin married , remained his senior wife. She gave birth to four sons and five daughters, all of whom became influential figures in the empire. Genghis granted Börte's sons lands and property through the Mongol appanage system, andhe secured marriage alliances by marrying her daughters to important families. Her children were:

After Börte's final childbirth, Temüjin began to acquire a number of junior wives through conquest. They had all been princesses or queens, and Temüjin married them to demonstrate his political ascendancy. They included the Kereit princess Ibaqa; the Tatar sisters Yesugen and Yesui; Qulan, a Merkit; Gürbesu, the queen of the Naiman Tayang Khan; and two Chinese princesses, Chaqa and Qiguo, of the Western Xia and Jin dynasties, respectively. The children of the junior wives were always subservient to those of Börte, with daughters married off to seal lesser alliances and sons, such as Qulan's child , never a candidate for succession.

No eyewitness description or contemporaneous depiction of Genghis Khan survives. The Persian chronicler Juzjani and the Song diplomat Zhao Hong provide the two earliest descriptions. Both recorded that he was tall and strong with a powerful stature. Zhao wrote that Genghis had a broad brow and long beard, and Juzjani commented on his cat's eyes and lack of grey hair. The Secret History records that Börte's father remarked on Genghis's "flashing eyes and lively face" when he met him.

Atwood has suggested that many of Genghis Khan's values, especially the emphasis he placed on an orderly society, derive from his turbulent youth. He valued loyalty above all, and mutual fidelity became a cornerstone of his new nation. Genghis did not find it difficult to gain the allegiance of others: he was superbly charismatic even as a youth, as is shown by the number of people who left existing social roles behind to join him. Although his trust was hard to earn, if he felt loyalty was assured, he granted his total confidence in return. Recognised for his generosity towards his followers, Genghis unhesitatingly rewarded previous assistance. The  most honoured at the 1206  were those who had accompanied him since the beginning, and those who had sworn the Baljuna Covenant with him at his lowest point. He took responsibility for the families of  who were killed in battle or otherwise fell on hard times by raising a tax to provide them with clothing and sustenance.

The principal source of steppe wealth was post-battle plunder of which a leader would normally claim a large share. Genghis eschewed that custom and chose instead to divide booty equally between himself and all his men. Disliking any form of luxury, he extolled the simple life of the nomad in a letter to Changchun and objected to being addressed with obsequious flattery. He encouraged his companions to address him informally, give him advice and criticise his mistakes. Genghis's openness to criticism and willingness to learn saw him seeking the knowledge of family members, companions, neighbouring states and enemies. He sought and gained knowledge of sophisticated weaponry from China and the Muslim world; appropriated the Uyghur alphabet with the help of the captured scribe Tata-tonga; and employed numerous specialists across legal, commercial, and administrative fields. He also understood the need for a smooth succession, and modern historians agree he showed good judgement in choosing his heir.

Although he is today renowned for his military conquests, very little is known about Genghis's personal generalship. His skills were more suited to identifying potential commanders. His institution of a meritocratic command structure gave the Mongol army military superiority even though it was not technologically or tactically innovative. The army that Genghis created was characterised by its draconian discipline, ability to gather and use military intelligence efficiently, mastery of psychological warfare, and willingness to be utterly ruthless. Genghis thoroughly enjoyed exacting vengeance on his enemies. The concept lay at the heart of  (), the steppe code of justice. In exceptional circumstances, such as when Muhammad of Khwarazm executed his envoys, the need for vengeance overrode all other considerations.

Genghis came to believe that the supreme deity Tengri had ordained a great destiny for him. Initially, the bounds of his ambition were limited to Mongolia, but as success followed success, and the reach of the Mongol nation expanded, he and his followers came to believe he was embodied with  (). Believing that he had an intimate connection with heaven, anyone who did not recognise his right to world power was treated as an enemy. That viewpoint allowed Genghis to rationalise any hypocritical or duplicitous moments on his own part, such as killing his  (blood brother) Jamukha or killing  who wavered in their loyalties.

Genghis Khan left a vast and controversial legacy. His unification of the Mongol tribes and his foundation of the largest contiguous state in world history "permanently alter[ed] the worldview of European, Islamic, [and] East Asian civilizations", according to Atwood. His conquests enabled the creation of Eurasian trading systems unprecedented in their scale, which brought wealth and security to the tribes. Although he very likely did not codify the written body of laws known as the Great Yasa, he reorganiseed the legal system and established a powerful judicial authority under Shigi Qutuqu.

On the other hand, his conquests were ruthless and brutal. The prosperous civilizations of China, Central Asia, and Persia were devastated by the Mongol assaults and underwent multigenerational trauma and suffering as a result. Perhaps Genghis's greatest failing was his inability to create a working succession system. His division of his empire into appanages, meant to ensure stability, actually did the reverse, as local and state-wide interests diverged, and the empire began to divide into the Golden Horde, the Chagatai Khanate, the Ilkhanate, and the Yuan dynasty in the late 1200s. In the mid-1990s, the Washington Post acclaimed Genghis Khan as the "man of the millennium" who "embodied the half-civilized, half-savage duality of the human race". This complex image has remained prevalent in modern scholarship, with historians emphasising both his positive and negative contributions.

For many centuries, Genghis Khan was remembered in Mongolia as a religious figure, not a political one. After Altan Khan converted to Tibetan Buddhism in the late 1500s, Genghis was deified and given a central role in the Mongolian religious tradition. As a deity, Genghis drew upon Buddhist, shamanistic, and folk traditions; for example, he was defined as a new incarnation of a chakravartin (idealised ruler) like Ashoka, or of Vajrapani, the martial bodhisattva; he was connected genealogically to the Buddha and to ancient Buddhist kings; he was invoked during weddings and festivals; and he took a large role in ancestor veneration rituals. He also became the focus point of a sleeping hero legend in which he will return to help the Mongol people in a time of great need. His cult was centred on the  (), today a mausoleum in Inner Mongolia, China.

In the 19th and the early 20th century, Genghis began to be viewed as the national hero of the Mongolian people. Foreign powers recognised that. During its occupation of Inner Mongolia, the Empire of Japan funded the construction of a temple to Genghis, while both the Nationalist Party and the Communist Party used the memory of Genghis to woo potential allies during the Chinese Civil War. That attitude was maintained during World War II, when the Soviet-aligned Mongolian People's Republic promoted Genghis to build patriotic zeal against invaders; however, as he was a non-Russian hero, who could serve as an anti-communist figurehead, that attitude swiftly changed after the war's end. According to May, Genghis "was condemned as a feudal and reactionary lord [who] exploited the people". His cult was repressed, the alphabet that he chose was replaced with the Cyrillic script and celebrations planned for the 800th anniversary of his birth in 1962 were cancelled and denigrated after loud Soviet complaints. Because Chinese historians were largely more favourable towards him than their Soviet counterparts, Genghis played a minor role in the Sino-Soviet split.

The arrival of the policies of glasnost and perestroika in the 1980s paved the way for official rehabilitation. Less than two years after the 1990 revolution, Lenin Avenue in the capital, Ulaanbaatar, was renamed Chinggis Khan Avenue. Since then, Mongolia has named Chinggis Khaan International Airport and erected a large statue in Sükhbaatar Square, which was itself renamed after Genghis between 2013 and 2016. His visage appears on items ranging from postage stamps and high-value banknotes to brands of alcohol and toilet paper. In 2006, the Mongolian Parliament officially discussed the trivialisation of his name through excessive advertising.

Modern Mongolians tend to downplay Genghis's military conquests in favour of his political and civil legacy and view the destructive campaigns as "a product of their time", in the words of the historian Michal Biran, and secondary to his other contributions to Mongolian and world history. His policies, such his use of the , his establishment of the rule of law through an independent judiciary and human rights, are seen as the foundations that allowed the creation of the modern democratic Mongolian state. Viewed as someone who brought        peace and knowledge, rather than war and destruction, Genghis Khan is idealised for making Mongolia the centre of international culture for a period. He is generally recognised as the founding father of Mongolia.

The historical and modern Muslim world has associated Genghis Khan with many of ideologies and beliefs. Its first instinct, as Islamic thought had never previously envisioned being ruled by a non-Muslim power, was to view Genghis as the herald of the approaching Judgemnt Day. Over time, as the world failed to end, and his descendants began converting to Islam, Muslims began to see Genghis as an instrument of God's will, which was destined to strengthen the Muslim world by cleansing its innate corruption.

In post-Mongol Asia, Genghis was also a source of political legitimacy because his descendants had been recognised as the only ones entitled to reign. As a result, aspiring potentates who were not descended from him had to justify their rule by nominating puppet rulers of Genghis's dynasty or stressing their own connections to him. Most notably, the great conqueror Timur, who established his own empire in Central Asia, did both. He was obliged to pay homage to Genghis's descendants Soyurgatmish and Sultan Mahmud, and his propaganda campaigns vastly exaggerated the prominence of his ancestor Qarachar Noyan, one of Genghis's lesser commanders, and depicted him as Genghis's blood relative and second-in-command. He also married at least two of Genghis's descendants. Babur, the founder of the Mughal Empire in India, in turn derived his authority through his descent from both Timur and Genghis. Until the 18th century in Central Asia, Genghis was considered the progenitor of the social order and was second only to the prophet Muhammad in legal authority.

With the rise of Arab nationalism in the 19th century, the Arab world began to view Genghis increasingly negatively. Today, he is perceived as the ultimate "accursed enemy", a "barbarian savage who began the demolition of civilization which culminated in" the Siege of Baghdad in 1258 by his grandson Hulegu Khan. Similarly, Genghis is viewed extremely negatively in Russia, where historians have consistently portrayed the rule of the Golden Horde, the "Tatar Yoke", as backwards, destructive, inimical to all progress and the reason for all of Russia's flaws. His treatment in modern Central Asia and Turkey is more ambivalent: his position as a non-Muslim means that other national traditions and heroes, such as Timur and the Seljuks, are viewed more highly.

Under the Yuan dynasty in China, Genghis was revered as the nation's creator and remained in that position even after the foundation of the Ming dynasty in 1368. Although the late Ming somewhat disavowed his memory, the positive viewpoint was restored under the Manchu Qing dynasty (1644–1911), which positioned itself as his heirs. The rise of 20th-century Chinese nationalism initially caused the denigration of Genghis as a traumatic occupier, but he was later resurrected as a useful political symbol on a variety of issues. Modern Chinese historiography has generally viewed Genghis positively, and he has been portrayed as a Chinese hero. In contemporary Japan, he is most known for the legend that he was originally Minamoto no Yoshitsune, a samurai and tragic hero who was forced to commit seppuku in 1189.

The Western world, which was never directly affected by Genghis, has viewed him in shifting and contrasting ways. During the 14th century, as shown by the works of Marco Polo and Geoffrey Chaucer, he was seen as a just and wise ruler, but during the 18th century, he came to embody the Enlightenment stereotype of a tyrannical Oriental despot, and by the 20th century, he represented a prototypical barbarian warlord. In recent decades, Western scholarship has become increasingly nuanced to view Genghis as a more complex individual.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt (January 30, 1882 – April 12, 1945) was the 32nd president of the United States from 1933 to his death. He died shortly after he he had begun his fourth term. The twelve years in the office was the longest ever spent in it. After his death, the 22nd Amendment came into effect and set term limits to prevent another person from being president that long.

Before becoming president, he was governor of New York from 1929 to 1932, assistant United States Secretary of the Navy from 1913 to 1920, and New York state senator from 1911 to 1913. He was a member of the Democratic Party.

His father, James Roosevelt I, and his mother, Sara Delano, were from rich old New York families, which had made money from slavery. The Roosevelts were originally from the Netherland, and the Delanos were originally from France. Franklin was their only child. His father's grandmother, Mary Rebecca Aspinwall, was a first cousin of Elizabeth Monroe, the wife of the fifth U.S. president, James Monroe.

One of his ancestors was John Lothropp, who was also an ancestor of Benedict Arnold and Joseph Smith Jr. One of his distant relatives from his mother's side was the author Laura Ingalls Wilder.

His maternal grandfather, Warren Delano II, a descendant of Mayflower passengers Richard Warren, Isaac Allerton, Degory Priest, and Francis Cooke, made duringtwelve years in China more than a million dollars in the tea trade in Macau, Canton, and Hong Kong, but upon coming back to the United States, he lost it all in the Panic of 1857. In 1860, he came back to China and made a fortune in the notorious but highly-profitable opium trade by supplying opium-based medication to the War Department during the American Civil War.

Roosevelt was a fifth cousin and a nephew-in-law of President Theodore Roosevelt. His fifth cousin once removed was Eleanor Roosevelt, who also became his wife. Roosevelt once had an affair with his wife's secretary but later avoided seeing her to protect his political career.

Franklin Delano Roosevelt was born on January 30, 1882, in the Hudson Valley town of Hyde Park, New York. When Roosevelt was five years old, his father took him to visit President Grover Cleveland. The president said to him: "My little man, I am making a strange wish for you. It is that you may never be President of the United States." Roosevelt became the longest-serving president in American history.

Roosevelt was the Assistant United States Secretary of the Navy under President Woodrow Wilson. He was nominated the vice presidential candidate under James M. Cox in 1920. Cox and Roosevelt, who were Democrats, lost to the Republican canadiates: Warren Harding and Calvin Coolidge.

In 1921, Roosevelt got sick with poliomyelitis, a disease that paralyzes people. (Some people now think that actually had Guillain-Barré syndrome.) He never walked easily again, but Roosevelt remained physically fit and became an avid swimmer. Roosevelt became a champion of medical research and treatment for crippling illnesses but kept his illness as hidden as much as possible from the public for fear of discrimination. His disability did not limit his political career; Roosevelt was elected the Governor of New York in 1928. His wife, Eleanor Roosevelt, helped his career by traveling and meeting people when he could not do so. She became famous as his eyes and ears, met thousands of ordinary people, and brought their concerns to him.

Roosevelt won the 1932 election against the unpopular incumbent, President Herbert Hoover, and became president in early 1933.

He started a series of popular programs known as the New Deal to fight the Great Depression. The New Deal gave people jobs building roads, bridges, dams, parks, schools, and other public services. Also, it created Social Security, made banks insure their customers, gave direct aid to the needy, and made many regulations to the economy. The New Deal helped him get re-elected by a large victory in 1936. Roosevelt could then continue the New Deal. However, the United States did not fully recover from the Great Depression until it entered World War II.

In 1939, Roosevelt became the first President of the United States to appear on television. Roosevelt was elected for a third term in 1940. He gave weapons and money to the Allies fighting World War II as a part of the Lend-Lease program, but the United States was still technically neutral in the war. Many Americans opposed the war and accused him of trying to get the country into it.

On December 7, 1941, Japan launched its attack on Pearl Harbor, a military base in Hawaii. On December 8, the United States Congress declared war on Japan an hour after the famous Day of Infamy speech by Roosevelt. After the declaration of war, Germany and Italy, the other members of the Axis, declared war on the United States to help Japan. That brought the United States fully into the war.

Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8802 on June 25, 1941, prohibiting companies and unions from discriminating on the basis of race or ethnicity. Although it was not always implemented and was only a wartime measure, the executive order laid the groundwork for the federal government supporting civil rights for African Americans.

The military used conscription and forced people to fight in the war, but many people in Puerto Rico, a colony of the United States, did not want to fight because they felt the U.S. was treating them badly by occupying the island. The U.S. still forced them to fight and to help pay for war supplies. Roosevelt also signed an order allowing Japanese Americans to be forced to go internment camps.

While still president, he died on April 12, 1945. Vice President Harry S. Truman became president. World War II continued for almost four more months, but the Allied victory was already assured.

For overcoming the difficult challenges of a severe depression and another world war, historians consider him to be one of the three best U.S. presidents. Indeed, his presidency has been said to have redefined the role of the presidency, inspiring Truman's Fair Deal, John F. Kennedy's New Frontier, and Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society.

Ferdinand Magellan (1480 – 27 April 1521) was a Portuguese explorer. He became the first European to sail the Pacific Ocean, and the first to sail around the world.

Though ancient Greek philosophers and astronomers had proposed that the earth was round as early as the 5th century BC, Magellan's voyage confirmed this.

Magellan was born in 1480. Records disagree about whether he was born in Sabrosa or Porto in Portugal.

Magellan's parents were members of the Portuguese nobility. As a result, after they died, Magellan was able to get a job in the royal court. At age 10, he became a page for the Queen of Portugal. In the royal court, he learned many important skills, including map-making, navigation and astronomy.

In 1505 Magellan joined the Portuguese navy. He traveled to many parts of the world, such as India, the Spice Islands, East Africa, and Morocco. He was wounded in Morocco in 1513, and walked with a limp for the rest of his life.

After he lost his job for the King of Portugal, Magellan went to work for the King of Spain, Charles V. Charles V gave Magellan five ships for his voyage around the world. Only one ship, the Victoria, completed the voyage.

In 1520, during his circumnavigation voyage, Magellan became the first European to sail through the Strait of Magellan (which was then named for him).

Magellan was killed in Mactan, Philippines on April 27, 1521, aged 40-41. He was accused of stealing from the native people, which led to a battle. He was killed by a Filipino leader called Lapulapu and his warriors.

Magdalena Carmen Frida Kahlo y Calderón  (6 July 1907 – 13 July 1954), Mexican Painter usually known as Frida Kahlo. She was known for her surreal and very personal works. She was married to Diego Rivera, also a well-known painter.

She was born in Coyoacán, Mexico to a German father and Mexican mother. She was close with her father from a very young age mainly due to him being a professional photographer. She had polio that left her disabled when she was 6 years old and some think that she may have had spina bifida (a birth defect affecting the development of part of the spine) as well. She studied medicine and was going to become a doctor. Because of a traffic accident in a tram at age 18 which badly injured her, she had periods of severe pain for the rest of her life. After this accident, Kahlo no longer continued her medical studies but took up painting. She used ideas about things that had happened to her. Her paintings are often shocking in the way they show pain and the harsh lives of women, especially her feelings about not being able to have children. Fifty-five of her 143 paintings are self-portraits. She was also influenced by native Mexican culture, shown in bright colors, with a mixture of realism and symbolism. Her paintings attracted the attention of the artist Diego Rivera, whom she later married. She was openly bisexual and was a communist. She died of a pulmonary embolism caused by bronchopneumonia in Coyoacán.

Kahlo's work is sometimes called "surrealist", and although she organized art shows several times with European surrealists, she herself did not like that label. Her attention to female themes, and the honesty in her painting them, made her something of a feminist cult figure in the last decades of the 20th century. Some of her work is seen at the Frida Kahlo Museum, found in her birthplace and home in suburban Mexico City.

Free will is being able to choose between different . If we judge an action (for example, as good or bad) it only makes sense if the action is freely chosen.

Things like advice, persuasion, and prohibition, are pointless unless people have some kind of free will. Free will means people can do different things. Different results come from different courses of action. Traditionally, only actions that are freely willed deserve  or . If there is no free will, there is no sense or justice in rewarding or punishing anybody for any action.

Free will is a major problem in ethical philosophy, and is also relevant to the philosophy of science.

In ordinary life, and in law, people are generally assumed to have free will, and are  for what they do.

Determinism comes from the idea that our world – and the universe – is in some way rather like a machine. This idea goes back a long way in history (at least 2,500 years).

There is more than one kind of determinism, but essentially it is the idea

that events in the past fully decide () events in the future. It is the same as saying "the universe is like a  instrument". If you knew everything about it, you could predict exactly what will happen. To illustrate this Pierre-Simon Laplace proposed a thought experiment in 1814, which he called Laplace's demon.  If determinism is the case, then there can be no free will.

The view that a deterministic universe means people do not have free will is called "incompatibilism". It means if determinism is true, it is  with free will, and so free will does not exist.

Many thinkers do not like what follows from hard determinism, and ideas have been put forwards as to why we do have free will. Here we give just one of these ideas.

Soft determinism (or "compatibilism") tries keep determinism, but still claims that free will is possible. David Hume had this position. According to Hume, free will is not the ability to make a different decision under the same circumstances. Because there may be slight differences in the circumstances, a different decision can be reached. Chrysippos. a stoic philosopher gives the example of a dog which is tied to a cart. This dog can freely decide to follow the cart. William James coined the term "soft determinism" in  The dilemma of determinism in 1884. There, James writes "A common opinion prevails that the juice has ages ago been pressed out of the free-will controversy". James went on to argue, just as did Plutarch, that events fall into two groups: the causally determined and the rest.

The law assumes we have free will. The job of courts is to find out when people do things and what they were thinking when they decided to do it. For example, think of someone who kills someone else. A court tries to figure out (1) if he or she actually killed the other person, and (2) if he or she decided to do it. The courts do not ask the philosophical question above.

In the past, people such as Democritus saw the universe as deterministic. Some people thought that getting enough information would allow them to predict perfectly what will happen in the future. Modern science, however, is a mixture of deterministic and stochastic theories.

General relativity is a theory of space and time. The theory was published by Albert Einstein in 1915.

The main idea of general relativity is that space and time are two different parts of spacetime. In general relativity, gravity does not work the same way that Sir Isaac Newton said gravity worked. According to Einstein, gravity changes not only space, but also time (gravitational time dilation).

An important idea in general relativity is the "principle of equivalence". An example is that two people, one on the surface of the Earth, and the other in an elevator in outer space but accelerating upwards at the speed of Earth's gravity will each observe the same behavior of an object they drop from their hands. The object will accelerate to the floor at the speed of Earth's gravity (≈9.8 m/s2) in either case.

This makes it impossible for either to tell whether or not they are at rest in a uniform gravitational field or accelerating with no gravity. Other versions of this type of "thought experiment" were used to show that light would curve in an accelerating frame of reference.

In relativity, acceleration makes spacetime warp for an observer. If one isn’t accelerating, this warping goes away. However, for masses, since the “acceleration” must point different ways at different places, this creates actual curvature, which cannot be removed by changing your reference frame. This can be thought of as spacetime being a jello of some sort, curving into itself, so that a straight line ends up curving. The Sun and other objects with mass (and energy) curve four dimensional spacetime fabric. If there’s enough mass or energy in one place, a black hole is made, because the warping from acceleration becomes so extreme that future and inward swap places (according to what we know).

General relativity has predicted many things which were later seen. These include:

Fire is a chemical reaction that gives off light and heat. Fire happens when a material rapidly oxidizes, or loses electrons, and gives off a great amount of energy. Flames are only the part of the fire that give off visible light.

Fire is sometimes useful, but also very dangerous because it can cause houses, trees and other things to burn to ashes. Forest fires are very harmful as they can travel quickly due to wind and brush. They can destroy a huge area in a matter of minutes. Every year people die by accidents from fire.

Fire can be started by heating something in many different ways. Once the thing is heated past a temperature called the ignition point, it will start to burn, beginning a fire. Some common ways to start a fire include rubbing sticks together very rapidly, making sparks by hitting flint with steel, or using matches or a lighter. Even though the Sun is very hot, it does not make fire. Instead, it crushes together hydrogen atoms to release energy through a process called nuclear fusion.

Fire can be very useful if it is treated carefully. It has always been very important for people to be able to make fire. People need its heat to keep warm on cold days. It is also used to cook food. Its light helps people see in dark places and scare away predators.

If human skin touches fire, the skin may burn, which can take some time to heal and to remove the scar.  If a fire gives off a large amount of smoke, a person's mouth should be covered with a wet cloth, since people can faint when they breathe in too much smoke.  Even a spark, such as from a cigarette, should be kept away from any fuels that very easily catch and spread fire, like gasoline, or cause an explosion, like gunpowder.

If fire is not treated carefully, it can be very dangerous.  One wildfire sometimes burns thousands of square miles or kilometers.  Forests can burn down if fires are not controlled. Every year, large areas of forests are destroyed because of fire.  This usually happens in the summer.

In some camps, there is a camp fire; around the camp fire, there are usually some rocks to stop it from spreading. In buildings, fire shutters can be used. Fire shutters contain a fire. With the help of effective shutters, a fire cannot spread from room to room in a building.

Fire needs three things to burn: oxygen, fuel, and heat. Fuels can be wood, tinder, coal, oil, or any other substance that will easily oxidize. Once a fire is burning, it creates its own heat. This lets the fire keep burning on its own for some time.

Firefighters are people with special training to control and stop fires. They also rescue victims of fire related incidents.

However, some fires cannot be smothered, such as magnesium flames. They can burn in carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and some other elemental compounds. However, they cannot burn in noble gases such as helium.

Fires are usually combustion reactions that take carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. The products are commonly water and carbon dioxide, although there are other examples that avoid this generalization, such as burning magnesium in air, which makes magnesium oxide.

Fires can occur in many ways. There are many types of fire. There are wood fires, gas fires, metal fires, and more.

Wood fires can usually be put out with water because water absorbs heat, but metal fires are too hot for water to absorb enough heat to put out the fire. If water is used to extinguish ("put out") a metal fire, the water will simply evaporate. For metal fires, sand can be used to cover the fire and keep it from obtaining oxygen. A fire extinguisher can put out most fires.

In human culture, fire is often used as a symbol of destruction and anger. It is also one of the four elements, those being fire, water, air, and earth/wood.

A fungus (plural: fungi) is a type of living organism that includes yeasts, molds, mushrooms and others. Fungi are a category of organism as large and varied as the animals or plants. Fungi, animals and plants are each Kingdoms of life.

Historically people thought fungi were most like plants, even calling fungi a type of plant. However fungi are not plants. Fungi are more closely related to animals than to plants.

The study of fungi is known as mycology from "myco-" meaning fungi and "-ology" meaning "study of".

Fungi evolved around 1 billion years ago.  Fossils from the Devonian period show evidence of fungi likely having an even older history.

There are fungi fossils and ancient fungi found trapped in amber but compared to material like bone fungi fossils are rare due to their rapid decay

Fungi are all eukaryotes. This means their cells have nuclei, unlike bacteria which do not have nuclei and so are called prokaryotes.

In addition to a cell nucleus that contain the DNA, fungal cells have ribosomes to turn the DNA genes into protein, mitochondria that produce energy for the cell, and other organelles. Fungi cell walls are mainly composed chitin. Meanwhile, plant cell walls are cellulose found in cell walls of plants.

Fungi do not have any chlorophyll and so cannot capture energy from sunlight like plants do. This is one way fungi are more similar to animals, which also lack chlorophyll.

Most fungi are saprophytic. These fungi digest and absorb dead organic matter around them. Fungi can absorb the food molecules through their cell walls.p107

However there are many very different other ways some fungi get nutrients and live. Some are parasites, some are pathogens, some are predatory, some cooperate with other living things in symbiosis and some fungi have more than one lifestyle.

Pleurotus fungi, also called "oyster mushrooms", are an example of fungi that both eat dead matter and are also predatory. They can capture nematodes with their hyphae.

Some fungi can instead live by growing around or into the roots of trees or other plants. When they do this they can be called mycorrhiza where the "myco" indicates fungi and "rhiza" refers to plant roots. Most trees contain mycorrhizal roots, and so do many crop plants. This benefits both the fungus and the plant, which makes it a  symbiotic relationship.

Besides mycorhizza, there are other cases of symbiosis where a fungus shares resources with other organisms and all benefit. Lichen is an example where fungi and an algae or cyanobacteria live together and help each other survive. In this partnership the algal cells live within the fungal tissue. The outcome is a new mat-like life-form which clings to rock and various surfaces. Approximately 20% of all fungi lives as lichen symbiosis.

In other cases fungi can be parasitic, taking resources from other living things and giving nothing or very little back. Still other fungi can be pathogens that cause disease in other living things and eventually kill them. Once it is dead then many of these pathogenic fungi switch to eating the dead matter, becoming saprophytes. Many fungi can switch how they get their nutrients. They often switch lifestyles to survive better.

Fungi can exist as one cell (unicellular) or many cells (multicellular) as organisms.

Fungi with more than one cell can have thin thread-like cells called hyphae (singular: hypha) that absorb nutrients and anchor the fungus in place.

Hyphae are not roots but can resemble threads or tiny roots through which the fungus uses to extract nutrients. Each hypha consists of a long cell enclosed within a tube-shaped cell wall that grows from the end. Hyphae generally form syncytia so that their cell walls (septa) are mostly incomplete and have gaps. This means the cell nuclei are not separated from each other, as in typical cells. Specific details may differ among species.

The mycelium consists of a mat of hyphae, The mycelium is also defined as all the "vegetative" or non-reproductive parts of a fungus. The mycelium of a fungus may be found growing underground, through a rotting log or over dead leaves, inside the body of an insect, among many other places.

Yeast is an example of a single-celled fungus that reproduces either sexually or asexually. Asexual reproduction occurs by simple budding (binary fission).

Different fungi reproduce sexually and asexually. Some are able to reproduce in only one way or the other, while other fungi reproduce both ways.

In general, the production of spores is key. Spores can travel to new places by air or water and develop into new fungi.

Some fungi give rise to mushrooms, also called sporocarps as part of reproduction. Mushrooms are multicellular bodies produced from fungus's hyphae that exist to produce and release spores so that they may eventually develop into new fungi. Mushrooms are sometimes called fungal "fruiting bodies" because mushrooms are only part of a fungus and exist for fungal reproduction, which is similar to how fruit are only part of a plant and exist for plant reproduction. This comparison is also made because fungi and their mushrooms were historically incorrectly thought of as plants.

Other fungi use a sporangium to produce spores through mitosis, or sexual spores through meiosis.

Mushrooms can take many different shapes, depending on the fungi species that produces the mushrooms. They can range from the classic "cap and stem" shape found in Amanita, Boletus and many other groups of fungi, all the way to the unique branching shape of coral fungi.

In some cases the cap of a mushroom has gills, in other cases it may have "teeth" as in hedgehog mushrooms (genus Hydnum) or pores as in Boletus or Leccinum.

Other mushrooms are simply shaped, like cups. These are the Ascomycota, which include the highly sought-after morel mushrooms.

Some mushrooms even grow entirely underground, as in truffle fungi.

Many fungi species are defined based mostly on genetics but are still able to be recognized and identified based on their shape, color, odor, smell and habitat.

Contrary to popular belief, unless someone is allergic, it is safe to handle all mushrooms. Even the most poisonous fungus must be eaten to begin to do harm. Someone studying mushrooms of fungi can pick up and examine any mushroom but should not attempt to eat any mushroom.

Edible fungi are widely consumed as human food. Some are grown in mushroom farms and others are foraged in woods, fields and anywhere else fungi produce mushrooms. Not all fungi produce edible mushrooms. Some fungi species produce toxic mushrooms. People learn to forage from older family members in cultures with mushroom foraging traditions, from amateur mycological and mushroom hunting societies, from studying many guidebooks and in formal classes.

Certain types of cheese require a fungal species. Examples include Blue cheese and Camembert cheese, which owe their unique flavor and texture to the cheese.

Yeasts are widely used in the production of beer, certain breads and more fermented foods.

Certain fungi (for example, penicillin) have served as a source of antibiotics. These antibiotics are naturally produced by many fungi as a defense mechanism against bacteria.

Some fungi produce psychotropic (mind-altering) substances. These psychedelic mushrooms are often referred as magic mushrooms because of their ability to induce hallucinations. Like any drug, their effect are temporary typically lasting for 4 to 6 hours. Many countries have prohibited them.

The effects of psilocybin containing fungi were first known to be used by indigenous peoples, most famously the Mazatec people of Mexico who invented social and medicinal uses of psilocybin. Some people today use these fungi recreationally due to their psychedelic properties.

Scientists today continue to investigate ways to use "magic mushrooms" as medical applications. Treating anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress disorder are common ways psilocybin are studied as medicine.

Many factors, from habitat destruction to pressures from pollution to climate change may cause some fungi to become more rare or even go extinct.

Just like animals, plants or any other type of life, there are some fungi that spread from where they are native to places where they are invasive species. A fungi can become an invasive species anywhere they are not native to and are potentially causing harm in the ecosystem including out-competing native species or directly harming native species by eating them or changing their habitat too much.

Fungi can become invasive because of being transported to areas where they are not native deliberately or accidentally by people. When people grow fungi species that are not native to their area outdoors, there can be a chance for that non-native fungi to begin to spread. If they spread too much it can become impossible to control and then the fungi is invasive. The risk for becoming invasive is not the same for all non-native fungi species. Some are much more likely to become harmful or to spread so fast they begin disrupting native species. Fungi that can cause disease such as the fungi that can cause white nose syndrome in bats are more likely to do harm if they spread to an area where they are not native.

Fungi like golden oyster mushrooms (Pleurotus citrinopileatus) are native in Europe and Asia but have begun rapidly spreading in North America, where they are not native. Although golden oyster mushrooms do not cause disease and are also edible, that they are spreading so quickly in an area where they are not native means they have been called an invasive species.

When trees are planted either for landscaping or farming for wood or paper, the fungi in the soil that associate with the roots of those trees can be spread, too. Sometimes this is done intentionally if the trees are being grown to be harvested and the fungi have been found to help those trees grow faster and stay healthier. If those fungi species are not native and begin to spread, however, then they can become invasive species. This has been seen happening with death cap fungi (Amanita phalloides) spreading to areas where it is not native from the roots of planted trees, replacing some native fungi and becoming invasive.

Some fungi are poisonous to people or to other animals. Sometimes the poison helps the fungus by keeping insects from eating the mushrooms, other times the poison is not made by the fungus to be a poison but does cause harm if eaten by people or other animals. A mushroom that is poisonous for one type of animal to eat may be safe for another animal. No known fungus is unsafe to touch unless a person is allergic to it. All known poisonous fungi must be eaten or put into the body some other way to do harm.

Reactions to eating poisonous mushrooms and cause a range of reactions in people, including stomach cramps, hallucinations, severe organ failure, and death.

Though not all mushrooms of fungi in the genus Amanita are poisonous, the destroying angel (Amanita virosa, Amanita bisporigera, Amanita ocreata) and the death cap (Amanita phalloides), are the most common cause of deadly mushroom poisoning.

Some fungi are poisonous when eaten raw or under-cooked but are edible if well-cooked. Morel mushrooms (genus Morchella) are edible and widely eaten cooked but have toxins in them that are broken down by heat, so can poison people if eaten raw or under-cooked.

As it is difficult to accurately identify a safe mushroom without experience or training, it is often advised to assume that a wild mushroom could be poisonous and to not consume it.

Flamenco is a style of baile. It is a form of entertainment with song, music and dance. It is very popular in Spain and is known worldwide. Its foundation is in Andalusia in Spain. In its evolution Andalusian gypsies played an important part.  The term 'flamenco' was first recorded in the late 18th century but many believe the art form is much older.

Flamenco has acoustic guitar music, singing, hand claps, heel , castanets. It is danced by a man and a woman in traditional Spanish costumes. The dance has no set tempo. It may have both fast and slow passages, rising to a climax near the end.

Flamenco performance has evolved during the history of this musical genre. In the beginning (the 18th century at the latest), songs were sung without any guitar accompaniment. During the 19th century, the guitar was used to accompany songs. Since the second half of the 19th century, the solo guitar is played in flamenco concerts.

On November 16, 2010, UNESCO declared Flamenco one of the Masterpieces of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.

The flute is a musical instrument. A person who plays the flute is called a flautist.

There are many kinds of flutes. The most common concert flute is on C tuning. In addition, there are other flutes like piccolos, alto flutes, and bass flutes.

Flutes have changed over time. Pan flutes were made for many centuries. Later, the "Renaissance flute" came into use. In Baroque music flute means recorder, so flutes were called traverso in order not to confuse them. A Bavarian flute maker named Boehm reformed flutes largely to enlarge the volume and improve the way of using the chromatic scale. Later improvements created the modern flute.

There is a large repertoire of music for the flute. Baroque composers used them in their orchestras, usually in pairs, and composed concertos, chamber music and solo music for them. This has continued to the present day. Orchestras have at least 2 flutes each, sometimes three or four. Sometimes there is 1 piccolo which plays an octave higher, or an alto flute which plays a fifth lower than the flute.

The flute sounds very bright and cheerful playing high notes. Please listen, for example, to the Badinerie from Bach's Orchestral Suite no 2. It can also sound very thoughtful or sad when playing in its lowest register. A good example is the opening of Debussy's Prélude à l'après midi d'un faune also flutes Andre a brass instrument and can make a really low pitch.

The flute is a woodwind instrument, but modern flutes are made of metal. It was made of wood a long time ago. It doesn't need lip vibration like brass instruments. Flute players hold it horizontally and make a sound by blowing their breath over the edge of the hole of flute's head. This makes the air vibrate. Flutes need the second most amount of air for an instrument, next to the tuba. Flautists can change the pitch by pushing buttons or changing the direction of the breath. These buttons are called keys. The breath also can change the tone or the volume. Flute has many variations of the sound. The sound of flute is high, so composers often express it as a bird. A flute matches with many instruments such as violin and piano, and is often part of an ensemble.

There are many kinds of flute, so the material also varies.  Most flutes are made out of silver. Gold, platinum, wood, and aluminum are also used. The price of flute depends on the material, but there are many different playing situations, so not only expensive flutes are useful.

In India, a flute called bansuri is used. It has no keys and is often made of bamboo or cane.

In China, a simple flute is used, which has no keys. The Chinese flute sometimes has a thin piece of paper over one hole, which adds a bright raspiness to the sound.

There are other kinds of flute, that are played by blowing into the end, like a recorder. Some of these are tin whistle, flageolet, tabor pipe, and ocarina, and slide whistle.

In Japan there is a kind of flute called a shakuhachi, which is made from the bottom of a bamboo plant. It is blown at the end, but is not like the recorder because it does not have an opening that guides the air across a hole that makes the sound.

In South America, there is a flute called a quena that makes its sound the same way as the shakuhachi.

The Pan pipes are a form of flute with no holes. It has more than one pipe connected together, with the bottom closed. The player blows across the top of one of the pipes to make a note. The pipes are in different sizes, so that each one makes a different note. They are named after Pan, who played this instrument in Greek myth.

There are flutes in many cultures.  The flute has been described as "a musical weed which springs up everywhere".

The band Jethro Tull was founded by a flute player (Ian Anderson). It can be heard in many songs. One of them is the hit "Locomotive Breath".

Feminism is a  social,  political, and  economic movement. It is about changing the way that people see male and female rights and campaigning for equal rights. A feminist is someone who follows feminism.

Feminism began in the 18th century with the Enlightenment. The controversy over gender differences led to the discussion of equality.

The word "feminism" comes from the French word "féminisme". This medical term was used to describe masculine women or men with feminized traits. When its use became popular in the United States of America, it was used to refer to groups of women who "asserted the uniqueness of women, the mystical experience of motherhood and women's special purity.

Feminism started with the idea that human rights should be given to women. This idea was put forward by some philosophers in the 18th and 19th centuries such as Mary Wollstonecraft and John Stuart Mill. Later feminists in the early 20th century said that women should be allowed to vote in a democracy. Many women felt strongly that they should be allowed to vote, and many protests existed. These women were called Suffragettes. This is because they were fighting for Universal suffrage, which means everybody can vote. The Suffragettes staged many protests for their rights. Some women even committed suicide to show how wrong it was that they could not take part in politics. After women received the vote, feminism worked to make all of society more equal for women.

Feminism is generally acknowledged to have "waves," with different periods focusing on different aspects of feminism and often building on the ideas presented by the previous wave.

The first wave of feminism could be dated earlier to include pre-nineteenth-century women's rights movements. The French Revolution of 1789 is often attributed as the beginning of the first demands for women's rights. This inspired Mary Wollstonecraft, whose book A Vindication of the Rights of Women was published in 1792. It is one of the earliest significant works of feminist literacy. However, first-wave feminism is usually dated between the mid to late nineteenth century and early 1900s. During the first wave, women began to realize that they must first gain political power before they could bring about social change. This wave focused on gaining the right to vote (universal suffrage). Later, the focus shifted to include sexual, economic, and reproductive concerns.

During the inter-war years, the feminist movement declined. Anti-feminism was on the rise, focusing on the issue of women and work. Women were being 'persuaded' to return to their traditional roles in the home and give up their war jobs. There were also issues within the organized ranks of feminism itself. The ideologies and priorities were changing. Some felt that equality with men had been reached and shifted their focus onto the needs of women as women, such as the subjects of birth control, family allowance, and protective legislature. This caused the split into the dominant groups of equality and new feminism. New feminists focused on the role of traditional women in the home and as mothers. Equality feminists encouraged women to look beyond the home and fought for equality with men in every aspect of life. Equality feminists opposed protective legislature, such as maternity leave.

The topic of protective legislature eventually led to the divide of first-wave feminism. Middle-class feminists tended to oppose protective legislature, whereas working class feminists largely supported it. This split between the previously dominant equality feminism and the rising new feminism marks the end of the first wave of feminism.

The rise of political concerns marks second-wave feminism. Where the first wave of feminism dealt with women in the workforce, as well as the right to own property and vote, the second wave of feminism lobbied for 'liberation' from a patriarchal society. The key to second-wave feminism was the struggle over the female body itself – how it was represented and the significance attached to the reality of biological differences.

The famous "One is not born, but rather becomes a woman" declaration by Simone de Beauvoir led to new thinking about gender as a construction rather than something inherent.

Second-wave feminism was also characterized by the problematization of equality. Questions arose about what gaining equality would achieve due to the societal roles men and women were still expected to fill. This led to the call for extreme change to revolutionize the very fabric of a patriarchal society. This was the beginning of the radical, Marxist, and socialist feminist groupings. It also marked a shift in the politics of liberal feminism, focusing more on 'sexual politics', such as the family, abortion, rape, domestic violence, and sexuality.

Third-wave feminism is generally described as the feminism of a younger generation who acknowledge both the effect and the limitations of the ideologies presented by second-wave feminism. This new generation argues that the conditions that prompted second-wave feminism no longer exist, and, therefore, feminism needs to change. It also argues that second-wave feminism catered too much to a small group of people, namely white, middle-class, heterosexual women.

Third-wave feminists seem to have grown up with feminism as a strong societal concept, influencing them from a young age. It is taught in schools and prominent in the media.

Third-wave feminists largely focus on issues surrounding individual self-expression. This includes how identity is formed and communicated through things such as appearance, sexuality, and intersectionality. Third wave feminism  recognized women from different cultural backgrounds, religions, sexualities, ethnicities, and abilities.

Some say that a fourth wave of feminism is already upon us, prompted by increased internet culture. This wave is similar to the third wave but distinguished by more advanced technology and broader ideas of equality. It stands more in solidarity with other social justice movements.

Fourth wave feminism uses the internet and its "call-out" culture to challenge misogyny and sexism in popular media such as television, literature, advertising, etc. This has caused companies to change how they market to women to avoid being "called out."

Another part of fourth-wave feminism is the existence of people who reject the word feminism because of "assumptions of gender binary and exclusionary subtext: 'For women only.'"

In the 21st century, online communities and support groups focused on masculinism discourse as a counterpart to the online presence of feminism, which is known as manosphere.  Masculinism fueled by primordialist ideologies have also resulted into an openly anti-feminist toxic culture known as "incels" (involuntarily celibate).

There have been women who have been involved in politics throughout history.

Esther, Lady Godiva, Bodicea, Queen Elizabeth, Lucrezia Borgia, Catherine the Great, Joan of Arc.

Starting in 1960, many women have been elected to high positions of power, such as prime minister. Sirimavo Bandaranaike was the first, followed by Indira Gandhi, Golda Meir, Elisabeth Domitien and Margaret Thatcher. Dame Eugenia Charles lasted nearly 15 years in the post, a record.

Liberal feminism drew its strength from the diversity of liberal thought following the Enlightenment. The basis of liberal feminism is the emphasis on the power of the individual. If everyone individually stands up for what is right, discriminatory practices will change. Liberals challenge societal norms. Liberal feminists acknowledge and support individual choices and preferences that are considered as 'traditional' gender placements (such as the home and the workplace) if they are a voluntary choice without coercion.

Socialist or Marxist feminism are similar cause their feministo (female-centered manifesto) is "revolution is the answer to change." They both link social conditions with capitalism and believe that overthrowing the current system is the only way to get what you want. Like liberal feminists, socialist or Marxist feminists acknowledge that men are necessary as part of the movement for change. Whatever the theory, socialist and Marxist countries have never had women in major government posts. Women have often achieved ministerial positions in democracies. Rhetoric (what regimes say) does not always line up with what regimes do in practice.

Radical feminism, particularly in the US, developed from civil rights and new left. Radical feminists were largely fed up with the male-dominated left-wing radicalism and formed the Women's Liberation Movement. This was formed to create woman-centered politics and to escape from male-oriented politics. They believed this could only be done in a safe women-only space, and this led to the policy of separatism for which radical feminism is best known. Radical feminists are often misunderstood and seen as "man-hating" because of the way their women-oriented politics seem to reject male input.

Evangelical feminism or 'Christian feminism' was developed from religious movements. Evangelical feminists work to protect and spiritually reform those who need it, such as women and children from outside the church. These feminists believe that everyone is equal under one God and strive to bring that equality to the church and their individual lives.

Equality feminism is a subsection of the feminist movement. Equality feminism's focus on the similarities between the sexes is on the basis that men's and women's abilities are indistinguishable from their biology. This type of feminism encourages women to look beyond the home. Its ultimate goal is for the sexes to be equal in every part of life.

New feminism is a philosophy similar to equality feminism. It focuses on how the differences between men and women complement each other, rather than one sex's biology causing a superiority over the other. New feminism, unlike equality feminism, recognizes the different strengths and roles given to men and women. New feminism advocates for equality in how men and women are treated in their roles in society. Its basic concept is the emphasis placed on important differences being biological rather than cultural. Women should be supported as child bearers, both economically and culturally, but this should not be a role that is forced upon them. The main aim is to emphasize the importance of women and men as individuals and that in all senses (legal, social, economic), they should be equal despite their natural differences.

Global Feminist Thought is primarily the movement for women's rights on a global scale. Women are impacted in different communities around the world and have common problems they face on a day-to-day basis, usually at home or in the workforce. Although different cultural locations have different experiences that will shape their experiences and perceptions, they have common themes. Global feminists tend to focus on nationality. They reach out to help those in developing and third world countries, as well as address oppression created through histories of colonialism and imperialism. It works to end capitalism, imperialism, sexism, and racism, along with having everyone considered equal on a global view. It encourages feminists to confront their problems and seek help, as they are not the only ones experiencing that problem.

Lean-In Feminism is an approach where women act and behave in a toxic manner and justify their actions by messaging if a man behaved the same way they did, he wouldn't get called out on it. Elizabeth Holmes, founder of Theranos; Ellen DeGeneres of Ellen DeGeneres Show; Amy Klobuchar, American senator; Chelsea Handler, American comedian; Zoe Sugg, YouTube vlogger etc. are considered to be prime examples. This is a negative idea of empowerment seen in social movements that posits women in power are unimpeachable and immune to feminist critique simply because they have achieved such high positions. It is hard to distinguish people of this approach from supportive feminists because they often cloak themselves with publicity stunts of advocating for all women to maintain their hegemony (dominance and power) through a kyriarchal system (where multiple unfair structures overlap and reinforce each other).

Writers such as Camille Paglia, Christina Hoff Sommers, Jean Bethke Elshtain, Elizabeth Fox-Genovese and Daphne Patai oppose some forms of feminism, though they identify as feminists. They argue that feminism often promotes misandry (hatred of men) and the elevation of women's interests above men's and criticize radical feminist positions as harmful to both men and women. Daphne Patai and Noretta Koertge argue that the term "anti-feminist" is used to silence academic debate about defects of feminism like lack of intersectionality and visible separatism.

It's a branch of feminism that rejects language and cultural practices used to define body and gender. They accept a person's identity with the openness of accepting the identity chosen by the individual or reflexively as not-yet-known nor necessarily knowable. They are anti-essentialists and reject tenets made by liberal feminists who make truth claims about who is a "real" women.

In mathematics, a function is a mathematical object that produces an output, when given an input (which could be a number, a vector, or anything that can exist inside a set of things).

In essence, a function is like a machine, that takes a value of  and returns an output . The set of all values that  can have is called the domain, and the set that contains every value that  can have is called the codomain. A function is often denoted by italic letters such as , , .

If this happens, then we say that  is a function of , and we write . Here,  is the name of the function, and one writes  (function from X to Y) to represent the three parts of the function: the domain (), the codomain (), and the pairing process (the arrow), or, the mapping from and to the sets.

An example of a function is . One gives a natural number  as the input, and gets a natural number , which is . For example, giving 3 as input to  results in an output of 4.

A function doesn't have to be an equation. The main idea is that inputs and outputs are paired up somehow—even if the process might be very complicated.

The inputs and outputs can be put in a table like the picture; this is easy if there is not too much data.

In the picture, one can see that both 2 and 3 have been paired with c; this is not allowed in the other direction, as 2 could not output c and d at the same time (each input can only have one output).

All of the  ( and  in the picture) are usually called the image set of , and the image set can be the entire codomain or one of its subset.

One can say that the image set of a subset A of the domain is .

If the inputs and outputs have an order, then it is easy to plot them on a graph:

In the 1690s, Gottfried Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli used the word "function" in letters between them, so the modern concept began at the same time as calculus.

In 1748, Leonhard Euler gave the following definition for function:"A function of a variable quantity is an analytic expression composed in any way whatsoever of the variable quantity and numbers or constant quantities."and then in 1755:"If some quantities so depend on other quantities that if the latter are changed the former undergoes change, then the former quantities are called functions of the latter. This definition applies rather widely and includes all ways in which one quantity could be determined by other. If, therefore,  denotes a variable quantity, then all quantities which depend upon  in any way, or are determined by it, are called functions of ."Usually, Peter Dirichlet is credited with the first modern definition of function (formulated in 1837). It was often used in schools until the second half of the 20th century:" is a function of a variable , defined on the interval , if to every value of the variable  in this interval there corresponds a definite value of the variable . Also, it is irrelevant in what way this correspondence is established."In 1939, the Bourbaki generalized the Dirichlet definition, and gave a set-theoretic version of the definition as a correspondence between inputs and outputs; this has been used in schools from about 1960.

Finally in 1970, Bourbaki gave the modern definition as a triple , with  (i.e.  and ).

is called the domain of ,  its codomain, and  its graph. The set of all elements of the form , where  ranges over the elements of the domain , is called the image of . The image of a function is a subset of its codomain and might not coincide with it.

Fascism is a far-right form of government where most of the country's power is held by one ruler or a small group, under one political party.

Under fascism, the government heavily controls a country's economy and other parts of society, usually by using a form of authoritarian corporatism. Under this system, companies and workers are supposed to work together under national unity. A fascist regime uses violence to kill or persecute anyone it does not consider useful.

The power of such totalitarianism comes from engaging and motivating large segments of the population by the way mentioned, while helping voluntarily at every level of society by those agreeing with the same goal is necessary for maintaining the totalitarian state.

Six large fascist countries in history were Italy under Benito Mussolini, Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler's Nazism, the Empire of Japan under Hideki Tojo, Spain under Francisco Franco, Portugal under António Salazar and Leopoldo Galtieri of Argentina.

Mussolini started fascism in Italy in the late 1910s and developed it fully in the 1930s. He came to power in late 1922 and introduced a complete dictatorship in the mid-1920s. He accomplished this by eliminating all other political parties and changing the electoral law to make sure his party got the most seats.

Mussolini wrote a paper called The Doctrine of Fascism in English. He started writing it in 1927, but it was only published in 1932. Most of it was probably written by Giovanni Gentile, an Italian philosopher who joined fascism and became an important influence.

When Hitler came to power in Germany in the 1930s, he copied Mussolini.

The name "fascism" comes from the Italian word  for bundle. That word comes originally from the Latin word , which was an axe surrounded by a bundle of sticks. In Ancient Rome, leaders carried the  as a symbol of their power.

Benito Mussolini started fascism. He was originally a journalist. Then in 1919, he started Italy's fascist party.

He became Italy's prime minister in 1922. He was not elected. His supporters walked into Rome in large numbers, and the king of Italy made him prime minister. Officially, the fascist party in Italy was ruled by a "grand council" from 1922 until the end of World War II. In truth, Benito Mussolini had almost all the power in the country.

According to scholar Ruth Ben-Ghiat, Mussolini believed democracy had failed. He had been a Socialist, but left the movement because he thought it was not strong enough, and it had refused to join the First World War. He believed democracy failed because of social class, and that it was too weak to stand against communism. Under fascism, he believed, people would focus on the nation, and they would cooperate for the good of the country without thinking about social class.

However, Mussolini also believed that to make fascism work, he and his followers had to remove anything that could distract people from the nation. He also believed he should get to decide who in Italy counted as part of the Italian nation. He thought he should have the power to exile or arrest anyone he did not consider a real Italian. He believed it was right to use violence to remove those distractions and those people.

Following these beliefs, groups of people with weapons regularly went out into the streets and beat up or even killed people Mussolini did not like. Mussolini did not allow journalists to write what they wanted. He believed that Italy should be made of white people, so he encouraged white women to have more babies and persecuted people who were not white.

The fascist governments in Italy, Germany, and Japan were removed after they lost World War II. Still, fascism continued in military dictatorships under Salazar in Portugal, Franco in Spain, in some parts of Latin America, Africa, and Asia.

In the 21st century, fascist political movements exist in many countries.

Scholars hold different views on the definition of fascism. Philosopher Jason Stanley of Yale University called fascism

That is, fascism focuses on one person as the leader. It views communism as threatening and claims that at least one group of people is responsible for the nation's problems. Some fascist governments have blamed people from other countries for their problems; others have blamed groups of people within the country.

Under Hitler's fascist Germany, the government blamed "Jewish communists", homosexuals, the disabled, Roma, and other groups for Germany's problems. Hitler's tyranny sent them to death camps to be killed.

American historian Robert Paxton summarized fascism's characteristics as follows:

In 1991, British historian Roger Griffin proposed an alternative definition of fascism. He said fascism is a form of revolutionary nationalism hinged on the unity of a group to achieve a national rebirth (or palingenesis, Koine Greek: παλιγγενεσία), often by mistreating ethnic minorities. In 2003, Laurence W. Britt wrote the 14 Defining Characteristics of Fascism:

One of the reasons fascism spread in the early 20th century was because the Russian Revolution had just happened and people were afraid of communism. Many landowners and business owners supported fascists because they were afraid of what would happen if the country became communist instead.

In her work, The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951), Hannah Arendt compared National Socialism, Stalinism and Maoism. She wrote that these regimes were totalitarian, not fascist.

In 1967, German philosopher Jürgen Habermas warned about a "left-wing fascism" of a protest movement in Germany of the 1960s, commonly known as Ausserparlametarische ("Extra-parliamentary") Opposition (APO).

There is more than one reason why people living in democratic states oppose fascism. The main reason is that in a Fascist government, the individual citizen doesn't always have the option to vote, nor do they have the option to be someone or to live a lifestyle which the fascists see as immoral, useless, or unproductive towards society. For example, LGBT people (like homosexual, cross-dressing, and transgender people) can be arrested and put on trial.

Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1343–25 October 1400) was an English writer, poet, and philosopher. He is most famous for writing Canterbury Tales which had 24 stories but was never completed. He was one of the first writers to write in English. He wrote in Middle English.

Chaucer was probably born in London. His father, John, and grandfather were prosperous wine merchants in London. The name Chaucer is French and means shoemaker. However, not many details are known of his early life and education.

By 1357, Chaucer was a page to Elizabeth, Countess of Ulster, wife of Lionel, 1st Duke of Clarence. In 1360, he was captured by the French near Reims during a battle in the Hundred Years' War. He was then ransomed and released. King Edward III gave £16 towards his release. Chaucer married Phillipa (de) Roet. She was a lady-in-waiting to the queen and had close family connections to John of Gaunt. He had four children:  Elizabeth, Thomas, Agnes and Lewis.

Chaucer may have studied law in the Inner Temple.  He joined the Royal court and travelled around Europe on business for the king. He became one of the king's esquires. One of his first known poems was written in 1369. It was called The Book of The Duchess, and was written after the death of John of Gaunt's wife, Blanche. In 1374, he became Comptroller (in charge of the money) of the Customs for the Port of London. He did this job for 12 years. It was a well paid job and Chaucer was quite rich.

When Richard II became king, Chaucer continued to work in Customs. He was also sent to Europe on several more diplomatic jobs for the king.

Chaucer moved to Kent in 1385 where he had a new position as Justice of the Peace. He was also elected as one of two knights of the shire to be a member of parliament. At the end of the year he lost his customs jobs. His wife, Phillipa, died in 1387. But on 12 July 1389, he was made the Clerk of the Kings Works, looking after repairs to the royal palaces. He was given other small positions, including looking after the river banks of the Thames, and as a deputy forester in the Royal Forest. Over the next few years, Chaucer became poorer and often was given small payments and pensions from the king.

He died at St.Mary's Chapel in Sevenoaks on 25 October 1400. Chaucer is buried in Westminster Abbey, in what is now called the Poets' Corner.

Chaucer did most of his writing between 1369 and 1393. He is famous for his collection of stories in verse called the Canterbury Tales. He also wrote The Book of the Duchess, The House of Fame and Troilus and Criseyde. For these works he is called "the father of English poetry". He also wrote A Treatise on the Astrolabe, an instruction manual.

Frequency is how often an event repeats itself over a set amount of time.

In physics, the frequency of a wave is the number of wave crests that pass a point in one second (a wave crest is the peak of the wave).

The relationship between frequency and wavelength is expressed by the formula:

where v is speed and  (lambda) is wavelength. The formula for the frequency of light waves is  where the c is the speed of light.

All electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light in a vacuum but they travel at slower speeds when they travel through a medium that is not a vacuum. Other waves, such as sound waves, travel at much much lower speeds and can not travel through a vacuum.

Examples of electromagnetic waves are: light waves, radio waves, infrared radiation, microwaves, and gamma waves.

Different types of electromagnetic waves have different frequencies.

One way to visualize this is if there were two trains traveling at the same speed, but the size of the train cars was smaller on one train than the other. If someone picked something that was not moving, like a signpost, and then counted how many train cars passed the sign post in one second for each train, they would know the frequency of cars passing in each train. The number and frequency of train cars passing the sign post would be different, because the train with smaller train cars would have more train cars passing the sign post in a second than the train with larger train cars. Knowing how many cars passed the sign post in one second, and knowing the speed of the train, one could figure out mathematically the size of each train car for each train.

For example, if the train was moving at 10 miles per second, and 10 train cars passed in one second, then each train car would be 1 mile long. If the other train was also moving at 10 miles per second and 20 train cars passed in one second, then one would know that each train car was 1/2 of a mile long for that train. This example shows that knowing the frequency of an electromagnetic wave gives you the wavelength, since all electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light so that c = v (lambda) where v is frequency and lambda is wavelength, and c is the speed of light. Therefore, another way of expressing frequency is to say frequency is c over lambda.

Geology is the study of the nonliving things that the Earth is made of. Geology is the study of rocks in the Earth's crust.  People who study geology are called geologists.  Some geologists study minerals (mineralogist) and the useful substances the rocks contain such as ores and fossil fuels.  Geologists also study the history of the Earth.

Some of the important events in the Earth's history are floods, volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, orogeny (mountain building), and plate tectonics (movement of continents).

Geology is divided into special subjects that study one part of geology. Some of these subjects and what they focus on are:

Rocks can be very different from each other.  Some are very hard and some are soft.  Some rocks are very common, while others are rare.  However, all the different rocks belong to three categories or types, igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic.

All three kinds of rocks can be changed by being heated and squeezed by forces in the Earth. When this happens, faults (cracks) may appear in the rock. Geologists can learn a lot about the history of the rock by studying the patterns of the fault lines. Earthquakes are caused when a fault breaks suddenly.

Soil is the stuff on the ground made of lots of particles (or tiny pieces). The particles of soil come from rocks that have broken down, and from rotting leaves and animals bodies. Soil covers a lot of the surface of the Earth. Plants of all sorts grow in soil.

To find out more about types of rocks, see the rock (geology) article.

Geologists use some simple ideas which help them to understand the rocks they are studying. The following ideas were worked out in the early days of stratigraphy by people like Nicolaus Steno, James Hutton and William Smith:

Fiction is any story created by humans, originating from the depths of human imagination. It is not based on real-life events or actual people, but rather represents a departure from reality, allowing for the exploration of ideas, emotions, and scenarios that may not exist in the real world.

The opposite of fiction is non-fiction, writing that deals with facts and true events. Often in a library, part of the library is for fiction books and another part of the library is for non-fiction.

The word fiction comes from the Latin word fictum, which means "created". This is a good way to remember what fiction is: if it has been created or made up by somebody, it is fiction. Fiction can be written or told, or acted on stage, in a movie, on television or radio. Usually the purpose of fiction is to .

However, the dividing line is not always so clear. Fiction with real people or events in it is called historical fiction, because it is based on things that happened in history. This type of fiction is written so that we can imagine and understand what it was like when those people were alive.  Reality can be presented through creative writing, and imagination can open the reader's mind to significant thoughts about the real world.

In fiction, there are always characters. There is usually a protagonist, or hero. Sometimes this is a group of people, not one person. You usually support the hero (or heroes.) The protagonist has to face some kind of enemy, usually another character called the antagonist, or villain. The fight between the protagonist and their enemy is called the conflict.

Plot is a literary term. It is the events that make up a story, particularly as they relate to one another. The events may form a pattern. That pattern may be a sequence, through cause and effect, or  how the reader views the story, or simply by coincidence. (For example, at the start. a puppy hunged by a tree branch. At the middle, someone sees that puppy is about to fall. At the end, someone saves the puppy.)

In his Poetics, Aristotle considered plot (mythos) the most important element of drama—more important than character, for example. A plot must have, Aristotle says, a beginning, a middle, and an end, and the events of the plot must causally relate to one another as being either necessary or probable.

Of the utmost importance to Aristotle is the plot's ability to arouse emotion in the psyche of the audience. In tragedy, the emotions are fear and pity, emotions which he considers in his Rhetoric.

Gustav Freytag considered plot a  structure that divided a story into five parts, like the five acts of a play. These parts are: exposition (of the situation); rising action (through conflict); climax (or turning point); falling action; and resolution.

The climax is the most dangerous and exciting part of the plot. For example, if you were on a rollercoaster, the highest part would be the climax.

The climax usually near to the end of the story, because the whole story has been building up to it (rising action). In an action drama  it is the point when the hero or heroine looks like s/he is about to lose, and is in the greatest danger.

Conflict is very important in fiction. Every work of fiction needs a conflict, or problem. There are five basic types of conflict. In modern times, a new one, "Person vs. Technology", has been used.

Person vs. Self is when a character is facing his own fears,  or philosophy. Sometimes the character tries to find out who he or she is, and comes to realize it or change it. Sometimes the character struggles to find out what is right or wrong. Although the enemy is inside the character, they can be influenced by outside forces. The struggle of the human being to come to a decision is the base of this type of conflict.

Person vs. Person is when the hero is fighting another person. There is usually more than one time that the hero meets the enemy. For example, if a child is being bullied, that is person vs. person conflict. An example is the conflict between Judah and Messala in .

Person vs. Society is when the hero's main source of conflict is traditions or ideas. The protagonist is basically fighting what is wrong with the world he lives in. Society itself is often treated as a single character, just as another person is in person vs. person conflict. An example in literature would be Wuthering Heights by Emily Brontë.

Person vs. Nature is when a character is fighting against forces of nature. Many films focus on this theme.  It is also found in stories about trying to  in places far away from humans, like Jack London's short story To Build a Fire.

Person vs. Supernatural is when a character is battling supernatural forces. Sometimes, this force is inside themselves, it is internal. Such stories are sometimes used to represent or  Freud's theory of id vs. superego. Bram Stoker's Dracula is a good example of this, as well as Frankenstein by Mary Shelley and Christabel by Samuel Coleridge. It is also very common in comic books.

Person vs. Machine/Technology places a character against robot forces with artificial intelligence.  I, Robot and the Terminator series are good examples of this conflict.

Fossil fuels are fuels that come from old life forms that decomposed over a long period of time.  The three most important fossil fuels are coal, petroleum, and natural gas.

Petroleum and gas are hydrocarbons (molecules that have only hydrogen and carbon in them).  Coal is mostly carbon. These fuels are called fossil fuels because they are dug up from underground. Coal mining digs up solid fuel; gas and oil wells bring up liquid fuel. Fossil fuel was not much used until the Middle Ages. Coal became the main kind of fuel with the Industrial Revolution.

Most of the fuels that people burn, are fossil fuels. A big use is to make electricity. In power plants fossil fuels, usually coal, are burned to heat water into steam, which pushes a fan-like object called a turbine. When the turbine spins around, magnets inside the turbine make electricity.

Crude oil (petroleum) can be separated to make various fuels such as LPG, gasoline, kerosene, jet fuel, and diesel fuel.  These substances are made by fractional distillation in an oil refinery.  They  are the main fuels in transportation. That means that they are burned in order to move cars, trucks, ships, airplanes, trains and even spacecraft.  Without them, there wouldn't be much transport.

People also burn fossil fuels to heat their homes. They use coal less for this than they did long ago, because it makes things dirty. In many homes, people burn natural gas in a stove for cooking.

All fossil fuels come from the periods in Earth's history when the Earth had huge tropical forests. In those periods, plants lived, grew and died, faster than they decayed. In other words, they were times when much of the dead vegetation did not entirely decompose. Instead it became coal and related substances such as peat.

The times of the great wetlands which produced coal and peat were in the Upper Carboniferous (Pennsylvanian), continuing in the first part of the Permian; the Jurassic and Eocene periods. Virtually all the worlds' coal dates to those periods.

Most air pollution comes from burning fossil fuels. This can be reduced by making the combustion process more efficient, and by using various techniques to reduce the escape of harmful gases. This pollution is responsible for causing the earth to get warmer, called global warming. They are non-renewable resources; there is only a limited amount of coal, gas, and oil, and it is not possible to make more. Eventually fossil fuels will be too scarce to use. Peak oil may have already been reached, and some economists think coal will run out by 2200.

Renewable energy sources like biomass energy such as firewood are being used.  Countries are also increasing the use of wind power, tidal energy, and solar energy to generate electricity.  Some governments are helping automobile makers to develop electric cars and hybrid cars that will use less oil.

Franz Kafka (born Prague July 3, 1883 – died near Vienna June 3, 1924) was a Czech-born, German-speaking writer. His best known works are The Metamorphosis and the novels The Trial and The Castle. Not much of his work was published during his lifetime. He asked his friend to make sure that all his writings which were not published, including his three novels, would be destroyed when he died. However, his friend did not destroy them, and they were published after Kafka’s death.

Kafka’s writings are about the frightening world around him which he often did not understand. A typical situation in his books might be someone who has gone somewhere to take a message, but he does not know what the message is or who it is for. The people he meets confuse him even more. Sometimes, when people find themselves in strange, nightmarish situations like this, they are described as Kafkaesque situations.

Kafka was born into a middle-class Jewish family. His father was a merchant. He was very strict and unkind to his family. Kafka’s stories often have fathers who are very brutal and unkind. Kafka spent most of his life living at home. He never married or became free from his parents. He felt that he had no will of his own. He wrote about people who are dominated by some mysterious power. He found it difficult to make friends, he hated his job and everyone around him. He often felt that he belonged nowhere. He was German-speaking but lived in a Czech-speaking country (Bohemia, part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, now part of the Czech Republic). He was different because he was Jewish, but he did not become part of the Jewish community either. He said that he was a socialist and an atheist, but although he was interested in politics he never took part in political activity. He supported Czechs who wanted to rule their own country and let their culture flourish, but he was not one of them because he himself was brought up in a German culture.

It was while he was studying law at the University of Prague that he met Max Brod who was to become his friend. Brod was a writer himself, and he later wrote a biography of Kafka.

After his studies Kafka took a job in an insurance company. He was good at his job although he hated it. He found the office work boring, and he spent his nights writing. In 1917 he got tuberculosis. Gradually he became more and more ill. He had to retire in 1922. He spent some time in hospital. He died in Klosterneuburg in 1924.

Several publishers asked Kafka whether they could publish his works. Kafka reluctantly let a few be published. One of these works was a story called The Metamorphosis. It is about a man called Gregor Samsa (the name “Samsa” means "loner" or "lonely"). Gregor wakes up one morning to find he has changed into a giant cockroach. His family becomes ashamed of him and they stop looking after him so that he slowly dies. Stories like these are a kind of fable. They are full of strange and frightening situations.

His novel Amerika (published in 1927) is about a man who arrives in America looking for a father figure to protect him. He is quiet and timid and other people use him. In the end he dies.

In The Trial (German: Der Prozess, published in 1925), a man who works in a bank is arrested and taken to court. He is never told what he has done wrong. Even the priest tells him that if he asks what he has done wrong it proves that he is guilty. Finally he is executed.

In The Castle (German: Das Schloss) a man who is simply called “K” (the first letter of “Kafka”) arrives at a castle saying that he has been given a job there, but the people there say they have not been told about his appointment. Kafka never finished the novel, but Max Brod says that Kafka was going to end it with K receiving permission to stay at the castle just as he was dying. The German word “Schloss” has two meanings: “castle” and “lock”. K becomes locked (trapped) in this strange situation.

At the time of his death only a few people understood Kafka’s writings. Max Brod saved all the unpublished books which would otherwise have been lost. Kafka is now thought of as one of the most important writers of the 20th century. His works had a lot of influence on German literature.

The French Revolution was a revolution in France from 1789 to 1799.  It ended the French monarchy. The revolution began with a meeting of the Estates General in Versailles, and ended when Napoleon Bonaparte took power in November 1804.

Before 1789, France was ruled by the nobles and the Catholic Church. The ideas of the Enlightenment were beginning to make the ordinary people want more power. They could see that the American Revolution had created a country in which the people had power, instead of a king. The government before the revolution was called the "Ancien Régime".

Before the Revolution, France was divided into three Estates. The First Estate was the clergy. It was 1% of the population. The Second Estate was the nobles,  also 1% of the population. The other nearly 98% of the population was in the Third Estate. Representatives of the people from all three estates together made up the Estates-General. The Estates General first met in 1302 and 1303, and occasionally met in later centuries.

In May 1789, the Estates-General was called by King Louis in order to deal with the money problems of the country. They met at the royal Palace of Versailles. However, the members of the Third Estate were angry. They had made lists of problems they wanted to fix called the Cahiers de Doléance. They  were angry that they were being taxed the most when they were the poorest group of people. They, and the Director-General of Finances, Jacques Necker, thought the Church and the Nobility ought to be taxed more.

They also wanted votes in the Estates-General to be more fair. Even though the Third Estate had many more members than the other two Estates, each Estate only had one vote in the Estates-General. The Third Estate thought this could be improved by giving members of the Estates-General a vote each. However, when they talked to the other Estates, they could not agree.

Since the First and Second Estates would not listen, The Third Estate decided to break away and start their own assembly where every member would get a vote. On 10 June 1789, they started the National Assembly. The king tried to stop them by closing the Salle des États meeting room, but they met in an indoor tennis court instead. On June 20, they took the Tennis Court Oath, where they promised to work until they had created a new constitution for France.

In July 1789, after the National Assembly was formed, the nobility and the king were angry with Jacques Necker, the Director-General of Finances, and they fired him. Many Parisians thought that the King was going to shut down the National Assembly. Soon, Paris was filled with riots and looting.

On 14 July 1789, the people decided to attack the Bastille prison. The Bastille contained weapons, as well as being a symbol of the power of the nobility and the rule of the king. By the afternoon, the people had broken into the Bastille and released the seven prisoners being held there.

The Members of the Third Estate took over Paris. The president of the National Assembly at the time of the Tennis Court Oath, Jean-Sylvain Bailly, became mayor of the city. Jacques Necker was given back his job as Director-General of Finances. Soon, the King visited Paris and wore the red, white and blue (tricolor) ribbons (cockade) that the revolutionaries were wearing. By the end of July, the revolution had spread all over France.

The National Assembly began to make lots of changes. On August 4th, the National Assembly ended the special taxes the Church was collecting, and put a stop to the rights of the nobility over their people, ending feudalism. On August 26th, the National Assembly published the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, which was written by the nobleman Marquis de Lafayette.

The National Assembly began to decide how it would be under the new constitution. Many members, especially the nobles, wanted a senate or a second upper house. However, more people voted to keep having just one assembly. The King was given a suspensive veto over laws, which meant he would only have the power to delay laws being made, not stop them. In October 1789, after being attacked at the Palace of Versailles by a mob of 7,000 women, the King was convinced by Lafayette to move from Paris to the palace in the Tuileries.

The Assembly began to divide into different political parties. One was made up of those against the revolution, led by the nobleman Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazales and the churchman Jean-Sifrien Maury. This party sat on the right side. A second party was the Royalist democrats (monarchists) which wanted to create a system like the constitutional monarchy of Britain, where the king would still be a part of the government. Jacques Necker was in this party. The third party was the National Party which was centre or centre-left. This included Honoré Mirabeau and Lafayette.

Under the new government, the Roman Catholic Church had much less power than they had before. In 1790, all special taxes and powers of the Church were cancelled.  All the Church’s property was taken over by the state.  On 12 July 1790, the Civil Constitution of the Clergy made all clergy employees of the state and made them take an oath to the new constitution.  Many clergy, as well as the Pope, Pius VI, did not like these changes.  Revolutionaries killed hundreds for refusing the oath.

On 14 July 1790, a year since the storming of the Bastille, thousands of people gathered in the Champs de Mars to celebrate. Charles Maurice de Talleyrand led the crowd in a religious mass. The crowd, including the King and the royal family, took an oath of loyalty to “the nation, the law, and the king.” However, many nobles were unhappy with the revolution and were leaving the country. They were called émigrés (emigrants).

Although the members of the Estates-General had only been elected for a year, the members of the Assembly had all taken the Tennis Court Oath. They had promised to keep working until they had a constitution and no constitution had been made. It was decided that the members would keep working until they had a constitution. The Assembly continued to work on a constitution and make changes. Nobles could no longer pass their titles to their children. Only the king was allowed to do this. For the first time, trials with juries were held. All trade barriers inside France were ended along with unions, guilds, and workers' groups. Strikes were banned.

Many people with radical ideas began to form political clubs. The most famous of these was the Jacobin Club, which had left-wing ideas. A right-wing club was the Club Monarchique. In 1791, a law was suggested to prevent noble émigrés from leaving the country. Mirabeau had been against this law, but he died on 2 April, and by the end of the year, the law was passed.

Louis XVI did not like the revolution, but did not want to get help from other countries or run away from France like the émigrés. General Bouille held the same views and wanted to help the king leave Paris. He said that he would give the King and his family help and support in his camp at Montmédy. The  was planned for June 20, 1791.

Dressed as servants, the royal family left Paris. However, their escape was not well planned, and they were arrested at Varennes on the evening of June 21. The royal family was brought back to Paris. The Assembly imprisoned Louis and his wife Marie Antoinette, and suspended the king from his duty.

Although the king had tried to escape, most members of the Assembly still wanted to include the king in their government rather than to have a Republic with no king at all. They agreed to make the king a figurehead, with very little power. The king would have to take an oath to the state. If he did not, or if he created an army to attack France, he would no longer be king.

Some people, including Jacques Pierre Brissot, did not like this. They thought the king should be completely removed from the throne and the constitution. Brissot made a petition and a huge crowd came to the Champs de Mars to sign it. Republican leaders Georges Danton and Camille Desmoulins came and gave speeches.

The National Guard, led by Lafayette, was called in to control the crowd. The mob threw stones at the soldiers who first fired their guns over the heads of the crowd. When the crowd kept throwing stones, Lafayette ordered them to fire at the people. Up to 50 people were killed. After this, the government closed many of the political clubs and newspapers. Many radical left-wing leaders, including Danton and Desmoulins, ran away to England or hid in France.

Finally the constitution was completed. Louis XVI was put back on the throne and came to take his oath to it. He wrote, “I engage to maintain it at home, to defend it from all attacks from abroad, and to cause its execution by all the means it places at my disposal.” The National Assembly decided that it would stop governing France on 29 September 1791. After that date, the Legislative Assembly would take over.

The new Legislative Assembly met for the first time in October 1791. Under the Constitution of 1791, France was a constitutional monarchy. The King shared his rule with the Legislative Assembly, but had the power to stop (veto) laws he did not like. He also had the power to choose ministers.

The Legislative Assembly had about 745 members. 260 of them were “Feuillants”, or Constitutional Monarchists. 136 were Girondins and Jacobins, left-wing liberal republicans who did not want a king. The other 345 members were independent, but they voted most often with the left wing.

The Legislative Assembly did not agree very well. The King used his veto to stop laws that would sentence émigrés to death. Because so many of the members of the Assembly were left-wing, they did not like this.

The people were turning against King Louis XVI. On 10 August 1792, the members of a revolutionary group called the Paris Commune attacked the Tuileries, where the King and Queen were living. The King and Queen were taken prisoner. The Legislative Assembly held an emergency meeting. Even though only a third of the members were there and most of them were Jacobins, they suspended the King from duty.

The kings and emperors of many foreign countries were worried by the French Revolution. They did not want revolutions in their own countries. On 27 August 1791, Leopold II of the Holy Roman Empire/Austria, Frederick William II of Prussia, and Louis XVI’s brother-in-law, Charles-Philippe wrote the Declaration of Pillnitz. The Declaration asked for Louis XVI to be set free and the National Assembly to be ended. They said that they would invade France if their requests were ignored. The Declaration was taken very seriously among the revolutionaries.

With the Legislative Assembly in place, the problems did not go away. The Girondins wanted war because they wanted to take the revolution to other countries. The King and many of his supporters, the Feuillants, wanted war because they thought it would make the King more popular. Many French were worried that the émigrés would cause trouble in foreign countries against France.

On 20 April 1792, the Assembly voted to declare war on Austria (Holy Roman Empire). They planned to invade the Austrian Netherlands, but the revolution had made the army weak. Many soldiers deserted. Soon, Prussia joined on the Austrian side. They both planned to invade. Together, on 25 July, they wrote the Brunswick Manifesto, promising that if the royal family was not hurt, no civilians would be hurt in the invasion. The French believed that this meant the king, Louis XVI, was working with the foreign kings. Prussia invaded France on 1 August, 1792. This first stage of the French Revolutionary Wars continued until 1797.

In September, things got worse. The Legislative Assembly had almost no power. No single group was controlling Paris or France. The country was being invaded by the Prussian Army. The revolutionaries were very angry and violent. They began to go into prisons and kill people they thought were traitors to France. They hated the priests of the Roman Catholic Church the most, but they also killed many nobles and ordinary people. By 7 September, 1,400 people were dead.

The Legislative Assembly had lost all its power. France needed a new government. On 20 September 1792, the National Convention was formed. The Convention had both Girondins and radical Jacobins.

The Brunswick Manifesto had made many people suspicious of the king. They thought he was plotting with the Prussian and Austrian rulers to invade France. In January 1793, the National Convention voted and found Louis XVI guilty of “conspiracy against the public liberty and the general safety.” On the twenty-first of January, the King was executed using the guillotine. Marie Antoinette, the Queen, was executed on the sixteenth of October.

People in the area of Vendée did not like the revolutionary government. They did not like the rules about the church in the Civil Constitution of the Church (1790) and new taxes put in place in 1793. They also disliked being forced to join the French army. In March, they rose up against the government in a revolt. The war lasted until 1796. Hundreds of thousands of people from Vendée (Vendeans) were killed by the Revolutionary French army.

Now that the king was dead, the National Convention made a new republican constitution that began on 24 June. It was the first one that did not include the king and gave every man in France a vote. However, it never came into force because of the trouble between the Jacobins and Girondins. The war with Austria and Prussia was causing the state to have money problems. Bread was very expensive and many people wanted things to change. In June 1793, the Jacobins began to take power. They wanted to arrest Girondin members of the National Convention. In July, they became angrier when Charlotte Corday, a Girondin, killed Jean-Paul Marat, a Jacobin.

By July, the coup was complete. The Jacobins had taken power. They put in new, radical laws including a new Republican Calendar with new months and new ten-day weeks. They made the army bigger and changed the officers to people who were better soldiers. Over the next few years, this helped the Republican army push back the attacking Austrians, Prussians, British, and Spanish.

In July 1793, a Jacobin called Maximilien de Robespierre and eight other leading Jacobins set up the Committee of Public Safety. It was the most powerful group in France. This group and Robespierre were responsible for the Reign of Terror. Robespierre believed that if people were afraid, the revolution would go better. The Reign of Terror lasted from the spring of 1793 to the spring of 1794.

It was not only the nobility who died in the Reign of Terror. Anyone who broke the Jacobins' laws, or was even suspected of breaking their laws or working against them, could be arrested and sent to the guillotine, most without a trial. Even powerful people who had been involved in the Jacobin coup were executed. Prisoners were taken from the prisons to “Madame Guillotine” (a nickname for the guillotine) in an open wooden cart called the tumbrel. According to records, 16,594 people were executed with the guillotine. It is possible that up to 40,000 people died in prison or were killed during the Reign of Terror.

By July 1794, people began to turn against Maximilien de Robespierre. He and his Revolutionary Tribunal had killed 1,300 people in six weeks. On 27 July, the National Convention and the Committee of Public Safety turned against him. Robespierre tried to get help from the Convention’s right-wing members, but he failed. A day later, Robespierre and many of his supporters in the Paris Commune were sentenced to death by guillotine without any kind of trial. This reaction against Robespierre is called the Thermidorian Reaction.

Now that the terror was over, the National Convention started to make a new Constitution, called the Constitution of the Year III. On 27 September 1794, the constitution came into effect.

The new constitution had created the Directories (Directory), which was the first government of France to be bicameral (split into two houses). The lower house, the parliament, had 500 members. It was called the Conseil de Cinq-Cent (Council of Five Hundred). The upper house, the senate, had 250 members and was called the Conseil des Anciens (Council of Elders). There were five directors chosen every year by the Conseil des Anciens from a list made up by the Conseil de Cinq-Cent. This group was in charge and was called the Directory.

Although the constitution of 1793 had given all men in France a vote, in this constitution only people with a certain amount of property could vote. The Directory was much more than the governments in France since 1789. The people were tired of radical changes and the unstable governments. Things were much more stable under the Directory than they had been before.

However, the Directors were disliked by the people - especially the Jacobins, who wanted a republic, and the royalists, who wanted a new King. France’s money problems did not go away. The Directors ignored elections that did not go the way they wanted. They ignored the constitution in order to do things to control the people. They used the ongoing war and the army to keep their power.

The Coup of 18 Brumaire brought General Napoleon Bonaparte to power as First Consul of France on 9 November 1799. In the view of most historians it ended the French Revolution. This bloodless coup d'état overthrew the Directory, replacing it with the French Consulate.

The 18 Brumaire marks the end of the Republican part of the French Revolution when Napoleon Bonaparte took control.

Fryderyk Franciszek Chopin (1 March 1810 – 17 October 1849; pronounced SHOH-pen) was a Polish composer and virtuoso pianist. He is considered one of the greatest Romantic piano composers. Chopin was born in Żelazowa Wola, a village in the Duchy of Warsaw. A famous child prodigy, he grew up in Warsaw where he completed his music education and composed many of his mature works before leaving Poland in 1830 at age 20, shortly before the November 1830 Uprising.

After the Uprising, he lived in Paris as part of Poland's Great Emigration. During the last 19 years of his life, Chopin performed only about 30 times, usually in a salon. He supported himself by selling his compositions and teaching piano. After a romantic relationship with Polish women, including an abortive engagement, from 1837 to 1847 he carried on a relationship with the French writer Amandine Dupin, better known as George Sand.

Since he composed many piano pieces, he was called the poet of the piano. Most of Chopin's works are for solo piano, though he also wrote two piano concertos, a few chamber pieces and some songs to Polish lyrics. His piano works are often technically difficult, especially because deep expression is involved along with the importance of considering each detail in his music. Chopin also created the instrumental ballade, along with the addition of new ideas to the piano sonata, mazurka, waltz, nocturne, polonaise, études, impromptu, scherzo and prélude. All of Chopin's works involve the piano, and for composing them he was using a number of them. While living in Warsaw, Chopin played on a Buchholtz piano. Later in Paris he preferred an instrument from Pleyel. Both of these instruments were recreated in the 21st century to help listeners hear Chopin's works played on pianos that they were written for.

Chopin suffered from poor health most of his life and died of tuberculosis in Paris in 1849 at age 39.

George Frideric Handel (German: Georg Friedrich Händel) (23 February 1685 – 14 April 1759) was an German composer who went to live in England when he was a young man and later became a naturalised Briton. Johann Sebastian Bach and Handel were born in the same year. They were the greatest composers of their time, but they never met. Handel changed his name to George Frideric Handel when he became British; he removed the dots above the "a" and changed the spelling of Georg and Friedrich. The German spelling of his name (Georg Friedrich Händel) is still used by German writers.

Although they both lived in the late Baroque period, Bach and Handel’s music developed differently. Handel wrote many operas and oratorios and by them became very famous. He took many trips, including to Italy where he learned a lot about composition. Bach never left central Germany, and most of the time he was a church musician who was not well known by the general public.

Handel wrote over 42 operas. Later he wrote oratorios. His most famous oratorio is the Messiah. He wrote anthems, chamber music and orchestral music including the Water Music and Music for the Royal Fireworks.

Handel was born in Halle in the northeast of Germany, in today's Saxony-Anhalt. His father was a barber and a surgeon. He started playing the harpsichord and the organ when he was very young. He was given a clavichord when he was seven and he used to practice it in the attic where his father could not hear him. At the age of nine he was already composing. He had a teacher called Friedrich Wilhelm Zachow who was the organist of the big church, the Marienkirche, in Halle. He learned the organ, harpsichord and violin as well as composition, harmony.

Handel’s father did not want him to study music; he wanted him to be a lawyer. Although Handel's father died in 1697, Handel enrolled at the University of Halle in 1703. He studied law for a year because his father wanted him to do so. After that year, Handel was unhappy studying law. He decided to stop studying law and become a musician. He became organist at the Protestant Cathedral in Halle. The next year he moved to Hamburg where he got a job as violinist and harpsichordist in the orchestra of the opera-house. Here his first two operas, Almira and Nero, were produced early in 1705. Two other early operas, Daphne and Florindo, were produced at Hamburg in 1708.

Handel was becoming a good opera composer, but he wanted to learn more, so he went to Italy in 1707. He spent four years there. His opera Rodrigo was produced in Florence in 1707, and his Agrippina at Venice in 1709. Agrippina was very popular and had 26 performances. It made Handel famous. He also had three oratorios produced in Rome. He wrote sacred music (church music) and other pieces in an operatic style, e.g. Dixit Dominus (1707).

In 1710, Handel became Kapellmeister (music director) to George, Elector of Hanover, who would soon be King George I of Great Britain. The Elector agreed that Handel could have an immediate leave of 12 months so that he could go to London. He visited London for eight months. His opera Rinaldo was performed in 1711. It was the first time an Italian opera had been performed in England. It was an immediate success. Handel returned to Hanover in the summer of 1711 and spent a year writing chamber and orchestral music because there was no opera in Hanover. He was also trying to learn English. In 1712 the Elector allowed him to make another visit to England. In England he had patrons (rich people who gave him money). He had a yearly income of £200 from Queen Anne (while Bach earned as little as eighty pounds in a year). He was having a lot of success, and so stayed in England instead of returning to his job in the Hanover Court.

In 1714, Queen Anne died and the Elector of Hanover became King of Great Britain. Handel might have been in trouble for staying in Britain. According to one story the King forgave Handel because he wrote some lovely music called Water Music which was performed on a boat on the Thames at a royal water party. This story about the king forgiving Handel is probably not true. George would have known that Queen Anne was about to die and he would become King of Great Britain and therefore Handel's master again. In fact, the new king doubled Handel’s salary. A few years later his salary increased again when he taught music to Queen Caroline’s daughter.

In 1724, Handel moved into a newly built house in 25 Brook Street, London, which he rented until his death in 1759, 35 years later. The house is now called Handel House Museum and is open to the public. It was here that Handel composed some of his most famous music such as Messiah, Zadok the Priest, and Fireworks Music.

In 1729, Handel's opera Scipio (Scipio) was performed for the first time. The march from this work is now the regimental slow march of the British Grenadier Guards. In the next year he took on British nationality.

In 1731, Handel was commissioned to write four anthems for the coronation ceremony of King George II. One of these, Zadok the Priest, has been sung at every coronation ceremony since.

Handel spent most of his time working on operas. From 1722 to 1726, he was director of the Royal Academy of Music. This was an organisation that put on opera performances. It had nothing to do with the academy which is called the Royal Academy of Music today where young students study music. Handel also worked in the management of the King's Theatres and many of his operas were performed in the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden. He sometimes travelled to Italy to find new Italian singers and persuade them to come to London. London became world-famous for operas. In spite of everything Handel was doing for opera he had many enemies as well as friends. There was a lot of rivalry, especially with a composer called Bononcini whose music is forgotten today. Handel gave up operatic management in 1740, after he had lost a lot of money in the business.

In April 1739, age 54, he had a stroke. It was probably this which left his right arm paralysed for a while so that he could not perform, but he made an excellent recovery after six weeks at a health spa in Aix-la-Chapelle. At this time he started to write oratorios instead of operas. In 1742 his oratorio Messiah was first performed in Dublin. Surprisingly, it was not successful in London until 1750 when it was performed in aid of the Foundling Hospital Chapel. Handel performed it every year there, which brought the hospital about £600 for each performance. Handel spent most of his time in these later years composing and producing oratorios. Judas Maccabaeus was particularly popular. The singers for these oratorios were English and Italian. They were not world-famous virtuosos but singers whom Handel had trained himself.

In August, 1750, on a journey back from Germany to London, Handel was seriously injured when his carriage overturned. In 1751 he started to lose his eyesight. He died, in 1759, in London. The last concert he went to was his own Messiah. More than 3,000 mourners went to his funeral. He was buried with full state honours in Westminster Abbey. Handel never married, and kept his personal life very private. He left £20,000 which was a lot of money for those days (Approximately 2,800,000 pounds today) His niece inherited most of his money. He also left some of it to friends, servants, relations and charities. His autographs (the original copies of the music that he wrote) are now mostly in the British Museum.

Handel adopted the spelling "George Frideric Handel" on his naturalization as a British subject, and this spelling is generally used in English speaking countries. The original form of his name (Georg Friedrich Händel) is usually used in Germany, but he is known as "Haendel" in France. There was another composer with a similar name, Handl, who was a Slovene and is more commonly known as Jacobus Gallus. This can be very hard for cataloguers (people trying to make a list of his music).

The Ganges (English pronunciation: /ˈɡændʒiːz/ GAN-jeez), also called the Ganga (, , ; Ganga IPA: [ˈɡəŋɡaː]; Bengali: গঙ্গা Gonga), is the third largest river on the Indian subcontinent by discharge. The Ganges river is named after a Hindu goddess called Ganga. Geographers, Historians and Mythologists alike regard Ganges as the heart of Indian culture, tradition and living.

The government declared that the Ganges river between Allahabad and Haldia is National-Waterway No.1. The river has many industrial towns like Patliputra, Kannauj, Kanpur, Kara, Prayagraj, Varanasi, Ghazipur, Bhagalpur,Munger, Murshidabad,Baharampur and Kolkata on its banks. The Ganges Basin drains 1,000,000-square-kilometre (390,000 sq mi) and supports one of the world's highest densities of humans. The average depth of the river is 52 feet (17 m), and the maximum depth, 100 feet (33 m).

The river starts from a glacier called Gangotri Glacier, which is in the Garhwal region in Himalayas. The Ganges flows through north India, and ends at the Bay of Bengal in eastern India. Overall it flows 3,877 km making it one of the longest rivers in the world. Its watershed is 907,000 km² broad. The major rivers which flow into the Ganges are Brahmaputra River, Gomti, Kosi river, Gandak, Ghaghra river, Yamuna river and Son river.

The Ganges flows only 200 km through the Himalayas. The river touches plain land in the Rishikesh region near Haridwar in Uttarakhand. Then it passes through the towns of Kanpur, Soron, Kannauj, Allahabad, Varanasi, Patna, Ghazipur, Bhagalpur, Mirzapur, Ballia, Buxar, Saidpur, and Chunar. At Allahabad, the river joins with Yamuna river.

At Pakur, the river divides itself into two distributaries, viz.- the Bhāgirathi-Hooghly and the main stream. Bhāgirathi-Hooghly in the later course forms the Hooghly River. The main stream Ganges enters Bangladesh.

Near the border with Bangladesh the Farakka Barrage controls the flow of the Ganges by diverting some of the water into a feeder canal which has link with the Hooghly river to keep it relatively silt-free. The river breaks up into multiples branches at its delta.

There is a lot of pollution in the Ganges because many locals tend to release their waste into it. This causes a lot of sicknesses like cholera, hepatitis, typhoid, and amoebic dysentery. The presence of coliform bacteria in the waters has increased well above normal. This is a major cause of water pollution. These diseases cause about a third of the deaths in India every year. That is why the government has started a multi-crore project called the Ganga Action Plan (GAP).

During the early Vedic Age, the Indus and the Sarasvati River were the major rivers of the Indian subcontinent, not the Ganges. But the later three Vedas seem to give much more importance to the Ganges, as shown by its numerous references. Possibly the first European Traveler to mention the Ganges was Megasthenes (ca. 350 – 290 BCE). In Rome's Piazza Navona, Fontana dei Quattro Fiumi (fountain of the four rivers) was designed by Gian Lorenzo Bernini and built in 1651. The art-work symbolizes four of the world's great rivers (the Ganges, the Nile, the Danube, and the Río de la Plata), which is to represent the four continents (Australia and Antarctica were unknown then).

Hindus regard the Ganges as not only a river but also a mother, a goddess, a tradition, a culture, and much more. In Hinduism it is considered holy to take a pilgrimage to the Ganges and take a dip. Many Hindus believe that bathing in the Ganga can purify a person's soul of all past sins, and some believe that it can also cure illnesses. So, many Hindu families keep Ganga water in their homes as they consider it to be very pure. The holy towns like Haridwar, Prayagraj, Kanpur, and Varanasi attract thousands of pilgrims. Thousands of Hindu pilgrims arrive at these towns to bathe in the Ganges. In Hinduism people's ashes are consecrated into the Ganges as it is a sacred river.

According to Hindu Puranas a king named Bhagiratha did Tapasya for many years to bring the River Ganges. Ganges was then residing in the Heavens. By the help of pure Ganga waters, Bhagirath wanted to release his ancestors of a curse. Therefore, the Ganges descended to the Earth to make the earth pious, fertile and wash out the sins of humans.

The water of the Ganges is used extensively in agriculture in the fertile Gangetic plains. Chief crops cultivated in the area include rice, sugarcane, lentils, oil seeds, potatoes, and wheat.

Along the banks of the river, the swamps and lakes provide a good growing area for crops such as legumes, chillies, mustard, sesame, sugarcane, and jute. Fishing is also done in the Ganga waters.

Industries which require a large amount of water are set up on the banks of the river. The Ganges is popular for river rafting, which attract many adventurers in the summer months. Tourism is also a related activity in modern times.

Franz Peter Schubert (31 January 1797, Vienna  19 November 1828, Vienna) was an Austrian composer. Although he died at the age of 31, he composed over one thousand pieces of music. There were other great composers who lived and worked in Vienna: Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven, but Schubert is the only one who was born in Vienna. He was the last great composer of the Classical music period, and one of the first of the Romantic period.

Schubert’s father was a schoolteacher. Twelve children were born into the family, but only four of them lived to become adults. Schubert's father tried to persuade his sons to help at the school when they grew up. As a boy, the young Franz learned the violin, piano, organ, singing and harmony. He soon became very good at them all. His teachers were all amazed at how quickly he learned. He was also very good at other subjects in school.

In the holidays he played string quartets with his two brothers and his father. He wrote his first string quartets for them to play. By the age of 16 he had composed a lot of music, including his first symphony. His mother died. His father soon remarried. His stepmother was very kind to him and often lent him money. He had one strange thumb on his right hand.

At the age of 17, Schubert was teaching at his father’s school. He had been rejected by the army because he was too short (shorter than five feet) and his sight was very poor. He still took composition lessons from Antonio Salieri. He often went to the opera where he heard some of the finest music of the time. He liked reading. One of his favourite books was Goethe’s Faust. He wrote a song called "Gretchen am Spinnrade" which is about the young girl in the book sitting at a spinning wheel dreaming of her lover. The piano has a gentle accompaniment which sounds like the throbbing of the spinning wheel. The music stops for a moment when the girl imagines her lover is kissing her, then the piano gradually starts again. It is a very famous song. Another song which soon made him famous in all Europe was "Erlkönig". When it was first published another composer whose name was also Franz Schubert, thought that somebody had published a song in his name because the music publishers sent it to him for a correction. He sent a very angry letter back saying he had not composed that rubbish.

It was difficult to find enough time to compose because he was a teacher. A man called Schober persuaded Schubert to give up teaching so that he could spend all his time composing. Soon he had become well known in all the drawing-rooms in Vienna where he met famous people, many of them musicians. These meetings were called “Schubertiads” because they played and sang his music. He wrote so many wonderful pieces that it seems strange that the music publishers did not want to publish them. They were only interested in publishing works written by performers, but were not very interested in people like Schubert who just composed. For a time he became music teacher for the two princesses of Count Johann Esterházy, but then he returned to Vienna to live with the Schober family. During the last few years of his life Schubert was ill. He had to leave the Schober’s house and find his own rooms. He was often desperately poor and composed in bed to keep warm.

Although Beethoven and Schubert lived in the same town they only met once, although they knew one another’s music. Schubert visited Beethoven on 19 March 1827. Beethoven was dying. Schubert was one of the torch-bearers at his funeral. A year and a half later Schubert, too, had died. He asked to be buried near Beethoven. Their graves were just three places apart.

Schubert’s pieces are among the greatest ever written. They are all settings of German poems. German art songs are called Lieder (pronounced “leader”), and Schubert made his Lieder very special by making the piano accompaniments describe the action of the songs in many different ways. If you try to sing them in a translation it is difficult to make it sound good. It is best to hear them in German and to have a translation so that you understand what is being sung. Some of the last songs he wrote make up a cycle called “Die Winterreise” (“The Winter Journey”). The poems are about a man who is unhappy because his lover does not want him. He goes out into the cold winter woods and all nature seems to reflect the way he feels inside. The songs are usually sung by a male singer (tenor, baritone or bass).

Schubert wrote a great deal of chamber music. Among his most famous pieces are several string quartets, a string quintet (for 2 violins, viola and 2 cellos) and the “Trout” quintet (for piano, violin, viola, cello and double bass). There are sonatas and sonatinas for violin and piano, and a sonata for an instrument called the “arpeggione” which was used for about ten years after it was invented and then it was forgotten. The sonata is normally played on a cello or a viola nowadays. There is lots of piano music including sonatas, impromptus and also piano duet music. Schubert wrote eight famous impromptus.

Schubert wrote nine symphonies. The last one is known as the “Great” symphony in C major. The eighth is called the “Unfinished”. There are only two movements instead of the usual four. A lot of people still argue about why he left it unfinished. Some people even think that he completed it and that the last two movements are either lost, or are now known as movements from a piano duet. We shall probably never know for certain.

Most of his life he was supported by his friends who gave him manuscript paper when he could not afford it. Many of his greatest works only became widely known in the 1860s, long after his death. The house in Vienna where Schubert was born is now a museum which people can visit. There visitors can also see the Benignus Seidner piano that Schubert was using for composing. Other instruments that composer was playing on were a piano by Anton Walter & Sohn (now in the Kunsthistorisches museum in Vienna) and a piano from Viennese piano builder Conrad Graf.

Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoyevsky (11 November 1821 – 9 February 1881) was a Russian novelist. His most popular novels are Crime and Punishment, The Idiot and The Brothers Karamazov. He is regarded as one of the greatest authors of all time.

In his 20s he joined a group of radicals in St Petersburg. They were into French socialist ideas. A police agent reported the group to the authorities. On 22 April 1849, Dostoyevsky was arrested and imprisoned with the other members. After months of questioning and investigation they were tried. They were found guilty of planning to distribute subversive propaganda and condemned to death by firing squad.

The punishment was changed to a sentence of exile and hard labour, but not before they were forced to go through a mock execution.  In 1859 a new tsar allowed Dostoyevsky to end his Siberian exile. A year later he was back in St Petersburg. The experience had cost him ten years of his life. It is the root of all his writing.

Raised in an educated and religious family, Dostoyevsky's beliefs changed through his life. In prison, he focused intensely on the figure of Christ and on the New Testament, the only book allowed in prison. In a letter to the woman who had sent him the New Testament, Dostoyevsky wrote that he was a "child of unbelief and doubt up to this moment, and I am certain that I shall remain so to the grave". He also wrote that "even if someone were to prove to me that the truth lay outside Christ, I should choose to remain with Christ rather than with the truth".

From an analysis of religious ideas in Crime and Punishment, The Idiot, The Demons (The Possessed), and The Brothers Karamazov, James Townsend thinks Dostoyevsky held orthodox Christian beliefs except for his view of salvation from sin. According to Townsend, "Dostoevsky almost seemed to embrace an in-this-life purgatory", in which people suffer to pay for their sins, rather than the Christian doctrine of salvation through Christ. Malcolm Jones sees elements of Islam and Buddhism in Dostoyevsky's religious convictions. Colin Wilson in The Outsider describes him as a "tormented half-atheist-half-Christian".

Many scholars see Dostoyevsky as one of the greatest psychologists in literature. His works have had a big effect on twentieth-century fiction. Very often, he wrote about characters who live in poor conditions. Those characters are sometimes in extreme states of mind. They might show both a strange grasp of human psychology as well as good analyses of the political, social and spiritual states of Russia of Dostoevsky's time. Many of his best-known works are prophetic. He is sometimes considered to be a founder of existentialism, most frequently for Notes from Underground, which has been described as "the best overture for existentialism ever written". He is also famous for writing The Brothers Karamazov, which many critics, such as Sigmund Freud, have said was one of the best novels ever written.

His attack on nihilism is in his great novel Demons, or The Possessed. Published in 1872, it is a "dark comedy, cruelly funny in its depiction of high-minded intellectuals toying with revolutionary notions without understanding anything of what revolution means in practice".

The plot is a version of actual events at the time. A former teacher of divinity turned terrorist, Sergei Nechaev, had written a pamphlet, The Catechism of a Revolutionary, which argued that any means (including blackmail and murder) could be used to advance the cause of revolution. Nechaev planned to kill a student who questioned his ideas.

One of the characters in Demons confesses: "I got entangled in my own data, and my conclusion contradicts the original idea from which I start. From unlimited freedom, I conclude with unlimited despotism". This suggests that the result of abandoning morality for the sake of an idea will be tyranny more extreme than any in the past.

The last five stories (1873-1877) are included in A Writer's Diary.

Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche was a German philosopher, writer, and scholar of ancient languages. He was born on 15 October 1844 and died on 25 August 1900.

Nietzsche studied ancient Greek and Latin writings. He became a professor at the University of Basel in Switzerland when he was 24 years old. After ten years he had to give up his job because he was often sick. For the rest of his working life he had no fixed home. He moved between cheap rooms in Switzerland, Italy, and France, and wrote almost all of his famous books in those years.

His books are not like ordinary philosophy books. Many of them are made of short, sharp pieces of writing called aphorisms. He used jokes, stories, and strong images instead of long chains of proof. He attacked Christianity and the common ideas about right and wrong. He said that the old religious view of the world was dying, and he wrote the famous line "God is dead" to describe this. He thought that people would have to find new values for themselves, or fall into the belief that life means nothing. Some of his best known ideas are the will to power, the eternal return of all things, and the Übermensch, which means the "overman" or "overhuman".

In January 1889 Nietzsche had a sudden mental breakdown. He never got better. He spent the last eleven years of his life unable to work, cared for first by his mother and then by his sister. He died in 1900, just as his fame was beginning to grow.

During his illness and after his death, his sister took more and more control of his writings. She changed how people read him. Later, the German Nazi Party used parts of his work for their own ends, often by taking his words out of their setting. Scholars after the Second World War showed that this picture of Nietzsche was false. He is studied as a thinker who shaped existentialism, modern psychology, and much of later European thought.

Nietzsche was born in the village of Röcken, near Lützen, in the eastern part of Germany. His father, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche, was a Lutheran pastor, which is a kind of Christian minister. His father died in 1849, when Friedrich was only four. His baby brother died the next year. After that, the young boy grew up in a house full of women: his mother, his younger sister Elisabeth, his grandmother, and two aunts. In 1850 the family moved to the town of Naumburg.

As a boy Nietzsche was serious, careful, and very good at his lessons. From 1858 to 1864 he went to Schulpforta, one of the best and strictest schools in Germany. There he fell in love with the ancient Greek and Latin writers. His family hoped he would become a Christian minister like his father. So he first went to the University of Bonn to study religion. But he quickly gave up religion and moved to the University of Leipzig to study philology, the careful study of old languages and texts.

He then read a book by the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer called The World as Will and Representation. Schopenhauer wrote that the world is controlled by a blind, hungry force he called the "will", and that life is mostly suffering. Nietzsche also started listening to music by the composer Richard Wagner, whom he met in 1868 and admired for years.

In April 1869 something rare happened. The University of Basel in Switzerland offered Nietzsche a chair as a professor of classical philology. He was only 24, and he had not even chosen the subject of his doctoral thesis. Leipzig gave him the degree without an exam, because his work was already so respected. He gave his first lecture there in May 1869. To take the job he gave up his Prussian citizenship. He never became a Swiss citizen either, so for the rest of his life he officially belonged to no country.

In 1870 a war broke out between Prussia and France. Nietzsche served for a short time as a medical helper, caring for wounded and sick soldiers. He caught serious illnesses himself. From then on his health was never strong. He suffered from terrible headaches, stomach trouble, and very poor eyesight for the rest of his life.

His first book came out in 1872. It was called The Birth of Tragedy. In it he wrote about ancient Greek plays and about two forces in art and life, which are explained below. Other scholars of ancient languages harshly criticized the book.

Then Nietzsche slowly grew less friendly with Wagner. He thought that Wagner's later music turned toward Christian feeling and German national pride. Nietzsche disliked both. Nietzsche and Wagner stopped being friends. In 1878 Nietzsche published Human, All Too Human, a book of sharp short pieces that questioned many things he had once loved. By 1879 his health was so bad that he had to leave his post at Basel. The university gave him a small pension to live on.

The next ten years were hard but full of work. Nietzsche had no home of his own. In summer he often stayed in the cool mountain village of Sils-Maria in Switzerland. In winter he moved to warmer towns such as Nice in France or Genoa and Turin in Italy.

In 1881 he published Daybreak, and in 1882 The Gay Science. The phrase "gay science" here means joyful or playful knowledge, not anything to do with sexuality. The year 1882 also brought a painful episode in his private life. He fell in love with a young writer and thinker named Lou Salomé and hoped to marry her. She refused. This unhappy episode belongs to the years in which he began his next and most famous book.

That book was Thus Spoke Zarathustra, written between 1883 and 1885. It is part poem, part story, and part prophecy. Its hero, named after an ancient Persian teacher, comes down from a mountain to share his wisdom with people. Through this character Nietzsche set out his ideas about the Übermensch and the eternal return.

The year 1888 was the most productive of all. In a single burst Nietzsche wrote The Case of Wagner, Twilight of the Idols, The Antichrist, and Ecce Homo, a strange book about his own life and work. He had never written so much, or so fast. He was also more alone than ever, and almost unknown to the wider public.

In early January 1889, in the city of Turin, Nietzsche broke down. According to a famous story, he saw a horse being beaten in the street, threw his arms around its neck, and collapsed. Many writers repeat this story, but it may not be exactly true. What is certain is that his mind gave way. He sent wild letters to friends, signing them with strange names. He was taken to a clinic and never recovered his reason.

What caused the breakdown is still debated. For a long time most doctors blamed syphilis, a disease that can attack the brain. Some scholars now doubt this and suggest other causes, such as a slow brain illness. Whatever the reason, the last eleven years of his life were silent ones. His mother cared for him until she died in 1897. After that his sister took him into her house in the German city of Weimar. Friedrich Nietzsche died there on 25 August 1900, aged 55.

Nietzsche is hard to sum up, and on purpose. He did not build one neat system in which every idea fits together. He wrote in pieces, he changed his mind, and he often wore "masks", saying one thing to make people think harder about another. He warned readers not to follow him blindly. Because of this, people still argue about what he really meant. The ideas below are the most important and the most discussed.

In his first book, The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche described two forces that he saw at work in art and in life. He named them after two Greek gods.

The first he called the "Apollonian", after Apollo, the god of light, form, and dreams. This is the drive toward order, clear shapes, and calm beauty. Think of a perfect marble statue, or a quiet, well-made painting.

The second he called the "Dionysian", after Dionysus, the god of wine and wild feasts. This is the drive toward energy, loss of self, and being swept away. Think of music that makes a crowd move as one, or a dance in which a person forgets who they are.

Nietzsche thought that great Greek tragedy joined these two forces together. The wild Dionysian truth, that life is full of pain and chaos, was made bearable by Apollonian beauty and form. Later in his life he leaned more and more toward the Dionysian side. He used the name Dionysus as a sign for saying a full "yes" to life, even to its suffering.

One of Nietzsche's deepest projects was to ask where ideas of "good" and "evil" come from. He set this out most clearly in On the Genealogy of Morality (1887). A "genealogy" is a kind of family tree. Nietzsche traced the family tree of moral ideas, to show that they have a history and were not simply handed down from heaven.

He described two very different ways of judging the world. He called the first "master morality". Here the strong, proud, and successful look at themselves and call their own qualities "good": strength, courage, health, beauty. Then they call the opposite "bad", meaning weak or low. The starting point is a "yes" to themselves.

He called the second "slave morality". This grows among the weak, the ruled, and the suffering. They cannot beat the strong by force, so they fight back in their minds. They call the qualities of the strong "evil", and they make a virtue out of their own state, praising humility, patience, pity, and obedience. Nietzsche thought that this turn was driven by a hidden, helpless anger. He named it with the French word ressentiment. This means a deep and lasting bitterness.

Nietzsche gave a famous picture of this in the Genealogy. Imagine birds of prey carrying off little lambs. The lambs may decide that the birds are "evil", and that they, the lambs, who eat no one, are therefore "good". From the lambs' point of view this feels like justice. But, Nietzsche pointed out, it is a little strange to blame a bird of prey for acting like a bird of prey.

It is important to read this carefully. Nietzsche was not simply praising cruelty or telling people to be bullies. He studied culture almost like a doctor studies an illness, trying to show where common values came from and what they cost. At the same time, he should not be made too gentle. He really did admire rank, discipline, and the making of higher kinds of human beings, and he attacked the idea that all people are equal. His view of morality cannot be reduced only to "being true to yourself".

Nietzsche grew up in a Christian home, and he knew the religion well. As an adult he became one of its sharpest critics. He set out his attack most strongly in The Antichrist (written in 1888). The word "antichrist" here means "against Christ" or "against Christianity".

Nietzsche linked Christianity to slave morality. In his view, certain forms of the religion grew out of the hidden resentment of the weak, above all in the way it later hardened into a moral code and a church. He argued that it taught people to feel guilty, to fear the body, and to look away from this life toward a better world after death. In his eyes this turned people against life itself. He called such values "life-denying", meaning that they say "no" to the natural world.

Nietzsche also drew a sharp picture of the difference between Jesus and the apostle Paul. This picture was his own reading of the two men as human types. It was not a neutral piece of history. He treated Jesus as a gentle figure who lived a certain inner state. He treated Paul as the man who built a church, and a whole system of guilt and reward, around that figure. It is not a portrait that most scholars of religion would accept.

Nietzsche's most famous saying is "God is dead". He did not mean that a living god had died. He meant something about culture and belief. He thought that in the modern world, science and reason had quietly destroyed the old faith in God, even among people who still went to church. In his view, the shared belief that once held everything together was dying out.

He gave this idea a striking scene in The Gay Science (section 125). A madman runs into a market square in the morning with a lantern, crying out that he is looking for God. The people there, who no longer believe, only laugh at him. The madman tells them a terrible thing: it is they who have killed God, and they have not yet understood what they have done.

For Nietzsche this was not good news to celebrate. He saw a great danger ahead, which he called nihilism. Nihilism is the belief that nothing has any meaning, value, or purpose. If the old source of values is gone, people may feel that life is empty and that nothing matters. Nietzsche thought this was the deepest crisis facing the modern world. His whole work can be read as a search for a way through nihilism, by creating new values out of love for life rather than fear of it.

Schopenhauer had said that all living things are driven by a "will to live", a simple wish to survive and to keep going. Nietzsche thought this did not go far enough. He proposed instead a "will to power".

Nietzsche often describes life as a drive to grow, to overcome resistance, and to become stronger. A plant pushes through stone toward the light. An artist works for years to master a craft. A thinker tries to understand more and more of the world. In each case the deep urge is not only to stay alive, but to overcome and to expand.

This idea is one of the most debated in all of Nietzsche. Some readers take it as a claim about all of nature, almost like a law of physics. Others take it more narrowly, as an idea about human drives and feelings. It is also easy to twist. "Power" here does not only mean armies or rule over others, and it does not only mean quiet self-control either. It covers the full range of striving, growth, and overcoming. Nietzsche never finished turning it into a clear theory, and much of what he wrote about it was found only in his notebooks after his death.

Another strange and powerful idea is the "eternal recurrence", sometimes called the eternal return. Recurrence means happening over and over. Nietzsche introduces the idea in The Gay Science (section 341) as a kind of test.

Nietzsche asks the reader to imagine a strange visit. One night a demon comes and speaks. He says that this same life will have to be lived again. Every joy and every pain will return. Every moment, large and small, will come back in the same order, again and again, forever, with nothing new added. How would a person take such news? For some, it would be a heavy burden, almost too much to bear. But a person who truly loved life might welcome it, and even wish for it.

Nietzsche uses this thought as a way to measure a life. A person who truly loved their life would be able to face the demon with joy. Some scholars also ask whether Nietzsche believed the eternal return was literally true about the universe. But its main force in his work is as a test of the heart: can a person say "yes" so fully to life that they would happily live it over forever?

In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche presents the Übermensch. The word is often translated as "superman", but "overman" or "overhuman" fits better, because it points to the idea of going beyond and overcoming. Zarathustra gives a famous image for it. The human being, he says, is like a rope stretched over a deep gorge, tied between the animal and the overman. To cross such a rope is dangerous, but it is also the great task.

The overman is the person who can live without the old God and the old values, and who creates new values out of strength and love of life. Such a person overcomes themselves again and again, instead of standing still. They do not look away from this world toward another, and they do not deny life. For this reason, Nietzsche says, the overman might even look frightening to other people.

It is very important to say what the Übermensch is not. It is not a fixed new kind of human, a final stage of evolution, or a master race. It is an ideal of constant self-overcoming, always reaching beyond what a person already is. Reading it as a kind of super-race is a serious mistake, and that mistake later did real harm, as the next section explains.

Behind many of these ideas lies one feeling that Nietzsche prized above all. He called it by the Latin phrase amor fati, which means "love of fate". To have amor fati is to love everything that happens in one's life, the bad as well as the good, and to wish for nothing to be different.

This connects the will to power, the eternal return, and the overman into a single attitude. The eternal return tests whether a person can love their fate that much. The overman can be understood as a figure of this kind of strength that says yes to life. For Nietzsche, the highest goal was not to escape suffering or to reach a calm heaven, but to say a deep and joyful "yes" to life exactly as it is. His famous line "What does not kill me makes me stronger", from Twilight of the Idols, belongs to this same spirit.

Nietzsche also had bold ideas about truth and knowledge. He doubted that anyone could see the world without having a point of view. He argued that all seeing and all knowing come from some particular position, with its own interests and limits. This idea is often called "perspectivism", from the word "perspective", meaning a point of view.

This does not quite mean that "anything goes" or that every opinion is as good as every other. Nietzsche's point was that taking in more points of view gives a fuller and fairer understanding. There is no view from outside the world, but some points of view see more than others. This part of his work later became very important for thinkers who study how knowledge and power are linked.

A book called The Will to Power is sometimes listed among his works, but Nietzsche never wrote it as a finished book. It was put together after his death from his private notebooks. The next section explains why this matters.

The story of how Nietzsche was read after his death is almost as strange as his ideas. During his years of illness, and after his death, his sister, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche, took more and more control of his writings. She outlived him by many years and ran an archive devoted to his work. She also edited his unpublished notes, and from them she helped to shape the book called The Will to Power.

Elisabeth had been married to a man named Bernhard Förster, who hated Jews and dreamed of a "pure" German colony. Nietzsche himself had disliked his brother-in-law's views and had spoken against the hatred of Jews. Yet over time his sister steered his name closer to German nationalism. Years later, the Nazi Party and its leader Adolf Hitler treated Nietzsche as one of their heroes. They lifted single lines and words out of his books and used them to support ideas about race, war, and the rule of the strong.

Scholars now agree that this picture was false. Nietzsche was not a Nazi, and he was not even an early model for the Nazis. That description fits his brother-in-law far better, and Nietzsche had opposed those very views. The Nazis took his claims out of their setting and bent them to serve their own needs. After the Second World War, writers such as Walter Kaufmann worked to clear his name and to show the real shape of his thought.

The truth, however, is not simple, and it is fair to readers to say so plainly. Nietzsche was not a Nazi, but he was also not a comfortable, modern liberal. He wrote harsh things about equality, about democracy, and about whole groups of people, and he defended rank and hardness. It is also too simple to put all the blame on his sister, as if she alone had spoiled a gentle thinker. The honest position lies in between. His own views were often hard and troubling, but the Nazi version of Nietzsche was still a distortion of what he himself wrote.

Few modern thinkers have had a wider effect than Nietzsche, even though he was almost unknown while he could still work. His influence reaches across the whole of the twentieth century and beyond.

He is often seen as a father of existentialism, a movement that asks how people can make meaning in a world without a fixed plan. Several major philosophers wrote long studies of his work. They include Martin Heidegger, Michel Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, and Jacques Derrida. The French thinkers among them read him above all as a doubter of fixed truth. Nietzsche is also often linked to the new study of the mind. Many readers have compared him with Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, because both wrote about hidden drives in the mind. Freud knew of Nietzsche's importance, but he did not simply present himself as Nietzsche's follower.

His influence also runs through literature and the arts. Writers, poets, composers, and painters have all drawn on his images and his daring. Because his work can be read in so many ways, many different groups have tried to claim him as their own. That very richness is part of why people still read and argue about Friedrich Nietzsche.

Francisco José de Goya y Lucientes (30 March 1746 – 30 April 1828) was a Spanish . He painted many portraits of the Spanish Royal Family. His most famous paintings are Charles IV of Spain and His Family and The Third of May 1808. He regularly painted the famous Duchess of Alba.

Goya was born in Fuendetodos, in the region of Aragón, Spain, in 1746. His parents were José Benito de Goya y Franque and Gracia de Lucientes y Salvador. He spent his childhood in Fuendetodos. His father's work was gilding (putting gold onto picture frames). In about 1749, the family moved to a house in the city of Zaragoza. Goya went to school at Escuelas Pias. He became best friends with Martin Zapater. Through their lives, they wrote many letters to each other. Because of these letters, historians know a lot about Goya's life. When he was 14 Goya became an apprentice to the painter José Luzán.

Goya later moved to Madrid where he studied with Anton Raphael Mengs, a painter who was popular with Spanish royalty. Goya and Mengs did not like each other, and Goya got bad marks in his examinations. Goya tried to join the Spanish Royal Academy of Fine Art in 1763 and 1766, but failed.

He then traveled to Rome. In 1771 he won second prize in a painting competition in the city of Parma. Later that year, he returned to Zaragoza. He got work painting frescos in several buildings including the dome of the Basilica of the Pillar. He studied with the painter Francisco Bayeu y Subías. His painting began to show the style which later made his famous.

Goya married Bayeu's sister, Josefa, in 1774. Francisco Bayeu was a member of the Spanish Royal Academy of Fine Art. This helped Goya to get work with the Royal Tapestry Workshop. He worked there for 5 years, and designed 42 patterns. Many of his designs were made into tapestries and used to decorate the bare stone walls of the royal palaces, such as El Escorial. The Spanish Royal family saw his works and later gave him work as a portrait painter. He also painted an altarpiece (Holy picture) for the Church of San Francisco El Grande. Because of this picture, Goya was at last made a member of the Spanish Royal Academy of Fine Art.

In 1783, the Count of Florida blanca, commissioned Goya (gave Goya the paid work) to paint his portrait. Then King Charles III of Spain and other important people wanted Goya to paint their portraits. Goya became friends with Crown Prince Don Luis, and lived in his house. From 1788, in the reign of Charles IV, Goya became even more popular.

In the 1790s Goya became ill. It is not known exactly what his illness was. It is believed that he suffered mental breakdown. He may have had viral encephalitis or several strokes. He may have suffered from dementia. It is also thought that he may have been poisoned by lead paint. His sight, hearing, balance and mental health were all affected.

His unhappiness was also affected by the French invasion of Spain in 1808. One of his most famous paintings, The Third of May 1808, is about the execution of Spanish men trying to defend their country.

After the defeat of the French, Goya did not get on well with King Ferdinand VII. Goya moved to a house far away from the court. He lived there with his housekeeper and her daughter, and taught painting to the girl, Rosario Weiss. Some of the walls of the house are painted with strange dark pictures, but it is not sure whether Goya did them. For two years Goya lived in France but returned to Spain where he was warmly welcomed home in 1826, He died in 1828 at the age of 82.

Goya's early cartoons for the royal tapestries are  scenes of festivals in bright colours.

Goya painted portraits of many famous people, including the Duke of Wellington. His paintings of the Royal Family of Charles IV of Spain and Ferdinand VII show them looking like very ordinary people, not like proud nobility. Queen Maria Luisa was delighted with the large portrait that he did of her family in 1800, even though a French writer Théophile Gautier said that Goya made them look "like the corner baker and his wife after they had won the lottery".

Two of Goya's most famous paintings were owned by a member of the royal court, Manuel de Godoy. These two paintings are called The Nude Maja (La maja desnuda) and The Clothed Maja (La maja vestida). The nude painting was thought of as very shocking. In 1813, the Inquisition said that both paintings were pornography and took them away. They were returned to Goya in 1836. Nobody knows who the woman was that posed for Goya. One idea is that she was the Duchess of Alba. She may have been Godoy's mistress. Perhaps Goya painted the figure from his imagination. There is only one earlier nude painting by a Spanish artist, Velazquez's "Venus and Cupid", (see National Gallery, London). When this painting was done, other nude figures, painted in Italy, Germany and other countries, always showed the woman as a goddess from mythology or had some other allegorical meaning (was a symbol of some sort). This painting is unusual because the nude figure is not meant to be a Goddess and does not seem to have any symbolic meaning. It is the very first life-sized female nude in Western Painting that is just about the beauty of the female body.

In 1793 and 1794 Goya was recovering from his illness. During this time, he painted eleven small pictures painted on tin. These pictures are known as Fantasy and Invention today. They show a change in his art. From that time on, he painted dark, frightening pictures about war, violence and madness.

One painting is called Courtyard with Lunatics. It is a scene in a mental asylum. It is about loneliness and fear. It shows how mentally ill people have trouble dealing with other people and normal life. Goya was the first artist to paint people with mental illness in a realistic way. Goya wanted to show that it was wrong to punish mentally ill people, and lock them up with criminals. There was a movement at this time to improve the life of people in asylums and prisons.

Goya made two series of prints. The first was called Caprichos and the second was called The Disasters of War. The Caprichos series shows nightmarish scenes of the problems with Spanish society. The Disaster of War shows scenes of terrible violence. These were not published until more than 30 years after his death. The Disaster of War were made because of the war between France and Spain. One of Goya's most famous paintings is a large picture called The Third of May 1808.(see above) It is about the executions of Spanish men that took place in 1808. This painting shows the courage of the unarmed Spanish hero. It shows the French soldiers in the firing squad acting as if they have no minds or feelings. This painting was a great inspiration to other painters such as the French painter Manet who painted a scene of the execution of the Governor of Mexico.

Goya's most frightening picture shows a giant man, eating people. It is now called Saturn Devouring His Sons, (after Saturn the Father of the Gods in Greek mythology) but no-one knows what it really means. It is more likely a picture of the way that War destroys people. In the house that Goya owned, there are paintings on the walls known as the Black Paintings. They show scenes with the Devil and witches. It is not sure whether Goya really painted them.

Goya's brightly coloured tapestry cartoons influenced the French Impressionist painters such as Monet and Renoir. His portraits were an influence on Manet and Degas as well as Renoir. The Black Paintings influenced Expressionist painters.

Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (August 27, 1770 – November 14, 1831) was a German philosopher born in Stuttgart, Württemberg, which is now southwest Germany. He started Hegelianism and is a part of German Idealism. He influenced many writers and philosophers, including those who agreed with him (Bradley, Sartre, Küng, Bauer, Stirner, Marx), and those who did not agree with him (Kierkegaard, Schopenhauer, Nietzsche, Heidegger, Schelling). Hegel's books are difficult to read and deal with many different ideas at the same time. He has written about history, politics, religion, art, logic and metaphysics.

Frank Lloyd Wright (born Frank Lincoln Wright; June 8, 1867   April 9, 1959) was a famous American architect from the early 20th century. He designed all kinds of buildings including banks, holiday resorts, office buildings, churches, a synagogue, a gas station, a beer garden and an art museum.

Wright designed more than 1,000 structures and completed 532 works. Wright believed in designing structures which were in peace with humanity and its environment. He called his belief organic architecture. He used this technique for his design for Fallingwater (1935), which has been called "the best all-time work of American architecture". Wright was a leader of the Prairie School movement of architecture and developed the image of the Usonian home, his one-of-a-kind vision for urban planning in the United States.

He began an American style of building design and is said to be one of the greatest architects of the twentieth century.

Wright was born in Richland Center, Wisconsin on June 8, 1867 to a farming family.

His work includes original and creative examples of many building types. Wright also designed many of the interior elements of his buildings, such as the furniture and stained glass. Wright authored 20 books and many articles and was a popular lecturer in the United States and in Europe.

His colorful personal life often made headlines, most notably for the 1914 fire and murders at his Taliesin studio. Already well known during his lifetime, Wright was recognized in 1991 by the American Institute of Architects as "the greatest American architect of all time."

Wright died on April 9, 1959 in Phoenix, Arizona from surgical complications. He was 91 years old.

Frank Lloyd Wright was born in the farming town of Richland Center, Wisconsin, United States, on June 8, 1867. He was born Frank Lincoln Wright. His father, William Carey Wright (1825–1904), was a locally admired speaker, music teacher, sometimes a lawyer, and minister. William Wright had met and married Anna Lloyd Jones (1838/39 – 1923), a county school teacher of Welsh descent, the previous year when he was employed as the superintendent of schools for Richland County.

The Wright family moved from Richland Center to Weymouth, Massachusetts. Afterwards, The Wright Family struggled financially in Weymouth and returned to Spring Green, Wisconsin. They settled in Madison. Although William was a distant parent, he shared his love of music, especially the works of Johann Sebastian Bach, with his children.

Wright attended a Madison High School, but there is no evidence he ever graduated. He was admitted to the University of Wisconsin–Madison as a special student in 1886. There he joined Phi Delta Theta fraternity, took classes part-time for two semesters, and worked with a professor of civil engineering, Allan D. Conover. He moved to Chicago, Illinois in 1887.

Wright did not get along well with other draftsmen. He wrote that several violent events happened between them during the first years of his apprenticeship. Afterwards many other draftsmen showed very little respect for his employees as well. In spite of this, "Sullivan took [Wright] under his wing and gave him great design responsibility." As an act of respect, Wright would later refer to Sullivan as Lieber Meister (German for "Dear Master"). Wright also formed a bond with office foreman Paul Mueller. Wright would later engage Mueller to build several of his public and commercial buildings between 1903 and 1923.

As Wright began to work on residential projects for Adler & Sullivan. Wright designed his houses on his own time. Sullivan knew nothing of Wright's works until 1893, when he recognized that one of the houses was a Frank Lloyd Wright design. This particular house, built for Allison Harlan, was only blocks away from Sullivan's townhouse in the Chicago community of Kenwood.

Many examples of his work are in Buffalo, New York as a result of friendship between Wright and Darwin D. Martin. In 1902, the Larkin Company decided to build a new building. Wright came to Buffalo and designed not only the Larkin Administration Building (completed in 1904, demolished in 1950), but also homes for three of the company's executives including the Darwin D. Martin House in 1904. Wright later built their summer home. He also designed the Graycliff Estate, also designed for Darwin D. Martin and his wife, Isabelle.

On August 15, 1914, while Wright was working in Chicago, Julian Carlton, a male servant from Barbados who had been hired several months earlier, set fire to the living room of Taliesin and murdered seven people with an axe as the fire burned. The dead included Mamah; her two children, John and Martha; a gardener; a draftsman named Emil Brodelle; a worker; and another workman's son. Two people survived the mayhem. One of them helped to put out the fire that almost completely burned the residential wing of the house.

Right after the attack, Carlton tried to kill himself by drinking muriatic acid . He was nearly lynched on the spot, but was taken to the Dodgeville jail. Carlton died from starvation seven weeks after the attack, despite medical attention.

Frank Lloyd Wright designed a summer-house in 1935 for the Kaufmann family over a waterfall in Pennsylvania. He called the house "Fallingwater". Some people say it is the most famous private home in the world.

The house actually sits low in the valley over the stream, but looks dramatic from further downstream. It has large terraces, and some of them stick straight out and hang over the waterfall or the stream. There are windows and glass doors, with only narrow steel supports between them, wrapping all the way around the living room.

There are also windows going all the way from the floor to the ceiling in all three stories of the tower.

Most of the house is made from stone. There are strong horizontal and vertical lines in the design of the house. It resembles the horizontal and vertical lines in the rock formations and other natural features. The waterfall can be heard everywhere in the house. Wright wanted there to be a close connection between inside and outside, and for the house itself to be natural.

In 1991, members of the American Institute of Architects named the Fallingwater house the "best all-time work of American architecture".

One famous house was called the Robie House. It had a maze like layout and geometric stained glass windows. The Robie House was a unique house with odd shapes, colors and form. He finished making it in 1910, as a house for children. In fact, many children lived and played in that house with their families up until 1926 when it was closed for living in, and closed to the public. Many times, it was planned to be destroyed. However, twice, Wright saved his house from destruction because of the reasons he built it and all the memories of it that he loved so much. It is now being restored at a cost of $10 million.

Another famous building by Wright was called the Johnson Wax Headquarters. The building has Wright's idea of the streamlined Art Moderne style popular in the 1930s. In a break with Wright's earlier Prairie School structures, the building features many circular forms and needed over 200 different curved "Cherokee red" bricks to create the sweeping curves of the inside and outside.

The mortar between the bricks was created in traditional Wright-style to give the horizontality of the building. The warm, reddish hue of the bricks was used in the polished concrete floor as well. The white stone trim and white columns create a slight yet striking difference. All of the furniture, created by Steelcase, was designed for the building by Wright and it mirrored many of the building's unique design features.

The entrance is in the structure, entering the building on one side with a covered carport on the other. The carport is supported by short versions of the steel-reinforced (tree-like) concrete columns that appear in the Great Workroom.

Wright proposed to build a skyscraper called The Illinois that would be the height of a distance of a mile. It was intended to be constructed in Chicago, Illinois. It could have included 528 stories, with a gross area of 18,460,000 square feet (1,715,000 m2). Wright stated that there would be parking for 15,000 cars and 150 helicopters.

The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in New York City. Wright worked on this project for 16 years (1943–1959) and is probably his most recognized masterpiece. The building is on Fifth Avenue. Its interior is similar to the inside of a seashell.

Its one of a kind central geometry was created to allow visitors to easily see Guggenheim's collection of his paintings by taking an elevator to the top-level and then viewing artworks by walking down the slowly descending, central spiral ramp, the floor of which is lodged with circular shapes and triangular light bulbs to complement the geometric nature of the building.

However, when the museum was completed, some of Wright's design were ignored, such as his desire for the interior to be painted off-white. Further, the Museum currently designs exhibits to be viewed by walking up the curved walkway without walking down from the top-level.

Wright strongly believed in working alone. He did not support the American Institute of Architects during his career, going so far as to call the organization "a harbor of refuge for the incompetent," and "a form of refined gangsterism." When an the Institute called him "an old amateur" Wright later responded, "I am the oldest." In 1940, Wright started the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation. It was set up for educational purposes. It looks after two Wright buildings, Taliesin East in Wisconsin, and Taliesin West in Arizona. It has a library with more than 22,000 of Wright's drawings, and 300,000 documents. It is home to the Frank Lloyd Wright School of Architecture.

Frank Lloyd Wright was married three times and fathered seven children, four sons and three daughters. He also adopted Svetlana Milanoff, the daughter of his third wife, Olgivanna Lloyd Wright. Wright once had an apprentice who was married to Joseph Stalin's daughter.

The Oscar-winning actress Anne Baxter was Wright's granddaughter.

Wright was a fan of Japanese Art and collected them throughout his career. Wright continued to collect them until his death in 1959. He used prints to help him pay for loans. He often relyed upon his art business to help financially.

Wright died on April 9, 1959, while undergoing surgery in Phoenix, Arizona, to remove an intestinal obstruction. His third wife, Olgivanna, ran the Fellowship after Wright's death, until her own death in Scottsdale, Arizona, in 1985.

Later that year, it was learned that her dying wish had been that Wright, she, and her daughter by a first marriage all be cremated and relocated to Scottsdale. By then, Wright's body had lain for over 25 years in the Lloyd-Jones cemetery, next to the Unity Chapel, near Taliesin, Wright's later-life home in Spring Green, Wisconsin. Wright's remains were removed from his grave by members of the Taliesin Fellowship. Then, his remains were cremated and sent to Scottsdale where they were later interred in the memorial garden.

In 1966, the United States Postal Service honored Wright with a Prominent Americans series 2¢ postage stamp. Several of Wright's buildings have been proposed by the United States to be UNESCO World Heritage sites.

Shortly after his death, Simon & Garfunkel recorded So Long, Frank Lloyd Wright as a tribute to Wright.

In 2000, Fallingwater was named "The Building of the 20th century" in "Top-Ten" poll taken by members attending the AIA annual convention in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. On that list, Wright was listed along with many of the USA's other greatest architects including Eero Saarinen, I. M. Pei, Louis Kahn, Philip Johnson and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. He was the only architect who had more than one building on the list. The other three buildings were the Guggenheim Museum, the Frederick C. Robie House and the Johnson Wax Headquarters.

Federico Fellini (born 20 January 1920 in Rimini, died 31 October 1993 in Rome) was an Italian movie-maker and director. Fellini's movies combine memory, dream, and fantasy.

The first movie Fellini directed was Lo Sceicco Bianco (1951), with Alberto Sordi, written by Michelangelo Antonioni and Ennio Flaiano. In making this movie Fellini met Nino Rota, the musician that would follow him for the successful rest of his career.

Fellini was married to actress Giulietta Masina (1921-1994) from 1943 until his death. In 1945, he had a son who survived for only 2 weeks; it was the only child of Fellini and Giulietta Masina. Masina acted in many of his movies. Other actors Fellini often worked with include Marcello Mastroianni, Alberto Sordi, and Anita Ekberg.

Apart from making movies he also wrote scripts for radio shows, for movies (mainly for Roberto Rossellini) and wrote comic gags for well known actors like Aldo Fabrizi. Fellini also produced several drawings (mostly pencil on paper), often humoristic portraits. His first success was in drawing advertising pictures for movies.

During Fascism an Avanguardista, his first writings were for Alleanza Cinematografica Italiana (ACI), a production company of Vittorio Mussolini, son of Benito, who introduced him to Rossellini.

In 1944, when Fascism was over, he opened a shop in Rome in which he sold these drawings. The shop was named (in English) "The Funny Face Shop", and contained works from Fellini and De Seta, Verdini, Camerini, Scarpelli, Majorana, Guasta, Giobbe, Attalo, Migneco (all writers, directors or otherwise intellectuals working for Italian cinema). In the same year started his contribution to Rossellini's Roma Città Aperta, with Aldo Fabrizi. Fellini took also part in writing another of Rossellini's movies: Paisà. He wrote also for other directors as Alberto Lattuada, Pietro Germi and Luigi Comencini.

In 1987 he won the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, a lifetime achievement award. In 1993, he received an Academy Award (Oscar) for his lifetime achievement.

George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron (22 January 1788 – 19 April 1824) was an English peer, nobleman, politician, and poet. He was christened George Gordon Byron, but changed his name later in life. He adopted the surname Noel, so that he could inherit half his mother-in-law's estate.

Lord Byron was the son Captain John Byron and Catherine Gordon.

He was a leading figure in Romanticism. He was regarded as one of the greatest European poets and many people still read his works. Among his best-known works are the narrative poems Childe Harold's Pilgrimage and Don Juan.

Lord Byron is also famous for the way he lived his life. He was a dandy, living , with many love affairs and debts. His fight against the Turks in the Greek War of Independence led to his death from a fever in Messolonghi in Greece. He is buried in the family vault in St. Mary Magdalene Church, Hucknall Torkard, Nottinghamshire, England. A memorial was not raised to him in Poet's Corner in Westminster Abbey until 1969.

His daughter, Ada Lovelace, was famous because she collaborated with Charles Babbage on the "analytical engine," a predecessor to modern computers.

Fundamentalism was used at first to describe some people in the Protestant community in the United States in the early 20th century. These people had a set of well-defined ("fundamental") values. These values were in opposition to more modern ideas. The group also said it was important to stick to what faith (and a more literal translation of the Bible) told them. When people look at religion this way they see the ideas in the religion as absolute. This means that it is not possible for them to change. When religion is seen as absolute it becomes fundamentalism.

Today, the term is used more generally. It is now often used to describe groups of people who are committed to behave or act according to their (mostly moral, and religious) values and beliefs even though these values may be criticised by many people or unpopular. Modern-day fundamentalists want to go back to the roots of certain ideological or religious positions.

Religious fundamentalism has been prevalent in society since its beginnings in the late 19th- and early 20th-century. People today who study fundamentalism see it as a response to modern society. Today society is not as simple as it was: many people live in societies that can be difficult to understand. Changes in familiar things can make people feel unsafe. So some people look in their religion to see something that does not change. They also want rules about how to act that do not change. So they see their religion as this thing that does not change.

Fundamentalism is also a trademarked brand of belts "to Beat Children." Fundamentalism Leather Belts have been in countless art exhibits to satirize Fundamentalist Christians who think their God wants them to hit children. The artist and the only publicly recognized owner of Fundamentalism, Daniel Vander Ley, is a child-rights advocate who uses his brand "Fundamentalism America's Premier Child Abuse Brand" as a way to confront governments around the world about corporal punishment practices in schools and homes. Corporal Punishment still occurs in public schools in 19 American states.

Some people who are called religious fundamentalists do not like that name, as the term has other meanings. They do not like it because 'religious fundamentalist' has some negative ideas about it. Many people who are politically progressive or liberal sometimes do not like religious fundamentalists. They believe bad things about them like that they are not clever, they are not educated, or that they do not respect people's human rights.

Some people who are Christian fundamentalists do like that term and use it to name themselves. But they do not like being called religious fundamentalists because Islamic fundamentalists are in this same group.

Fundamentalism began as a movement in the U.S., starting among conservative Presbyterian academics and theologians at Princeton Theological Seminary in the first decade of the Twentieth Century. It soon spread to conservatives among the Baptists and other denominations during and immediately following the First World War. The movement's purpose was to reaffirm orthodox Protestant Christianity and zealously defend it against the challenges of liberal theology, German higher criticism, Darwinism, and other movements which it regarded as harmful to Christianity.

The term "fundamentalism" has its roots in the Niagara Bible Conference (1878–1897) which defined those things that were fundamental to Christian belief. The term was also used to describe "The Fundamentals", a collection of twelve books on five subjects published in 1910 and funded by Milton and Lyman Stewart

Not all religious fundamentalists believe the same things. But there are many issues that they have strong beliefs about. Some of these issues are similar even in different religions. Some of these issues are:

Many criticisms of fundamentalist positions have been offered. One of the most common is that some claims made by a fundamentalist group cannot be proven, and are irrational, demonstrably false, or contrary to scientific evidence. . For example, some of these criticisms were famously asserted by Clarence Darrow in the Scopes Monkey Trial.

Another is that religious beliefs do not translate well into laws or social policy in diverse tolerant societies. This criticism favors secularism as a better foundation for social harmony and stability.

In order to carry out the fundamentalist program in practice, one would need a perfect understanding of the ancient language of the original text, if indeed the true text can be (found...) among variants. Furthermore, human beings are the ones who transmit this understanding between generations. Even if one wanted to follow the literal word of God, the need for people first to understand that word (requires) human interpretation. Through that process human fallibility is inextricably mixed into the very meaning of the divine word. As a result, it is impossible to follow the indisputable word of God; one can only achieve a human understanding of God's will.

Gabriel José de la Concordia García Márquez, also known as Gabo (March 6, 1927   April 17, 2014) was a Colombian novelist, short-story writer, screenwriter, and journalist. He won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1982. He was best known for his novels One Hundred Years of Solitude (1967), The Autumn of the Patriarch (1975) and Love in the Time of Cholera (1985). His books were mainly about satire, solitude, magic realism, realism, and violence.

Márquez was sick with Alzheimer's disease after being diagnosed in 2012. He lived with his wife, Mercedes Barcha in Mexico City where he died from pneumonia in 2014 at the age of 87.

He is the most-translated Spanish-language author. After García Márquez's death in April 2014, Juan Manuel Santos, the President of Colombia, called him "the greatest Colombian who ever lived."

Márquez was born in Aracataca, Colombia. His parents were Gabriel Eligio García and Luisa Santiaga Márquez. His father was a pharmacist. His mother left him at a young age and he was raised by his grandparents and father. He studied at the University of Cartagena.

He started as a journalist, and wrote many famous non-fiction works and short stories. Márquez began writing at the age of eighteen. He began writing about living in an old house with grandparents.

He is best known for his novels, such as One Hundred Years of Solitude (1967), The Autumn of the Patriarch (1975), Chronicle of a Death Foretold (1981) and Love in the Time of Cholera (1985).

Most of his books are based or set in his birth_place, Aracataca. He mostly wrote books about realism or magical realism. His motifs included solitude and violence.

In 1982, he received the Nobel Prize in Literature "for his novels and short stories, in which the fantastic and the realistic are combined in a richly composed world of imagination, reflecting a continent's life and conflicts". When he was accepting the award, Márquez gave a speech called "The Solitude of Latin America".

In 2002, he published the memoir Vivir para contarla; the first of a projected three-volume autobiography. In 2004, he published another book named Memories of My Melancholy Whores. It caused many problems and controversies in Iran. This book is banned in Iran.

Several of his stories have inspired other writers and directors. In 1987, the Italian director Francesco Rosi directed the movie Cronaca di una morte annunciata, based on Chronicle of a Death Foretold, written by Márquez.

A number of movies have been made of García Márquez's work. He also wrote some scripts for movies. He often worked with Carlos Fuentes for writing scripts. His famous book, Love in the Time of Cholera was also made into a movie in 2007.

Márquez met his wife, Mercedes Barcha, when they were in college. They wanted to get married when they both finished college but Márquez was sent to Europe. When he returned, Márquez married Barcha in 1958.

Márquez had two sons with Barcha. His first son, Rodrigo García, was born in 1959, one year after Márquez and Barcha were married. His second son, Gonzalo, was born in 1962 in Mexico. Rodrigo is a movie director and Gonzalo is a graphic designer.

Márquez and his family traveled by bus to Mexico. They settled in Mexico City. Márquez had always wanted to see the Southern United States because it inspired the writings of William Faulkner.  Márquez lived with his family in Mexico City.

In 1999, García Márquez was diagnosed with lymphatic cancer. He went through chemotherapy and made a quick recovery. But, Márquez began developing side effects of old age which drove to his retirement in May 2008.

In 2012, Márquez became sick from Alzheimer's disease. On April 3, 2014, Márquez was hospitalized in Mexico. He had infections in his lungs and his urinary tract and was suffering from dehydration. Márquez later had pneumonia.

Márquez died of pneumonia at age 87 in Mexico City, Mexico. His remains were cremated the next day.

Galen of Pergamum (129–199/217 AD) was a prominent Greek physician and philosopher from Pergamon, a Greek city in western Asia Minor. He was an important medical researcher in the Roman Empire and his theories influenced Western medical science for over a thousand years.

Galen was the son of Aelius Nicon, a Greek architect and builder. Galen invented the 'Theory of Opposites' based on Hippocrates' Four Humours' theory, which helped develop medicine in the Roman age and again in the Middle Ages to include more natural-based medicine (rather than just religious medicine).

Some of the observations he made in his books were wrong as he could only dissect animals (mostly pigs and apes) and compare them to humans due to the Roman ban on dissecting human corpses.

Later in the Renaissance period, people such as Andreas Vesalius wrote books showing that some of what Galen said was wrong. He was most famous for his discovery that proved that arteries carry blood and his dissection of a pig proved that the larynx nerves control the voice. He also proved that the brain controls the body and not the heart.

Galen was vital in the beginnings of natural medicine and is called the "Father of Anatomy". He is also called the "Father of Medicine" second to Hippocrates.

Grammar is the study of words, how they are used in sentences, and how they change in different situations. The Ancient Greeks used to call it grammatikē tékhnē, the craft of letters. It can have any of these meanings:

When we speak, we use the native person's grammar, or as near as we can. When we write, we try to write with correct grammar. So, speaking and writing a language each have their own style.

All languages have their own grammar. Most European language grammars are fairly similar.

English makes few changes to its word endings ('suffixes'). In Romance languages (such as French, Italian, and Spanish), word endings carry a lot of meaning. In English we have just a few: plurals and possessives (John's) are the most common. In our verbs we have dropped most endings except one: I love, you love, but she loves. That final s comes from the Anglo-Saxon, which had more suffixes. Verbs do have endings which show changes in tense: walked, walking.

Word order is the other big difference. Romance languages normally put adjectives after the nouns to which they refer. For example, in English, a person may say I like fast cars, but in Spanish, it is Me gustan los coches rápidos. The order of the words has changed: if just the words, without the grammar, are translated into English, it would mean 'to me they please the cars fast'. This is because Spanish and English have different rules about word order. In German, verbs often come near the end of sentences (as: Die Katze hat das Futter gegessen), whereas in English we usually put them between subject and object, as: the cat has eaten the food.

Written grammar changes slowly but spoken grammar is more fluid. Sentences which English speakers find normal today, might have seemed strange 100 years ago. And they might not, because many of our favourite sayings come from the Authorized King James Version of the Bible, and from Shakespeare.

Different people speak with grammar that differs from that of other people.  For example, people who use the dialects called General American English and BBC English might say, I didn't do anything, while someone who speaks what is called African American Vernacular English or AAVE might say, I didn't do nothing. London working class version: I ain't done nuffink!  These are called double negatives, and are found almost entirely in spoken English, and seldom written.

These differences are called dialects. The dialect a person uses is usually decided by where they live. Even though the dialects of English use different words or word order, they still have grammar rules. However, when writing in American English, grammar uses the rules of General American English. When people talk about using 'proper English', they usually mean using the grammar of general British English, as described in standard reference works. The models for spoken English in Britain are often called Received Pronunciation or BBC English.

Grammar studies nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, sentences, phrases, clauses and interjections.

Nouns are 'thing' words like 'table and 'chair'.  They are , things you see in everyday life.  Proper nouns are names of specific places, people, or other things like days of the week.  The name 'James' is a proper noun, as is 'Wednesday' and 'London'. Nouns can also be abstract things, such as 'suffering' or 'happiness'.

Verbs are words that describe : "Ryan threw the ball". State: "I am worried". The basic verb form is called the infinitive.  The infinitive for existence is "to be".  A famous example is the speech of Hamlet: To be or not to be, that is the question.

Adjectives describe nouns. For example, the pretty in "pretty bicycle" says that the bicycle is pretty. In other words, the "pretty" is describing the bicycle. This can also happen with a place. For example, the tall in "that's a tall building" is describing the building.

Grammar studies syntax which is how the "parts of speech" fit together and create sentences.

The Great Lakes are five large lakes in east-central North America. They hold 21% of the world's surface fresh water.

The five lakes are: Lake Superior, Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, Lake Erie, and Lake Ontario.

Four of the Great Lakes are on the border between Canada and the United States of America. The other, Lake Michigan, is completely inside the United States.

All together, by volume, they are the largest group of fresh water lakes in the world. No one of the Lakes is larger than Lake Baikal (Russia) or Lake Tanganyika (East Africa).

The cities of Chicago, Illinois (9.8 million people, on Lake Michigan), Toronto, Ontario (5.5 million, on Lake Ontario); Detroit, Michigan (5.3 million, on the Detroit river); Montreal, Quebec (3.9 million, on the St. Lawrence River), Cleveland, Ohio (2.9 million, on Lake Erie), Buffalo, and Ottawa (1.2 million, Ontario, on the Ottawa River) are on the shores of the Great Lakes or their rivers.

Though the five lakes have separate basins, they form a single, connected body of freshwater. The lakes connect the east-central interior of North America to the Atlantic Ocean. Lakes Michigan, Huron and Erie are approximately equally high and ships can easily pass from one to the next. Water flows from Lake Superior and Lake Michigan into Lake Huron; then through the Detroit River into Lake Erie; then through Niagara Falls into Lake Ontario; and then through the Saint Lawrence River to the Atlantic Ocean. Water also drains from the Chicago River on the south.

Many rivers flow through a large watershed into the lakes. The lakes have about 35,000 islands. The Great Lakes region includes the five lakes and many thousands of smaller lakes, often called inland lakes.

Lake Michigan and Lake Huron hit all-time record low levels in 2013.

The unusual shape of the Great Lakes has created the possibility of large waves called seiche. If a storm causes a fast, strong increase in air pressure on one side of a lake, the water level on that side of the lake will drop and suddenly push up the water level on the opposite side of the lake.  A 10 foot tall wave in Chicago caused several deaths in 1954.

The Great Lakes are home to a variety of species of fish and other organisms. In recent years, overfishing caused a decline in lake trout. The drop in lake trout increased the alewife population. In response, the government introduced salmon as a predator to decrease the alewife population. This program was so successful that the salmon population rose rapidly, and the states surrounding Lake Michigan promoted 'salmon snagging'. This has been made illegal in all of the Great Lakes states except for a limited season in Illinois. Lake Michigan is now being stocked with several species of fish. However, several invader species such as lampreys, round goby, and zebra mussels threaten the native fish populations.

Accidentally introduced species are a big problem. Since the 19th century about 160 species have invaded the Great Lakes ecosystem, causing severe economic and ecological impacts. According to the Inland Seas Education Association, they deprive fish of food, cause blooms of toxic algae, and foul boats, spawning areas and drinking water intakes. On average a new invasive species enters the Great Lakes every eight months.

Two important infestations in the Great Lakes are the zebra mussel,  first discovered in 1988, and the quagga mussel in 1989. These molluscs are efficient filter feeders. They compete with native mussels, and also reduce available food and spawning grounds for fish.

Also, the mussels hurt utility and manufacturing industries by clogging or blocking pipes. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service estimates that the economic impact of the zebra mussel will be about $5 billion over the next decade. Because the quagga mussel is good at filtering plankton from the lake water, sunlight reaches deeper into the lake. This increases the growth of algae.

Chemicals from industrial plants run off the land into rivers and arrive in the lakes. Some of these chemicals are highly toxic, such as mercury. Contaminated water from sewer overflows also reaches the lakes, and beaches get closed because of the threat of pathogenic bacteria.

God is a being or spirit worshipped as a deity. God is considered to be the creator of the universe in some religions. Theists believe that God created everything that s and has ever existed. Some theists think God is immortal (cannot die) and has power without limits.  Deism is the belief that God exists, but God does not very often change or never changes things in the universe.  Pantheism is the belief that the universe is God, while atheism is the belief that there are no deities. Agnostics think we cannot know for sure whether God or gods exist, but still might (or might not) believe at least one deity exists.  People who believe that the word "God" should be defined before taking a theological position are ignostic.

In some religions, there is only one deity, God. This is called monotheism. Some monotheistic religions are the Abrahamic religions (Christianity, Judaism, and Islam), the Bahá'í Faith, and Sikhism. In other religions there are many gods. This is polytheism. Some polytheistic religions are Hinduism, Shinto, Taoism, paganism, Wicca and some variants of Buddhism. Some say that there is one God who can come in many forms, or that there is one God that is more powerful than the other gods.

In philosophy and theology, people normally write about a God that has a personality but no body and is everywhere at once; that God made the world and time and is separate from the world; that no-one made God; that God knows everything and has all power; that God is both free and good; and that God is perfect and the start of all morality.

There are different names for God in different religions. Some examples are Yahweh, Elohim in Judaism and Christianity, Allah in Islam, Baha in Bahá'í Faith, and Ahura Mazda in Zoroastrianism.

In English, people may write the words "god" and "gods"  in lowercase letters. People that believe in only one god (monotheists) like to write God with a capital letter. Some people that believe in more than one god (polytheists) also like to use capital letters when writing about their gods. Most people that believe in God or gods do not believe in the gods of other religions.

Many people have asked themselves if God exists. Philosophers, theologians, and others have tried to prove that it exists. Others have tried to disprove the hypothesis. In philosophical terminology, such arguments are about the epistemology of the ontology of God. The debate exists mainly in philosophy, because science does not address whether or not supernatural things exist.

There are many philosophical issues with the existence of God. Some definitions of God are not specific. Arguments for the existence of God typically include metaphysical, empirical, inductive, and subjective types. Some theories try to explain order and complexity in the world without evolution or scientific method. Arguments against the existence of God typically include empirical, deductive, and inductive arguments. Conclusions sometimes include: "God does not exist" (strong atheism); "God almost certainly does not exist" (de facto atheism); "no one knows whether God exists" (agnosticism); "God exists, but this cannot be proven or disproven" (deism or theism); and "God exists and this can be proven" (theism). There are many variations on these positions, and sometimes different names for some of them. For example, the position "God exists and this can be proven"  is sometimes called "gnostic theism" or "strong theism".

By the year 2000, approximately 53% of the world's population were part of one of the three main Abrahamic religions (33% Christian, 20% Islam,  less than 1% Judaism), 6% with Buddhism, 13% with Hinduism, 6% with traditional Chinese religion, 7% with various other religions, and less than 15% as non-religious. Most of these religious beliefs involve God or gods. Some religions do not believe in a god or do not include the concept of gods.

Abrahamic religions are very popular monotheistic ones. Well-known Abrahamic religions include Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Monotheistic means the people in these religions believe there is only one God. The name of God is usually not allowed to be said in Judaism, but some Jews today call him YHWH (Yahweh) or Jehovah. Muslims say the word Allah, which is the Arabic word for "God".

Believers in the Abrahamic religions (except Islamic believers) believe that God has created human beings in his image, but this idea is not easily understood by humankind. One artistic idea is that of an wise elder man in use since the Renaissance.

The Christian Bible talks about God in different ways. Within Christian canon the Old Testament talks about "God the Father", whilst the Gospels in the New Testament are about Jesus, or "God the Son". Many Christians believe that Jesus was God's incarnation on Earth. Christians consider the  Holy Spirit to be God as well, the third person of God.

In the New Testament, there are three beings who are said to be God in different forms: the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit (also known as the Holy Ghost). This is called the Trinity. Although the word "Trinity" is not in the Bible, the word used for God in chapter one of Genesis is actually plural, and the phrase "in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit' is used in the New Testament, (e.g. Matthew 28:19). Another word that Christians believe has exactly the same meaning as "Trinity" is the word "Godhead", which is in the Bible.

Christians believe that God incarnated in a human body, through the normal birth process, normally growing up into a man named Jesus or (Yeshua), coming to Earth specifically to give every person an opportunity of salvation from their own evil, called sin. The effect of personal evil far transcends the repercussions humans cause to one another in the world, but affects one's relationship with God the Father, and that aspect of the self cannot be addressed through one's own self-improvement efforts, but requires God to intervene in order to set one right. When Jesus prayed and talked to God, he called him "Father," and taught others to do the same.

Jesus also taught that one must be born again in order to receive God's Spirit, otherwise one remains separated from God, acting merely from their own mind, thus being vulnerable to deception by human philosophies or the many spiritual philosophies which do not come from God but from fallen angels, which are within various false religions. After a person consciously accepts the free gift of eternal life, which Jesus's sacrifice offers, God comes to live in the individual, as God lived in humankind before the Fall.

In Hinduism, there is only one God, named Brahman, but Brahman is said to have taken on many different incarnations. Some of these are Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Shiva, Kali, Parvati, and Durga. To many outsiders, the worship of God's different incarnations is considered to be the worship of many gods. However, it is really only the worship of one God in different ways.

Some Hindus also believe that the spirit of God lives in everyone. This idea is called Advaita Vedanta, which is the Hindu term for Monism.

Religions like Buddhism and Confucianism involve the worship of many gods, or sometimes no gods at all.

In Shinto, there is not a single specific God, as is in most religions, but instead, a wide variety of deities called kami, they are the spirit and essence of all nature things, both animate and inanimate, even including rocks, trees and poetry, for example. As Shinto is a  polytheistic religion, it is usually believed that there are eight-million Kami (八百万の神 yaoyorozu-no-kami), in the Japanese language, the number "eight-million" is normally used to mean infinity.

Philosophers can talk about God or god; sometimes they talk about a specific god, but other times they are just talking about the idea of god.

One of the earliest Western philosophers to write about God in a monotheistic way was the Greek Aristotle, who describes god as the Supreme Cause. Aristotle saw God as a being that makes everything happen, but is not influenced by anything else.

The idea of an "all powerful" God raises some interesting questions. One of them is called the God paradox. It asks whether God can make a mountain (or rock) that is so heavy he cannot lift it. The question considers if a god "who can do anything" could do two things that are mutually contradictory.

There have been several attempts to prove the existence of God with logic. Blaise Pascal said that it is better to believe there is a god, than to believe there isn't. This argument is known as Pascal's wager today. Note that Blaise Pascal was a mathematician, and he used this argument to illustrate the concept of expected value in statistics. Other attempts known as the ontological argument, the cosmological argument, and teleological argument today. Kurt Gödel formulated an argument for the existence of God using modal logic in the 1970s.

History is the study of past events. People know what happened in the past by looking at  from the past including sources (like books, newspapers, scripts and letters), buildings and different types of artifacts (like pottery, tools, coins and human or animal remains.) Libraries, archives, and museums collect and keep these things for people to study history. A person who studies history is called a historian. A person who studies pre-history and history through things left behind by ancient cultures is called an archaeologist. A person who studies mankind and society is called an anthropologist. The study of the sources and methods used to study and write history is called historiography.

People can learn about the past by talking to people who remember things that happened at some point in the past. This is called oral history. For example, when people who had been slaves and American Civil War survivors got old, some historians recorded them talking about their lives, so that history would not be lost.

In old times people in different parts of the world kept separate histories because they did not meet each other very often. Some groups of people never met each other. The rulers of Medieval Europe, Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome and Ancient China each thought that they ruled the only important parts of the world and that other parts were "barbarian". But they were still connected, even if they didn't realize it.

The term "historically" is used to say that something has been a certain way during most of its history. For example, a historically female university is a university which has had a student body that was mostly or entirely female for most of its history.

Current events, modern economic history, modern social history and modern intellectual history take very different views of the way history has affected the way that we think today.

Gravity, or gravitation is one of the fundamental forces of the universe. It is an attraction, or pull, between any two objects with mass. We discuss it here in three parts:

Some physicists think gravity is caused by gravitons, but they are still unsure.

In everyday talk, we say things fall because the Earth's gravity pulls on them. We talk as if our weight was a "given". Actually, weight changes when the pull of gravity changes. The Moon's pull of gravity is about one sixth smaller than Earth. So any object on the Moon weighs one sixth of its weight on Earth. What does not change is the amount of matter in an object. That is called conservation of mass. On Earth, mass and weight are the same for most purposes, though a sensitive gravimeter can detect the difference. The difference can be very different on other extraterrestrial objects such as the moon, and other planets.

The Earth has mass. Every particle of matter has mass. So the Earth pulls on every object and person, and they pull on the Earth. This pulling force is called "gravity" and it gives weight.

These words mean almost the same thing in everyday use. Sometimes scientists use "gravity" for the force that pulls objects towards each other, and "gravitation" for the theory about the attraction.

According to one of his students, Galileo did a famous experiment about gravity where he dropped balls from the Tower of Pisa. He later rolled balls down inclines. With these experiments, Galileo showed that gravitation accelerates all objects at the same rate regardless of weight.

Johannes Kepler studied the motion of planets. In 1609 and 1616 he published his three laws governing the shape of their orbits and their speed along those orbits, but did not discover why they moved that way.

In 1687, English mathematician Isaac Newton wrote the Principia. In this book, he wrote about the inverse-square law of gravitation. Newton, following an idea that had long been discussed by others, said that the closer two objects are to each other, the more gravity will affect them.

According to Newton's law of universal gravitation, gravity is a force between any two objects with mass. Three numbers affect its strength: the mass of each object, and the distance between them. These two objects will both pull on each other with the same force. However, a force has a greater effect on objects with less mass. The force between the Sun and the Earth makes the Earth orbit the Sun, but it only moves the Sun a small amount.

Newton's laws were used later to predict the existence of the planet Neptune based on changes in the orbit of Uranus, and again to predict the existence of another planet closer to the Sun than Mercury. When this was done, it was learned that his theory was not entirely correct. These mistakes in his theory were corrected by Albert Einstein's theory of General Relativity. Newton's theory is still commonly used for many things because it is simpler and is accurate enough for many uses.

Why does the Earth not fall into the Sun? The answer is simple but very important. It is because the Earth moving round the Sun is in a dynamic equilibrium. The speed of the Earth's movement creates a centrifugal force which balances the gravitational force between the Sun and the Earth. Why does the Earth continue spinning? Because there is no force to stop it.

Newton's first law: "If a body is at rest it remains at rest or if it is in motion it moves at the same speed until it is acted on by an external force".

There is a kind of analogy between centrifugal force and gravitational force, which led to the "equivalence principle" of general relativity.

In free fall an object's motion balances out the pull of gravity on it. This includes being in orbit.

The special theory of relativity describes systems where gravity is not an issue; by contrast, gravity is the central issue of the general theory of relativity.

In general relativity there is no gravitational force deflecting objects from their natural, straight paths. Instead, gravity is seen as changes in the properties of space and time. In turn, this changes the straightest-possible paths that objects will naturally follow. The curvature is, in turn, caused by the energy–momentum of matter. Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve.

For weak gravitational fields and slow speeds relative to the speed of light, the theory's predictions converge on those of Newton's law of universal gravitation. Newton's equations are used to plan journeys in our Solar System.

Gravity influences the passage of time. Light sent down into a gravity well is blueshifted, whereas light sent in the opposite direction (i.e., climbing out of the gravity well) is redshifted; collectively, these two effects are known as the gravitational frequency shift.

More generally, processes close to a massive body run more slowly when compared with processes taking place farther away; this effect is known as gravitational time dilation.

General relativity predicts that the path of light is bent in a gravitational field; light passing a massive body is deflected towards that body. This effect has been confirmed by observing the light of stars or distant quasars being deflected as it passes the Sun.

Closely related to light deflection is the gravitational time delay (or Shapiro delay), the phenomenon that light signals take longer to move through a gravitational field than they would in the absence of that field. There have been numerous successful tests of this prediction.

A parameter called γ encodes the influence of gravity on the geometry of space.

Gravitational waves are ripples in the curvature of spacetime. They move as a wave, travelling outward from the source. Einstein predicted them in 1915 on the basis of his theory of general relativity. In theory, gravitational waves transport energy as gravitational radiation. Sources of detectable gravitational waves might include binary star systems composed of white dwarfs, neutron stars, or black holes. In general relativity, gravitational waves cannot travel faster than the speed of light.

The 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics was awarded for measurements of the Hulse-Taylor binary star system. These measurements suggested gravitational waves are more than mathematical peculiarities.

On February 11, 2016, the LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration teams announced that they had made the first observation of gravitational waves, originating from a pair of merging black holes using the Advanced LIGO detectors. On June 15, 2016, a second detection of gravitational waves from coalescing black holes was announced. Besides LIGO, many other gravitational-wave observatories (detectors) are under construction.

Golf is a game played in an open field where the golfer plays his golf ball into a hole by using different types of clubs (golf instruments). The book Rules of Golf reads "The Game of Golf consists in playing a ball from the teeing ground into the hole by a stroke or successive strokes in accordance with the Rules."

In golf, a golfer plays a number of holes in a given order. 18 holes played in an order controlled by the golf course design, normally make up a game. On a nine-hole course, two nine-hole rounds make up a normal game.

Each hole starts from the teeing area. Golfers put the ball on a small stand called a tee and swing a club at it to try and hit it as straight and far as possible. Once each golfer in the group has done this, the person whose ball landed farthest from the hole hits his again, followed by everyone else, one person at a time, until everyone is on the green. The green is the area near the hole where the grass is cut very short.

Once on the green the players will try to "putt" the ball into the hole. Putting is similar to a regular swing except it is not as hard and the player does not want the ball to go in the air. Once each player has put their ball into the hole, the group moves on to the next hole.

Each time a player swings at his ball, it is considered a "stroke". Each hole is a certain number of strokes that golfers are expected to need to get their ball into the hole. This is known as the "par". If a player gets his ball in the hole in less than the par he gets a "birdie". If it takes him one more shot then the par it is known as a bogey. Most holes have a par between 3 and 5.

The two common forms of playing golf are match play and stroke play. In match play, two golfers (or two teams) play holes one at a time. The golfer with the lower number of strokes (number of times the golfer used to get his ball in the hole) wins that hole. If the two have the same number of strokes, the hole is "halved" (drawn). The golfer that has the greatest number of holes wins. In stroke play, the golfer (or team) with the smallest number of strokes all together wins. There are different forms of these rules, some given in the "Rules of Golf" making them "official".

The four different types of clubs used in golf are woods, irons, putters and wedges. Woods are used to hit the ball very far, usually off the tee (but also on the fairway and a lay-up in Par 5s.). The name of woods is different every number, for example, No.1 wood is called "driver" it is the farthest in all the clubs you have, No.2 is "brassey", No.3 is "spoon" and so on. There are many types of irons, which can be used to hit varying distances. They are numbered 1-9 with a 1 iron hitting the ball farthest than shorter every club to a 9 iron. The 1 iron is no longer common in the game. Even the 2 iron is getting uncommon. Pitching wedge, 52 degrees and 58 degrees are the most common wedges to use. They are the most common used in around the greens for chipping. Putters are used when on the green. The rules do not let the golfer use over 14 clubs in a game.

Golfers call the four (or five) biggest tournaments in professional golf "majors", and they play them at nearly the same time every year. The four majors are separate for men and women.

In 2013, women's golf added the fifth major. The Evian Masters, held in France.

Vincent Clark won the first ever open championship which was held in St Andrews in 1860.

Hong Kong (; ,  , literally "Fragrant Port"), officially The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of The People's Republic of China (HKSAR), is one of two Special Administrative Regions (SARs) of the People's Republic of China (the other is Macau).:,

It is one of the richest and most developed parts in the world, and one where the cost of living is one of the highest. Hong Kong grew quickly in the decades after World War II, becoming a famous world-class financial centre. Hong Kong was one of the last territories of the British Empire until 1997, when United Kingdom handed it over to China. China then promised to grant it special status for 50 years.:.

The population of Hong Kong is over seven million. The economy has rapidly grown from a trading port to a very rich city. Hong Kong has the most skyscrapers in the world.

Hong Kong was a British colony from 1842 to 1997 as China surrendered the city after losing the Second Opium War. After the handover in 1997, Hong Kong became under Chinese control under special status.

Hong Kong has its own constitution that is different from that of the People's Republic of China (PRC).::.

Hong Kong is in a sub-tropical area, and has monsoon winds. It is cool and wet in winter (January-March), hot and rainy from spring through summer (April-September), and warm, sunny and dry in the autumn (October-December). The rainy season is from May until September. In summer and early autumn, there is a frequent threat of typhoons.

The population of Hong Kong reached 7.5 million (7,503,100) in 2023. Most of the people in Hong Kong are Chinese. Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated countries in the world. It has an overall population density of 6,300 people per square kilometre.

Hong Kong has one of the world’s lowest birth rates — 1.05 per woman at an age of being capable to give birth as of 2019. This is far below the rate needed to replace each person, 2.1.

People from Hong Kong mainly speak Cantonese. Students are required to learn English at school. Ever since Hong Kong became a part of China, the number of people who speak Mandarin has increased because Mandarin is the official language of China.

There are coins from 10 cents to 10 Hong Kong Dollars and bank-notes (paper money bills) from $10 to $1000. One American dollar equals to  HK$7.80±0.05 Hong Kong Dollars, according to the official pegged exchange rate.

Hong Kong's education system is mostly based on the English system. Children are required to be in school from age 6 until completing secondary school (high school) at age 18.

According to the International Housing Affordability survey, Hong Kong has the most unaffordable housing market in the world since 2010.

Hong Kong has a few media companies, notably Television Broadcasts Limited (TVB), HK Television Entertainment (HKTVE),  and Fantastic Television. Access to television is not affected by Chinese regulations, such as the Great Firewall, which filters and blocks certain programs.

Homer is the name of the Greek poet who wrote the epic poems the Iliad and the Odyssey. These are the earliest works of Greek literature which have survived to the present day, and are among the greatest treasures of the ancient world. They are a product of Mycenaean culture. The Iliad tells the story of the Trojan war, which took place around 1190 BC. The manuscripts of Homer were written much later, probably later than 800 BC.

What makes the history of this period so difficult is that the Mycenaean civilization was followed by several hundred years of decline, from which little or no writing has survived. This period, the Greek Dark Ages, ended around 800 BC, when once again we find Greek writing, though this time in their newly developed alphabetic script. Therefore, there is a distinct possibility that the Homeric epics had a life, perhaps a long life, as oral literature, spoken by story-tellers.

We know little about Homer, and the later Greeks also knew little about him. Some have doubted he was a real person.  A legend, has it that he was a blind poet who lived in Ionia. There is no definite evidence for any of these ideas.

There is archaeological evidence that Troy existed. The site of Troy has been discovered, and excavated. Therefore, it is a fair guess that the epic began as a long oral poem based on the siege of Troy, but with details added and changed as time went on. Homer's poetry is different from other poetry because it had to be short in order to be memorized.

The date of Homer's existence is not known. Herodotus said that Homer lived 400 years before his own time, which would place him at around 850 BC; but other ancient sources gave dates much closer to the time of the Trojan War. The date of the Trojan War was given as 1194–1184 BC by Eratosthenes.

Today, "the date of Homer" means the date of the writing down the oral poems, rather than the life of Homer. This is called the transcription date. The language suggests that the earliest possible date for the transcription is 800 BC, and the latest possible date is 600 AD.

Hinduism (हिन्दू धर्म) () is an Indian religion, a religious and universal order or way of life afterwards. As a religion, it is the world's third-largest, with over 1.5 billion followers, or 15% of the global population, known as Hindus. While Hinduism has been called the oldest religion in the world, many Hindus call it Sanātana Dharma, (Devanagari: सनातन धर्म) meaning the "Eternal Religion" which refers to the idea that its origins lie beyond human history, as revealed in the Hindu texts. Another word used is Vedic Dharma, the dharma related to the Vedas.

Hinduism is a diverse system of thought marked by a range of philosophies and shared concepts, rituals, cosmological systems, pilgrimage sites, and shared textual sources that discuss theology, metaphysics, mythology, Vedic yajna, yoga, agamic rituals, and temple building, among other topics. Prominent themes in Hindu beliefs include the four Puruṣārthas, the proper goals or aims of human life; namely, dharma (ethics/duties), artha (prosperity/work), kama (desires/passions) and moksha (liberation/freedom from the passions and the cycle of death and rebirth), as well as karma (action, intent and consequences) and saṃsāra (cycle of death and rebirth). Hinduism prescribes the eternal duties, such as honesty, refraining from injuring living beings, patience, forbearance, self-restraint, virtue, and compassion, among others. Hindu practices include worship (puja), fire rituals, recitations, devotion, chanting, meditation, sacrifice, charity, selfless service, homage to one's ancestors, family-oriented rites of passage, annual festivals, and occasional pilgrimages. Along with the various practices associated with yoga, some Hindus leave their social world and material possessions and engage in lifelong Sannyasa (monasticism) in order to achieve moksha.

Hindu texts are classified into Śruti ("heard") and Smṛti ("remembered"). The major scriptures are the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Purānas, the Mahābhārata, the Rāmāyana, and the Āgamas. There are six āstika schools of Hindu philosophy, who recognise the authority of the Vedas, namely Sānkhya, Yoga, Nyāya, Vaisheshika, Mimāmsā, and Vedānta. While the Puranic chronology presents a genealogy of thousands of years, starting with the Vedic rishis, scholars regard Hinduism as a fusion or synthesisof Brahmanical orthopraxy with various Indian cultures, having diverse roots and no specific founder. This Hindu synthesis emerged after the Vedic period, between c. 500–200 BCE and c. 300 CE, in the period of the Second Urbanisation and the early classical period of Hinduism, when the Epics and the first Purānas were composed. It flourished in the medieval period, with the decline of Buddhism in India.

Currently, the four major traditions of "Hinduism" are Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism, and the Smarta tradition.  Sources of authority and eternal truths in the Hindu texts play an important role, but there is also a strong Hindu tradition of questioning authority in order to deepen the understanding of these truths and to further develop the tradition. "Hinduism" is the most widely professed faith in "India", Nepal, Mauritius and in Bali, Indonesia. Significant numbers of Professed Hindu communities are found in other countries of South Asia, in Southeast Asia, in the Caribbean, Gulf states, North America, and round the world.

The name "Indo/Hindu", root of "Hinduize(-d/-r/-ing/-ism)", "Hindutva(vadi)", "Hindi", "Indonesia" and "India(n)(ness).." is a rip-off of a classic Persian name "هندو/Hindoo/Hindū", from Mid(dle)-Persian  "Hindook/Hindūg", which comes from Proto-Persian name "𐏃𐎡𐎯𐎢𐏁/Hindoo/Hindu", which is a Persian transliteration of Indo-Aryan/Sanskrit name "Sindhoo" or "Sindhu" which is the Sanskrit name for the Sindhu River of Pakistan. According to Gavin Flood, the noun "Hindoos" or "Hindus" was originally used by Persians to refer to Pakistan, but then extended to mean the full Indian subcontinent.  An inscription of Darius I which was written around 550–486 BCE also described Hindus as the People of the Indus. These types of records did not refer to Hindoos or Hindus and it's derivatives as a religion (like Judaism, Christianity or Islam). The earliest record which refer to Hindoo or Hindu, as religion may be the 7th-century CE Chinese text Record of the Western Regions by Xuanzang, and the 14th-century Persian text Futuhu's-salatin by 'Abd al-Malik Isami.  The Arabic term al-Hind referred to the people, who lived on the Banks of the Indus.  It means "Land of Hindus" which is what it stood for until Islam started to come into the Subcontinent.

The term Hindoo or Hindu as later used in some Sanskrit texts like later Rajataranginis of Kashmir (Hinduka, c. 1450) and some 16th- to 18th-century Bengali Gaudiya Vaishnava texts including Chaitanya Charitamrita and Chaitanya Bhagavata. These texts used to distinguish Bharatiyas from Pakistani Muslims who are called Yavanas (Greeks) or Mlecchas (barbarians), with the 16th-century Chaitanya Charitamrita text and the 17th century Bhakta Mala text using the phrase "Hindu dharma". In the end of the 18th century the European merchants and colonists began to call followers of Indian religions Hindoos or Hindus. The term Hinduism or Hindooism, was introduced into the English language in the 18th-century to denote the religious, philosophical, and cultural traditions of Pakistan and "India".

Hinduism is diverse on ideas on spirituality and traditions, but it has no ecclesiastical order, no unquestionable religious authorities, no governing body, no prophet(s) nor any binding holy book; Hindus can choose to be polytheistic, pantheistic, monotheistic, monistic, agnostic, atheistic or humanist. Because of the wideness and openness of Hinduism, arriving at a definition is difficult.  Hinduism has been defined as a religion, a religious tradition, a set of religious beliefs, and "a way of life". From a Western point of view, Hinduism like other faiths is referred to as a religion. In "India" the term dharma is preferred, which is broader than the western term religion.

The study of "India" and its cultures and religions, and the definition of "Hinduism", has been shaped by the interests of colonialism and by the Judaic, Christian and Islamic notions of religion. Since the 1990s, those influences and its outcomes have been the topic of debate among scholars of Hinduism, and have also been taken over by critics of the Western view on "India".

Hindu beliefs include (but are not restricted to) Dharma (ethics/duties),  (the continuing cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth), Karma (Every action has a reaction), Moksha (liberation from samsara or liberation in this life), and the various Yogas (paths or practices). These are known as the Puruṣārthas.

Dharma is considered one of the most important goals of a human being in Hinduism. Dharma is considered Important because it is Dharma which makes running of Universe and life possible, and includes duties, virtues and "right way of living". Hindu Dharma includes the religious duties, moral rights and duties of each individual, as well as behaviors that enable social order, right conduct, and those that are virtuous. The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad states it as:

In the Mahabharata, Krishna says it is Dharma which is holding both this-worldly and other-worldly affairs (Mbh 12.110.11). The word Sanātana means eternal, perennial, or forever; thus, Sanātana Dharma means the dharma that has neither beginning nor end.

Artha is the second goal of life in Hinduism. It means pursuit of wealth for livelihood, and economic prosperity. It includes political life, diplomacy and material well-being. The Artha includes all "means of life", activities and resources that enables one to be in a state one wants to be in, wealth, career and financial security. Artha is considered an important aim of human life in Hinduism.

Kāma (Sanskrit, Pali; Devanagari: काम) means desire, wish, passion, pleasure of the senses, the enjoyment of life, affection, or love, with or without sexual connotations. In Hinduism, Kama is considered an important and healthy goal of human life when pursued without sacrificing Dharma, Artha and Moksha.

Karma  means action, work, or deed, and also the vedic theory of "cause and effect". The theory is a combination of (1) causality that may be moral or non-moral; (2) moralization, that is good or bad actions have consequences; and (3) rebirth. Karma theory means Whatever experience currently a man has is due to his/her past work or actions. These actions may be in a person's current life, or, in some schools of Hinduism, actions in their past lives. This cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth is called Saṃsāra. Liberation from samsara through moksha is believed to ensure lasting happiness and peace. Hindu scriptures teach that the future depends on current actions and our past deeds.

The ultimate goal of life, according to Hinduism is moksha, nirvana or samadhi, but this is understood in different ways in different schools. For example, Advaita Vedanta says that after attaining moksha a person knows their "soul, self" and identifies it as one with Brahman (Ultimate reality or cause of everything). The followers of Dvaita (dualistic) schools, state that after attaining moksha a person identify "soul, self" different from Brahman but very close to Brahman, and after attaining moksha one will spend eternity in a loka (higher plane). According to theistic schools of Hinduism, moksha is liberation from samsara, while for other schools such as the monistic school, moksha is possible in current life and is a psychological concept.

Hinduism is diverse.  Basically it depends on individuals choice and that's why sometimes Hinduism is referred to as henotheistic (i.e., involving devotion to a single god while accepting the existence of others), but this is an over generalization.

Hindus believe that all living creatures have a soul. This soul or true "self" of every living being is called the ātman. The soul is believed to be eternal. According to the monistic/pantheistic (non-dualist) theologies of Hinduism (such as the Advaita Vedanta school), this Atman is indistinct from Brahman. The goal of life, according to the Advaita school, is to realise that one's soul is identical to the supreme soul, that the supreme soul is present in everything and everyone, all life is interconnected and there is oneness in all life. Dualistic schools (see Dvaita and Bhakti) sees Brahman as a Supreme Being separate from individual souls. They worship the Supreme Being variously as Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva, or Shakti, depending upon the sect. God is called Ishvara, Bhagavan, Parameshwara, Devadu or Devi, and these terms have different meanings in different schools of Hinduism. Devi is typically used when refereeing to a female goddess.

The Hindu scriptures refer to celestial entities called Devas (or  in feminine form;  used synonymously for Deva in Hindi), which in English means demi-gods or heavenly beings. The devas are an integral part of Hindu culture and are depicted in art, architecture and through icons, and stories about them are related in the scriptures, particularly in Indian epic poetry and the Puranas. They are, however, often distinguished from Ishvara, a personal god, with many Hindus worshipping Ishvara in one of its particular manifestations as their , or chosen ideal. The choice is a matter of individual preference, and of regional and family traditions. The multitude of Devas are considered as manifestations of Brahman.

Hinduism has no central doctrinal authority and Hindus do not claim to belong to any particular sect or tradition. Four major sects in Hinduism are: Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism and Smarthism.

Vaishnavism is the tradition that worships Vishnu and his avatars, such as Krishna and Rama. The people of this sect are generally non-ascetic, monastic. These practices include community dancing, singing of Kirtans and Bhajans, with sound and music believed by some to have meditative and spiritual powers.

Shaivism is the tradition that focuses on Shiva. Shaivas are more attracted to ascetic individualism, and it has several sub-schools. Their practices include Bhakti-style devotion but also Advaita and Yoga. Some Shaivas worship in temples, but some practice yoga, striving to be one with Shiva within. Shaivas visualize god as half male, half female, as a combination of the male and female principles (Ardhanarishvara). Shaivism is related to Shaktism, where Shakti is seen as the wife of Shiva. Shaivism is mainly practiced in the Himalayan north from Kashmir to Nepal, and in south "India".

Shaktism focuses on goddess worship of Shakti or Devi as cosmic mother, and it is mainly worshipped in northeastern and eastern states of "India" such as Assam and Bengal. Devi is depicted as in gentler forms like Parvati, the consort of Shiva; or, as warrior goddesses like Kali and Durga. Community celebrations include festivals, some of which include processions and idol immersion in the sea or other water bodies.

Smartism  worships all the major Hindu deities like Shiva, Vishnu, Shakti, Ganesha, Surya and Skanda. The Smarta tradition developed during the (early) Classical Period of Hinduism around the beginning of the Common Era, when Hinduism emerged from the interaction between Brahmanism and local traditions. The Smarta tradition is very much same as Advaita Vedanta, and considers Adi Shankara as its founder or reformer.  He considered worship of God-with-attributes (saguna Brahman) as a journey towards ultimately realizing God-without-attributes (nirguna Brahman, Atman, Self-knowledge).

Hindu text are world's oldest and were written in Sanskrit and Tamil. The oldest Text is Rig Veda which is about 4000 years old. Hindu Texts can be divided in two parts:

Shruti or Shruthi in Sanskrit means "that which is heard" These ancient religious texts include the four Vedas with its four types of attached texts - the Samhitas, the Brahmanas, the Aranyakas and the early Upanishads

Smriti  meaning "that which is remembered" is a body of Hindu texts. Smriti were the texts which were remembered and were spread through mouth from generation to generation. Smriti includes the Mahābhārata and Rāmāyana, the Dharmasūtras and Dharmaśāstras or Smritiśāstras, the Arthasaśāstras, the Purānas, and the Kāvya or poetical literature.

There are many Hindu Festivals celebrated throughout the world but mainly in "India" and Nepal. These festivals include worship, offerings to deities, fasting, rituals, fairs, charity, celebrations, Puja, etc. The festivals mainly celebrate events from Hindu mythology, changes in season, changes in the Solar System. Different sects celebrate different festivals but festivals like Diwali, Holi, Shivratri, Raksha Bandhan, Janamashtmi etc. are celebrated by the majority of Hindus.

The origins of Hinduism are unknown but the earliest traces of Hinduism come from Mesolithic sites such as the rock paintings of Bhimbetka rock shelters dating to a period of 30,000 BCE or older, as well as neolithic times. Some of the religious practices can be considered to have originated in 4000 BCE. Several tribal religions still exist, though their practices may not resemble those of prehistoric religions.

According to one view, the Varna system, which later transformed into caste system during the British rule, shows how strongly many have felt about each person following his or her dharma, or destined path.

Many Hindus say it goes against the true meaning of dharma. However, Varna plays a big role in Hindu society. It's later transformation to the Caste system during the British rule in India and it lost favour, becoming illegal after the independence of India.

Puja (worship) takes place in the Mandir (temple). Mandirs vary in size from small village shrines to large buildings, surrounded by walls. People can also visit the Mandir at any time to pray and participate in the bhajans (religious songs). Hindus also worship at home and often have a special room with a shrine to particular gods.

Temple construction in "India" started nearly 2000 years ago. The oldest temples that were built of brick and wood no longer exist. Stone later became the preferred material. Temples marked the transition of Hinduism from the Vedic religion of ritual sacrifices to a religion of Bhakti or love and devotion to a personal deity. Temple construction and mode of worship is governed by ancient Sanskrit scriptures called agamas, of which there are several, which deal with individual deities. There are substantial differences in architecture, customs, rituals and traditions in temples in different parts of "India". During the ritual consecration of a temple, the presence of the universal all-encompassing Brahman is invoked into the main stone deity of the temple, through ritual. This makes the deity and the temple sacred and divine

The Bhakti (Devotional) school takes its name from the Hindu term that signifies a blissful, selfless and overwhelming love of God as the beloved Father, Mother, Child, or whatever relationship finds appeal in the devotee's heart. The philosophy of Bhakti seeks to tap into the universal divinity through personal form, which explains the proliferation of so many gods and goddesses in "India", often reflecting the  inclinations of small regions or groups of people. Seen as a form of Yoga, or union, it seeks to dissolve the ego in God, since consciousness of the body and limited mind as self is seen to be a divisive factor in spiritual realization. Essentially, it is God who effects all change, who is the source of all works, who acts through the devotee as love and light. 'Sins' and evil-doings of the devotee are said to fall away of their own accord, the devotee shriven, limitedness even transcended, through the love of God. The Bhakti movements rejuvenated Hinduism through their intense expression of faith and their responsiveness to the emotional and philosophical needs of "India". They can rightly be said to have affected the greatest wave of change in Hindu prayer and ritual since ancient times.

The most popular means of expressing love for God in the Hindu tradition has been through puja, or ritual devotion, frequently using the aid of a murti (statue) in conjunction with the singing or chanting of meditational prayer in the form of mantras.

Devotional songs called bhajans (written primarily from the 14th-17th centuries), kirtan (praise), and arti (a filtered down form of Vedic fire ritual) are sometimes sung in conjunction with performance of puja. This rather organic system of devotion attempts to aid the individual in connecting with God through symbolic medium. It is said, however, that the bhakta, through a growing connection with God, is eventually able to avoid all external form and is immersed entirely in the bliss of undifferentiated Love in Truth.

Altogether, bhakti resulted in a mass of devotional literature, music and art that has enriched the world and gave "India" renewed spiritual impetus, one eschewing unnecessary ritual and artificial social boundaries. See bhakti yoga for more.

According to the most famous Western Tantrik scholar, Sir John Woodroffe (pseudonym Arthur Avalon): "The Indian Tantras, which are numerous, constitute the Scripture (Shastra) of the Kaliyuga, and as such are the voluminous source of present and practical orthodox 'Hinduism'. The Tantra Shastra is, in fact, and whatever be its historical origin, a development of the Vaidika Karmakanda, promulgated to meet the needs of that age. Shiva says: 'For the benefit of men of the Kali age, men bereft of energy and dependent for existence on the food they eat, the Kaula doctrine, O auspicious one! is given' (Chap. IX., verse 12). To the Tantra we must therefore look if we would understand aright both ritual, yoga, and sadhana of all kinds, as also the general principles of which these practices are but the objective expression." (Introduction to Sir John Woodroffe's translation of "Mahanirvana Tantra.")

The word "tantra" means "treatise" or "continuum", and is applied to a variety of mystical, occult, medical and scientific works as well as to those which we would now regard as "tantric". Most tantras were written in the late Middle Ages and sprang from Hindu cosmology and Yoga.

Many Hindus are vegetarians (do not eat meat) because of their respect for life. About 30% of today's Hindu population, especially in orthodox communities in South India, in certain northerly states like Gujarat, and in many Brahmin areas around the subcontinent, are vegetarian.

Most Hindus who do eat meat do not eat beef. Some do not even use leather products. This is most likely because many Hindus have relied so heavily on the cow for all sorts of dairy products, tilling of fields and fuel for fertiliser that its status as a willing 'caretaker' of humanity grew to identifying it as an almost motherly figure. Thus, while most Hindus do not worship the cow, and rules against eating beef arose long after the Vedas had been written, it still has an honored place in Hindu society. It is said that Krishna is both Govinda (herder of cows) and Gopala (protector of cows), and Shiva's attendant is Nandi, the bull. With the stress on vegetarianism (which is usually followed even by meat-eating Hindus on religious days or special occasions) and the sacred nature of the cow, it is no wonder that most holy cities and areas in "India" have a ban on selling meat-products and there is a movement among Hindus to ban cow-slaughter not only in specific regions, but in all of "India".

Hindus use many symbols and signs. The two most important symbols used by Hindus are the "Aum" and the "Swastika (Hinduism)".

Contrary to popular belief, practiced Hinduism is neither polytheistic nor strictly monotheistic. The various Hindu gods and avatars that are worshipped by Hindus are understood as different forms of One truth, sometimes seen as beyond a mere god and as a formless Divine Ground (Brahman), akin but not limited to monism, or as one monotheistic principle like Vishnu or Shiva.

Whether believing in the One source as formless (nirguna brahman, without attributes) or as a personal god (saguna Brahman, with attributes), Hindus understand that the one truth may be seen as different to different people. Hinduism encourages devotees to describe and develop a personal relationship with their chosen deity (ishta devata) in the form of a god or goddess.

While some censuses hold worshippers of one form or another of Vishnu  to be  80% and those of Shiva and Shakti  the remaining 20%, such figures are perhaps misleading. The vast majority of Hindus worship many gods as varicolored forms of the same prism of Truth. Among the most popular are Vishnu (as Krishna or Rama), Shiva, Devi (the Mother as many female deities, such as Lakshmi, Saraswati, Kali and Durga), Ganesha, Skanda and Hanuman.

Worship of these deities is often done through the aid of pictures or icons (murti) which are said not to be God themselves but conduits for the devotee's consciousness, markers for the human soul that signify the ineffable and illimitable nature of the love and grandeur of God. They are symbols of the greater principle, representing and are never presumed to be the concept or entity itself. Thus, Hindu image worship is a form of iconolatry, in which the symbols are venerated as symbols of divinity, as opposed to idolatry, a charge often made (erroneously) at Hindus. For more details on this form of worship, see murti.

Hindus use many prayers and groups of words. Some group of words are called mantras. These words are said to give the speaker a deeper concentration and understanding, thus coming closer to Brahman. A well known mantra is om or aum. It symbolizes Brahman, and is the opening word in many prayers. To pronounce a mantra well, you should say it slowly, and in a deep voice.

The nations of "India", Mauritius, and Nepal as well as the Indonesian island of Bali have more people who are Hindus than people who are not Hindus. In these nations, specially Nepal and "India" Hinduism is very popular. These countries also have many Hindus:

There are also strong Hindu communities in the countries of the ex-Soviet Union, especially in Russia and Poland. The Indonesian islands of Java, Sulawesi, Sumatra, and Borneo also have big native Hindu populations. In its Yoga stream, Hinduism is even more widespread.

Hernán Cortés (1485 - 2 December 1547) was an explorer and Conquistador from Spain. Between 1519 and 1521, he conquered the Aztec Empire of emperor Montezuma II where Mexico is today. He introduced vanilla and chocolate to Europe.

Cortes was born Medellín, Extremadura province, in the Kingdom of Castile in Spain. He went to Salamanca University, but dropped out at the age of 17. After two years, Cortes failed and finished schooling, returning home. This, however, was later helpful, as he knew how the law of Spain worked.

Hernan's journeys started in 1502 when he had heard stories about the New World. He then went on a journey led by Nicolas de Ovando and Diego Velazquez to the West Indies. He turned out to be a good soldier under the orders of Vez.

He went to the New World in 1506.  In 1511, he took part in the Spanish conquest of Hispaniola and Cuba, where the Arawak people lived. In 1513, the Spanish built the town Bayamo. The next year, they built Trinidad, Santo Espiritu, Puerto Principe, and Santiago de Cuba.

In 1519, Cortes set out from Cuba with a fleet of ships, 600 men, and about 20 horses. They went to Yucatán to look for gold and to get Mexico ready for colonization.  They landed in Yucatán Peninsula and met Jeronimo de Aguilar, a priest who lived through a shipwreck. He knew a lot about the Maya, who owned this section of land.

Cortes took over Yucatán by winning a battle against the people of Tabasco.

He met a woman, La Malinche, who knew the Maya and Nahuatl languages. She acted as his translator when he talked with Maya and Aztec people.

In July 1519, the Spanish took over Veracruz, and left 100 men there. That August, Cortes went to Tenochtitlan, the capital of the Aztec Empire. He brought 400 men, 15 horsemen, and 15 cannons with him. On his way, he met Native American tribes like the Nahuas of Tlaxcala and the Totonacs of Cempoala.

In October 1519, Cortes gathered his soldiers and around three thousand Tlaxcalteca (who had long been enemies of the Aztecs).  His goal was to scare the Aztecs in Tenochtitlan. He then went on a killing spree and burned down the city. When he came to Tenochtitlan, he had a vast army of Aztec enemies.

Cortés was surprised that Tenochtitlan was as great as Constantinople.  In November, the emperor of the Aztecs, Moctezuma II, welcomed Cortes and his army.  Montezuma II let them into Aztec territory, where they learned the Aztecs' weaknesses and then destroyed them. The emperor gave them gold, and Cortes later told King Charles V that the Aztecs might have thought he was one of their gods: Quetzalcoatl, a feathered serpent with fair skin and a beard.  Cortes quickly realized that some Spaniards had been attacked on the coast and planned to kidnap Moctezuma and his house and make him swear loyalty to King Charles V.

On the night of June 30 – July 1, 1520 the Aztecs attacked, but the majority of the Spanish escaped and allied themselves with enemies of the Aztec empire. Later, in 1521, with his army of a few Spaniards and many natives, Cortés destroyed Tenochtitlan and took over the Aztec Empire.

Cortés returned from Honduras and was Governor of the Viceroyalty of New Spain for a while. Later, he went back to Europe with a lot of treasure. He died in Seville, Spain, in 1547 from pleurisy.

Henry Ford (30 July 1863 – 7 April 1947) was an American engineer and businessman. He started making cars in 1896 and founded the Ford Motor Company.

He developed the idea of a system in which each worker has the duty to do one small part of the process of making something. His idea made it possible to produce cars in large numbers. This was called the assembly line.

Many factories around the world still make things this way.  It was quite innovative at the time and it allowed him to produce many cars quickly and at a cheaper price than other car companies could. He married Clara Bryant and had one child named Edsel Bryant Ford. Ford left home for Detroit, Michigan to start his mechanical career.

Henry Ford was born on 30 July 1863, in Greenfield Township, Michigan. In his early life, he showed an interest in mechanics and engineering. Ford's career began at Edison Illuminating Company, where he worked as an engineer.

In 1903, Henry Ford helped start the Ford Motor Company. He was the owner of the company. The company sold its first car which was the model T car on July 23, 1903. Ford became president of the company in 1906.

In 1908, Ford's company began making the Ford Model T car. Ford said that he wanted to make a "motor car for the great multitude". This meant that he thought that most Americans should be able to afford to buy a car and not just a few rich people. In order to reach this goal, he chose to make the design as simple as possible. All his cars would be made the same way. They were even all the same color – black.

It cost $850 to buy a Model T car. Even though that was a lot of money back then, it was still very cheap for a car. Many people wanted to buy Model T cars. In fact, so many people wanted to buy them that Ford was having a hard time making enough cars to sell one to everybody who wanted to buy one.

Ford helped develop an idea, not much used before his time, called the assembly line, and started using it in his factories in 1913. Because of the assembly line, making new cars would not take as long. He put a moving belt in his factory. Cars moved along the belt, and workers put on one part at a time. Each worker would only be responsible for putting one part on cars.

The assembly line was a big success. Cars did not take as long to make, and they were cheaper to buy now, too. By 1916, it only cost $360 to buy one of Ford's cars, and more than three times as many people were buying his cars now. The Ford Model T changed America.

Ford was also known for his political views. He had been against World War I because he thought that it was a waste of time. He also believed that Jewish people were causing problems in the world. This belief is called antisemitism. In 1919, he took over a newspaper called the Dearborn Independent. He began publishing articles that blamed Jews for problems in the world. One such were the booklets called The International Jew. Later, he would blame Jewish bankers for starting World War II. In his book Mein Kampf, German dictator Adolf Hitler admired Henry Ford for his anti-Semitic writings and the industrial efficiency of Ford's factories. Ford's views influenced Hitler, but it's essential to note that their relationship was more ideological than personal.

In his later years, Henry Ford faced challenges and controversies, including his resistance to change and outdated business practices. His anti-Semitic views also drew criticism. Ford faced health issues later in life, including a series of strokes. He passed away on April 7, 1947, at the age of 83, due to a cerebral hemorrhage. Despite this, he left a lasting impact on the automotive industry and modern manufacturing.

Henry Ford's legacy is monumental; he revolutionized the automotive industry by introducing assembly line production, making cars more affordable for the masses. His innovations not only shaped the way we manufacture products but also had a profound impact on modern transportation and industrial practices. However, there is debate among historians about Henry Ford's legacy. While he is often credited with revolutionizing the automobile industry and pioneering assembly line production, some critics argue that his management practices were controversial, including his stance on labor unions and allegations of anti-Semitism.

The Holy Roman Empire (; ), occasionally but unofficially referred to as the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, was a polity in Western and Central Europe under the rule of an emperor, who was elected by the princes and the magistrates of its regions and cities.

On 25 December 800, Pope Leo III crowned Frankish King Charlemagne as Roman emperor and revived the title in Western Europe for the first time since the fall of the ancient Western Roman Empire in 476.

When Charlemagne died in 814, the Frankish Empire was given to his sons and divided into three different countries: West Francia, Lotharingia and East Francia. In 962, Otto I was crowned emperor by Pope John XII. The empire would last for over eight centuries, until it ended in 1806.

At the start of the empire, the emperor was quite powerful. As time went on, however, the empire's duchies and counties became more powerful than the emperor.

Since Charlemagne, the polity was simply called the "Roman Empire". The name "Holy Roman Empire" was not used until the 13th century. Before then, people had called the empire by different names like universum regnum ("the whole kingdom", meaning that it included all regions, not just local kingdoms) and imperium christianum ("Christian empire"). The emperor's right to rule came from the idea of translatio imperii ("transfer of rule"), which meant that he had the highest power, which had been passed down from the Ancient Roman emperors.

The Holy Roman Empire was not very centralised, unlike most countries today. Instead, it was divided into dozens and eventually hundreds of individual entities, which were governed by kings, dukes, counts, bishops, abbots and other rulers, who were collectively known as princes. The emperor directly ruled some areas, but he could not simply issue decrees and govern autonomously over the empire. His power was severely restricted by the various local leaders.

In the 16th century, the empire had to deal with the rebellion of the Frisians, which was led by Pier Gerlofs Donia and Wijerd Jelckama, from 1515 to 1523.

The empire was a rare state in Europe to have an elective monarchy. The emperor was chosen by a small group of prince-electors, but the previous emperor's dynastic heir was commonly elected to the throne. Until 1596 the elected emperor was crowned by the Pope to make him a real emperor. The House of Habsburg ruled most of the time between about 1280 and 1806. In 1806 the French Emperor Napoleon created the Confederation of the Rhine from his client states, and the last Holy Roman Emperor, Francis II, abdicated and ended his empire so Napoleon would not take control of it.

The Great Wall of China (, literally "ten thousand li long wall") is a series of fortifications in China. Chinese emperors and dynasties built the wall (and joined together existing walls) to protect the north of their empire from enemy attacks. In total, the wall stretches .

The first walls were built in the 7th century BC. Later, during the Qin dynasty (which ruled China from 221 BC to 206 BC), these walls were connected. Later dynasties continued construction on the wall system. Between the 3rd century BC to the 17th century AD, it was under construction continuously.

The Ming dynasty (which ruled from 1368 AD to 1644 AD) built the best-known sections, which stretch between 4,000 and 5,500 kilometers (2,500 and 3,400 miles).

The Great Wall is one of the largest man-made projects in the world. It is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Great Wall of Qi was started in 685 BC. The state of Qi made a fortified wall for protection against the Southern states Ju and Lu and later from the kingdom Chu.

The state of Yan built walls during the rule of King Zhao of Yan (311–279 BC).

The state of Zhao built walls during 325–299 BC, during the rule of king Wuling of Zhao.

The First Emperor of China, Qin Shi Huang also called Shi Huangdi, started the Qin Dynasty. The Xiongnu tribes in the north of China were his enemies. The land in some parts of China is easy to cross, so Qin Shi Huang started building the Great Wall to make it more difficult for the Xiongnu to invade China.

The most famous part of the Great Wall was built between 226 and 200 BC by the first Emperor of China, Qin Shi Huang (Qin Pronounced as Chin), during the Qin Dynasty.

Walls on the periphery of the Northern states Yan, Zhao, and Qin became linked together, because all those states came under the rule of emperor Qin Shi Huang during his rule (221–206 BC).

By 212 BC, the wall went from Gansu to the coast of South Manchuria.

Other dynasties in China continued to build and lengthen the Great Wall. The Han, Sui, Northern and Jin Dynasties all repaired, rebuilt or expanded it. Their goal was to protect China from Mongol invasions from the north.

During the Ming Dynasty (1368 CE - 1644 CE), Chinese leaders built between 4,000 and 5,500 kilometers of new wall (2,500 and 3,400 miles). On average, these walls were 21.3 feet (6.5 metres) wide at the base, 19 feet (5.8 metres) wide at the top, and 7 to 8 meters (23 to 26 feet) tall. They are made of mortar, rocks, adobe bricks, and dirt.

During the Ming dynasty, Chinese rulers built the Nine Garrisons (also called the Nine Defense Areas). These were meant to protect the northern border and the Great Wall. It grew to have 11 s:

Builders used materials that were nearby. Some parts of the wall were made of mud, straw, and twigs. Thousands of workers died from giant falling stones, exhaustion, disease, animal attacks, and starvation. The idea that workers died and were buried in and under the Great Wall is a myth.

A astronaut named William Pogue was able to see the wall from a Low Earth Orbit (300–530 km above Earth), but only with binoculars and a lot of practice. Another astronaut, Neil Armstrong, said that on the Moon, it was very clear that the wall was not visible. The Great Wall has shown up in some photos taken from space, but scientists are sure it is not possible for astronauts to see the wall without binoculars.

Hip hop is a type of culture/art style that started in the 1970s in The Bronx. It began in Jamaican American, African American, and Puerto Rican/Hispanic and Latino American urban areas in some of the larger cities of the United States. Hip hop uses drumbeats produced by a drum machine, and rapping, where the rapper or group chants or says words with a rhythm that rhymes. The lyrics of hip hop songs are often about the life of urban people in the big cities. Hip hop music also uses musical styles from pop such as disco. Rap and hip hop music have become successful music genres.

Hip hop's connection to reggae music goes beyond mere musical influence; it is rooted in the shared cultural experiences of the African diaspora. DJ Kool Herc, a key figure in the early development of hip hop in the Bronx, was a Jamaican immigrant who brought with him the tradition of 'toasting' from reggae culture. This practice, involving rhythmic spoken word over music, evolved into the rapping style central to hip hop. The use of sound systems, another reggae staple, played a crucial role in the block parties where hip hop culture flourished. Thus, reggae's influence is integral to the formation of hip hop, not just as a musical genre, but as a cultural movement.

Hip hop as a culture involves the music as well as a style of dressing called "urban" clothes (baggy pants, Timberland leather work boots, and oversize shirts); a dancing style called breakdancing or "B-boying"; and graffiti, a street art in which people paint pictures or words on walls. In the 2000s, hip hop music and hip hop culture are very popular in the United States and Canada. Hip hop musicians usually use nicknames. Many of the popular hip hop musicians from the 2000s use nicknames, such as LL Cool J, Nas, Snoop Dogg, Jay-Z, Eminem, Lil Wayne, and 50 Cent. Hip hop is sometimes fused with other genres such as country and rock.

In 2023, Drake was the most streamed rapper of all time. Drake has surpassed Eminem as the best selling rapper of all time.

Rapping is a form of singing. It is a mix between singing and talking. The words are spoken with rhythm and in the text there are rhymes. The urban youth made rhyming games based on rap. The beat in the background is a simple loop that is sometimes made by the rapper themself or sometimes copied from a sample CD. The simple loop carries out through the entire song usually, except for the chorus. It developed in the ethnic minority urban (city) areas, as an American form of Jamaican "toasting" (chanting and rhyming with a microphone).

Run DMC  and The Sugarhill Gang were early popular hip hop groups in the 1980s. When rappers began to use violent language and gestures, the music was then liked by gangsters. This kind of music was called "gangsta rap". Gangsta rap often has lyrics which are about guns, drug dealing and life as a thug on the street. This genre also began in the 1980s and is still produced.

Some well known early rappers include: 50 cent,  Nas, Common, Snoop Dogg, The Notorious B.I.G., Eminem, and Sean "P-Diddy" Combs. During the 1990s there was a  between the two big record labels "Death Row Records" and "Bad Boy Records". The rappers Tupac Shakur and Notorious B.I.G. were murdered. Later, the two record labels stopped the rivalry. Because most of the rappers who rapped for "Death Row Records" were from the West Coast of the US and most of the rappers who rapped for "Bad Boy Records" were from the East Coast, this rivalry was called "the West Coast – East Coast beef".

The fastest rapper according to Guinness World Records is Twista. In 1992, he rapped 11 syllables in one second. In 2013, the song Rap God by Eminem took the record for most words in a song; 1,560 in a little over 6 minutes, which is about 4 words per second.

The Gregorian calendar is the calendar that is used throughout most of the world. It began being used in 1582. It replaced the previous Julian calendar because the Julian calendar had an error: it added a leap year (with an extra day every four years) with no exceptions. The length of the Julian year was exactly 365.25 days (365 days and 6 hours), but the actual time it takes for the Earth to go around the Sun once is closer to 365.2425 days (about 365 days, 5 hours and 49 minutes). This difference is about eleven minutes each year.

This made the seasons get out of track with the calendar.  For example, as the centuries went by, the equinox (when day and night are the same length) was happening earlier and earlier than its traditional date, March 21. It was the calendar that was wrong, not the earth's orbit. By the 1500s, it was starting around March 11, ten days 'too early' according to the calendar. To farmers, this did not matter because they worked to the seasons rather than to the calendar. But it mattered a lot to the Christian church because the date of Easter is calculated from the equinox being on 21 March. So Pope Gregory XIII declared that the calendar must skip ten days in 1582.

To make sure that the mistake did not happen again, they revised the 'leap year rule'. Until then, every fourth year had February 29, without exception. The change was that there would be no February 29 for every year that ends in 00 - unless it could be divided by 400. So the year 2000 was a leap year, because it could be divided by 400, but 1700, 1800, and 1900 would be common years, with no February 29.

The official change took place the following October, when Thursday, 4th was followed by Friday, 15th.

If February has 29 days, then the year is called a leap year and it is 366 days long. A leap year usually happens once every four years. The most recent leap year was 2024, and the next leap year is 2028.

The Pope's instruction only applied to the Catholic Church, countries made their own laws. But Europe's Catholic countries decided to follow his lead. Spain, Portugal, and Italy started to use the new calendar on Friday, October 15, 1582, following Julian Thursday, October 4, 1582. In Europe's Protestant countries, people feared that the new calendar was an attempt by the Catholic Church to silence their movement.  Since the Great Schism, Europe's Eastern Orthodox churches also ignored the Pope's decision and many continue to use the Julian calendar even today.

England and the rest of the British Empire (including what is now the US and Canada) adopted the Gregorian calendar in 1752. Because 1600 was a leap year in both calendars but the Julian calendar had a leap year in 1700 but the Gregorian calendar did not, this meant that eleven days needed to be skipped. Wednesday, September 2, 1752 was followed by Thursday, September 14, 1752.

In the USSR, the October Revolution of 1917 was celebrated in November. In 1917 the Russian Empire still used the old Julian calendar. Changing the calendar meant 365 days after the revolution started was now in November 1918.

In 1923 some Eastern Orthodox Churches changed to the Gregorian calendar. Christmas Day is the same as the Catholic and Protestant churches, but the date of Easter continues to be worked out differently.

The Russian Orthodox Church, as well as some other Eastern Orthodox Churches such as Georgian and Serbian, did not want this change, so Russian Christmas Day is about two weeks after the rest of Europe.

Japan adopted the Gregorian calendar's way of working out leap years on January 1, 1873, but the months have numbers instead of names. Japan also starts year one with each new reign, but uses reign names not the name an emperor might be best known by in the west. For example, the reign names Meiji year 1=1868, Taisho 1=1912, Showa (Emperor Hirohito) 1=1926, Heisei (Emperor Akihito) 1=1989, and so on. The "Western calendar" (西暦, seireki) using western year numbers, is also widely accepted by civilians and to a lesser extent by government agencies.

Some old dates in Britain were written and documented with two different years. This is because Britain did not start a new year until March 25, so for a few months it was one year in Britain and the next year in other countries.

The letters OS (for Old Style) and NS (for New Style) were used to help determine the year being used. For example, King Charles I died on January 30, 1649. In "Old Style" it is correct to say that Charles I died January 30, 1648 (OS). Using "New Style", as we determine dates now, the correct date and year would be February 9, 1649.

In the old calendar, the year started on March 25, this was the Quarter Day when rents and taxes fell due. This became April 5 which is why the tax year in the United Kingdom begins on April 6.

People sometimes use the term N.S. or New Style to mean the Gregorian calendar, with Old Style (or O.S.) meaning the Julian calendar.

Hormones are the chemical  of the endocrine system. Hormones are the  which adjust the body's internal working, together with the nervous system. Every multicellular organism has hormones. The cells which react to a given hormone have special receptors for that hormone. When a hormone attaches to the receptor protein a mechanism for signalling is started. The cell or tissue that gets the message is called the 'target'. Hormones only act on cells which have the right receptors.

Many different kinds of cells can send a message. There are some cells whose main job is to make hormones. When many of these cells are together, they are called a gland. Glands are groups of cells that make something and release it (put it outside the cell). Many glands make hormones.

"Endocrine" means secreting directly into the blood. Most internal secretions are from endocrine glands. The opposite word is "exocrine", which means secreting through a duct or tube. Some hormones are produced by exocrine glands, and some exocrine secretions release outside the body. Sweat glands and salivary glands are examples of exocrine glands whose products are released outside the body.

The first discovery of a hormone was made in 1902. The hormone was secretin. The word 'hormone' was first used in 1905.

Hormones do many things. They regulate metabolism. Metabolism is the chemical and energy reactions that happen in a living thing. Hormones cause the growth and death of cells and of whole organisms. Hormones also start and control sexual development. For example, the hormones estrogen and progesterone make girls go through puberty. Hormones help keep homeostasis in an organism. Homeostasis means to keep a constant state inside the body like temperature, amount of water and salts, and amount of sugar. Hormones released by one gland can also tell other glands to make different hormones.

There are four types of hormones in most vertebrates. They are grouped by the chemicals from which they are made.

In biology regulation means to control something. So regulating hormones means controlling how much hormones are made and released from cells.

Hormone regulation is mostly done by negative feedback. In negative feedback, a hormone causes an effect. The cells that make the hormone detect this effect and its production ceases.

A good example of negative feedback is with the hormone insulin. Insulin is produced by the pancreas. Insulin is released by the pancreas in response to consumption of glucose. The amount of glucose in the blood rises, and the pancreas detects the increase. It then secretes insulin into the blood. Insulin increases glucose uptake in target cells. Some glucose is used by the cells but some is also converted to and stored in the form of glycogen.  Glucose uptake by cells decreases blood glucose levels. This decrease is detected by the pancreas and in response, it stops secreting insulin in to the bloodstream. As insulin levels in the blood decrease, so does glucose uptake by cells.

This negative feedback therefore helps to maintain normal blood glucose levels and prevents extreme changes.

There are three main types of hormones. Steroid hormones are non-polar and do not need a receptor. The second type is peptide hormones.  The third is Tyrosine derived hormones. An example is the T3 and T4 hormones produced by the thyroid gland.

Often two hormones control the same product, one increasing and the other decreasing the target. Blood glucose is very important to an organism, and is controlled by more than one hormone. Other hormones also make the glucose level go up or down. If the glucose level gets too low, the body releases hormones that do the opposite of insulin. They do not tell the cells in the body to take up glucose from the blood. They tell the cells to put glucose back into the blood. These kind of hormones that work opposite of other hormones are called counter-regulatory hormones. Counter-regulatory hormones for insulin are glucagon and epinephrine.

Most important things in an organism are kept in homeostasis by negative feedback and counter-regulatory hormones. However a few things are controlled in different ways. One rare way is positive feedback. In negative feedback, the hormone's effect makes a gland stop making hormones. In positive feedback the opposite happens. The effect of the hormone tells the gland to make even more hormones.

An example of positive feedback is the hormone that causes childbirth (when babies are born.) The hormone that causes this is oxytocin. This hormone is made by the pituitary gland. When the baby starts coming out, it stretches the muscle in the cervix (the bottom of the uterus). Nerves in the cervix send a message to the pituitary. This message makes the pituitary release more oxytocin. The oxytocin then causes the muscles of the uterus to contract, or squeeze. This causes more stretching in the cervix. This stretching then tells the pituitary to make even more oxytocin. So levels of oxytocin keep rising until the squeezing or contractions of the uterus force the baby out.

There are clear distinctions between hormones and neurotransmitters:

Most hormones start a cellular response by binding to cell membranes or receptors inside the cell. A cell may have several different receptor types that recognize the same hormone but activate different signal transduction pathways, or a cell may have several different receptors that recognize different hormones and activate the same biochemical pathway.

Hormones are defined functionally, not structurally. They may have various chemical structures. Hormones occur in multicellular organisms (plants, animals, fungi, brown algae and red algae). These compounds occur also in unicellular organisms, and may act as signalling molecules,

Peptide hormones are hormones with a short chain of amino acids.

The heart is a hard-working, fist-sized muscle found in people and animals. It pumps out blood through tube-like structures called blood vessels. The heart and these vessels together make up the body-wide circulatory system. Blood carries in oxygen-rich air and nutrient-packed food to the body and takes away waste-filled substances like carbon dioxide to the lungs. In people, the heart is about the size of a closed-hand and sits in between the lungs, in the chest-centered cavity.

In humans, the heart has four parts called chambers. These are the upper-left and upper-right atria, and the lower-left and lower-right ventricles. People often talk about the right-side atrium and ventricle together as the right heart, and the left-side ones as the left heart.

In a well-working heart, blood goes through the heart in one direction. Special flaps called valves keep out blood from going backward. The heart sits inside a fluid-filled protective bag called the pericardium. This bag holds in a small amount of fluid to help the heart move smoothly.

The heart wall has three layered parts: the epicardium (outer layer), the myocardium (middle layer), and the endocardium (inner layer).

The human heart has four s or closed spaces. Some animals have only two or three chambers.

In humans, the four chambers are two atria and two ventricles. Atria is talking about two chambers; atrium is talking about one chamber. There is a right atrium and right ventricle. These get blood that comes to the heart. They pump this blood to the lungs. In the lungs blood picks up oxygen and drops carbon dioxide. Blood from the lungs goes to the left atrium and ventricle. The left atrium and ventricle send the blood out to the body. The left ventricle works six times harder than the right ventricle because it carries oxygenated blood.

Blood is carried in blood vessels. These are arteries and veins. Blood going to the heart is carried in veins. Blood going away from the heart is carried in arteries. The main artery going out of the right ventricle is the pulmonary artery. (Pulmonary means about lungs.) The main artery going out of the left ventricle is the aorta.

The veins going into the right atrium are the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava. These bring blood from the body to the right heart. The veins going into the left atrium are the pulmonary veins. These bring blood from the lungs to the left heart.

When the blood goes from the atria to the ventricles it goes through heart valves. When blood goes out of the ventricles it goes through valves. The valves make sure that blood only goes one way in or out.

The heart has three layers. The outer covering is the pericardium. This is a tough sack that surrounds the heart. The middle layer is the myocardium. This is the heart muscle. The inner layer is the endocardium. This is the thin smooth lining of the chambers of the heart.

A heart beat is when the heart muscle contracts. This means the heart pushes in and this makes the chambers smaller. This pushes blood out of the heart and into the blood vessels. After the heart contracts and pushes in, the muscle relaxes or stops pushing in. The chambers get bigger and blood coming back to the heart fills them.

When the heart muscle contracts (pushes in) it is called systole. When the heart muscle relaxes (stops pushing in), this is called diastole. Both atria do systole together. Both ventricles do systole together. But the atria do systole before the ventricles. Even though the atrial systole comes before ventricular systole, all four chambers do diastole at the same time. This is called cardiac diastole

The order is: atrial systole → ventricular systole → cardiac diastole. When this happens one time, it is called a cardiac cycle.

Systole (when the heart squeezes) happens because the muscle cells of the heart gets smaller in size. When they get smaller we also say they contract. Electricity going through the heart makes the cells contract. The electricity starts in the sino-atrial node (acronym SA Node) The SA Node is a group of cells called pacemaker cells in the right atria. These cells start an electrical impulse. This electrical impulse sets the rate and timing at which all cardiac muscle cells contract. This motion is called 'atrial systole'. Once electrical impulse goes through the atrio-ventricular node (AV Node). The AV Node makes the impulse slow down. Slowing down makes the electrical impulses get to the ventricles later. That is what makes the ventricular systole occur after atrial systole, and lets all the blood leave the atria before ventricle contracts (meaning squeeze).

After the electrical impulse goes through the AV Node, the electrical impulse will go through the conduction system of the ventricle. Conduction means heat or electricity traveling through something. This brings the electrical impulse to the ventricles. The first part of the conduction system is the bundle of His. His is named for the doctor (Wilhelm His, Jr) who discovered it. Bundle means strings or wires grouped together in parallel. Once the bundle (meaning a group of strings or wires going in parallel directions) goes through the ventricle muscle, it divides into two bundle branches, the left bundle branch and the right bundle branch. The left bundle branch travels to the left ventricle and the right bundle branch travels to the right ventricle. At the end of the bundle branches, the electrical impulse goes into the ventricular muscle through the Purkinje Fibers. This is what makes ventricle contraction take place and makes ventricular systole.

Sino-Atrial Node → Atria (systole) → Atrio-Ventricular Node → Bundle of His → Bundle branches → Purkinje Fibers → Ventricles (systole)

ECG is an acronym for ElectroCardioGram. It is also written EKG for ElectroKardioGram in German. The ECG shows what the electricity in the heart is doing. An ECG is done by putting electrodes on a person's skin. The electrodes see the electricity going through the heart. This is written on paper by a machine. This writing on the paper is the ECG.

Doctors learn about the person's heart by looking at the ECG. The ECG shows some diseases of the heart like heart attacks or problems with the rhythm of the heart (how the electricity goes through the heart's conduction system.)

The ECG shows atrial systole. This is called a P-wave. Then ventricular systole happens. This is called the QRS or QRS-complex. It is called a complex because there are three different waves in it. The Q-wave, R-wave, and S-wave. Then the ECG shows ventricular diastole. This is called the T-wave. Atrial diastole happens then too. But it is not seen separate from ventricular diastole.

The PR-Interval is the space between atrial systole (P) and ventricular systole (QRS). The QT-Interval is from when the QRS starts to when the T ends. The ST-segment is the space between the QRS and T.

The digestive system is a part of the body that digests food. It is called the gastrointestinal system. It breaks down food into simple chemicals which can be   into the blood stream. It also produces waste, which be expelled by passing gas, pooping, or passing urine (peeing).

From the blood stream, nutrients go to the liver, which is a kind of chemical factory for the body. The liver adjusts the nutrients so that the mix is what the body needs.

In the stomach, gastric acid is introduced. This is dilute hydrochloric acid. It is very reactive and has a pH level of 1.5 to 3.5. The stomach has a layer of mucus to protect itself from the acid.

The digestive system also gets rid of waste material. The gastrointestinal system starts at the lips and ends at the anus. Animals like worms, insects, mammals, birds, fish, and people all have digestive systems. Passing gas (farting or burping) during digesting is normal.

The digestive system is not just the gut, but also many other organs which help digest food. For example, digestive enzymes are needed to break down carbohydrates and meat into substances which can be absorbed. The absorbed food then goes to the rest of the body to feed it and enable it to repair itself.

The parts of the human digestive system are the same in most, if not all animals:

Other organs that are part of the gastrointestinal system but are not part of the gut are:

Food does not go through these organs. But they help the gut digest the food. They also have other work. For example, the pancreas, thyroid, liver, and parathyroids are also endocrine glands that make hormones like insulin.

There are many diseases that affect the gastrointestinal system. Doctors who study the gastrointestinal tract are called gastroenterologists. They also study why people pass faeces (poo) excessively.

Human rights are rights and freedoms that all people should have.

Today, the ideas of human rights are protected as legal rights in national and international law.

They are seen as universal, which means they are meant for everyone, no matter what their race, religion, ethnicity, nationality, age, sex, political beliefs (or any other kind of beliefs), intelligence, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity are.

Everyone has all of these rights, it is not possible to only grant some of them:

The idea of human rights originated from ideas found in religion and philosophy in Western Europe. The modern Western idea of human rights started in the European Enlightenment. In the 16th century, some people started suggesting that everyone had the religious and political right to choose their religion and their leaders. This sort of thinking was important in the English Civil War. After the war, the philosopher John Locke argued that people should have a certain set of human rights. These ideas were also important in the American revolution and the French revolution in the 18th century.

In the 19th century, John Stuart Mill was an important philosopher who also thought about human rights. He said that people should be able to control their own bodies and minds. He talked about three special ideas:

Hegel was a philosopher who wrote about the idea of free will. He believed that in order to have freedom, a person should be able to:

Because people believe that human rights are important, countries make laws to protect them. These laws say that governments cannot take away people's basic rights. They make sure people who take away other people's rights are punished. However, many countries in the world do not protect the human rights of their people.

Some major political groups and countries have made statements that promote human rights. Many governments and international groups punish human rights violators by refusing to trade with them, or even helping groups that want to overthrow their governments.

Some of the important places that human rights laws are written is in constitutions. The United States Constitution and Constitution of France are two of the oldest set of laws based on human rights.

In 1948 the United Nations made the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. This is a widely respected document that lists what the United Nations believes are human rights. It is not a law, but two important agreements have been written based on its ideas:

These are United Nations human rights Covenants: agreements between people or countries. The countries who sign these two covenants agree to follow them.

In addition to those Declaration and Covenants, there are many treaties and documents made by United Nations and other international organizations. Those treaties and documents are called "International human rights law".

Not everyone agrees on what the basic human rights are. It is clear that few countries permit all these rights. Also, there are countries in which the rights are not illegal, but nothing is done to promote them. Here is a list of some of the most recognized rights:

Human rights abuses are when a person is hurt in a way that violates (goes against) his/her human rights. Human rights abuses are also often called human rights violations.

Many people, groups, and countries think protecting human rights is very important. But not everyone in the world believes in human rights. If people who do not believe in human rights have political power they can hurt many people. Even if these people have no political power, they can be violent to other people. There are many people who work to protect everyone's human rights; some of these are government groups, and some are not with any government. They are sometimes called human rights organizations. Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch are examples of human rights organizations.

In the UK, every Act of Parliament must comply with the European Convention on Human Rights. Nonetheless, a person can challenge an Act if it violates the convention. However, the Government are not bound to change the law due to incompatibility, and they have the power to pass a law that contravenes with the Human Rights, if they wish.

Honey is a food made by honeybees from nectar. They put the honey into a honeycomb, which for them is a storage unit. Honey is sweet and can be used instead of sugar. It is a supersaturated liquid. As the temperature drops, glucose comes out of solution. Then it is a semi-solid rather than a liquid.

Honey is first mentioned in the Book of Exodus, and is often linked with pleasant and comfortable things. "Land of Milk and honey". It is also referenced in the Qur'an, with similar associations to good and evil.

Much like wine, there are several kinds of honey with different tastes, colors and textures. Some common types are got from bees who use the clover flower's pollen. It is thick and has a medium color. It tends to form crystals or grains more quickly when exposed to air. Acacia flowers make another common variety.

Honey from bees using flowers from oleanders, rhododendrons, some laurels, and azaleas may cause honey intoxication. Symptoms include dizziness, weakness, sweating, nausea, and vomiting.

Expert beekeepers solve this problem by moving their hives to areas where the right flowers are available. Bees like to get their nectar locally, and do not go more than two miles from the hive.

Honey tastes quite different according to which flowers the bees used. Key things are its smell, taste and how clear it is; also no bad qualities.

Most microorganisms cannot grow in honey and a honey that's packed therefore does not get spoiled. Samples of honey discovered in archaeological contexts in Egypt and some other countries have proven that honey is perfectly edible even after thousands of years. Some of the worlds oldest jars of honey have been found in ancient egyptian tombs.

Honey can be classified by the type of flower that the bees make the honey from.

Most commercially available honey is a mixture of two or more honeys that differ in the source of the flower, color, flavor, density, or geographic origin.

Polyfloral honey, also called wildflower honey, is gotten from the nectar of many types of flowers. The taste may be different from year to year, and the smell and the taste can be more or less powerful, depending on which flowers are blooming.

Monofloral honey is made mainly from the nectar of one type of flower. To make monofloral honey, beekeepers keep beehives in place where the bees have access, as far as possible, to only one type of flower. However, a small amount of any monofloral honey will be from other flower types.

In 2017, the world produced 1.9million tonnes of honey. China produced 29% of the world total. Other major producers were Turkey, Iran, United States, and Ukraine.


The Himalayas (from Sanskrit हिमालय) are a mountain range located north of the Indian subcontinent.

The west end of the mountain range is in Pakistan. They run through Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh states in India, Nepal, and Bhutan. The east end is in the south of Tibet. They are divided into 3 parts:  Himadri, Himachal and Shiwaliks.

The 15 highest mountains in the world are in the Himalayas. The main ones are Mount Everest, Annapurna, and Nanga Parbat. Mount Everest is the highest mountain on Earth, at 8,849 meters. Mount Kanchenjunga 8,586 m (28,169 ft), the third highest mountain in the world also lies in Himalaya Range. Of the fifteen highest mountain peaks in the World, nine are in the Nepali Himalayas.

The word "Himalaya" means House of Snow in Sanskrit. North of the Himalayas is the Tibetan Plateau. It is called "the roof of the world". However, the Tibetan Plateau is very dry both because of its high elevation and the mountains acting to make a gigantic rain shadow. The rain, coming from the south, falls on the south side of the mountains. This has greatly influenced the climate of the Indian subcontinent. Not only do the mountains block the extremely cold winter winds blowing from Central Asia from entering the Subcontinent, they also forces the Bay of Bengal Monsoon branch to shed its moisture along NE and Northern Indian States, Bhutan, Nepal and Bangladesh.

Geologically, the origin of the Himalayas is the collision of the Indian tectonic plate with the Eurasian plate. The Indian plate travels northward at 15 cm per year, and joined the Eurasian continent about 40-50 million years ago. The formation of the Himalayas resulted in the lighter rock of the seabeds of that time being lifted up into mountains. An often-cited fact used to illustrate this process is that the summit of Mount Everest is made of marine limestone.

The Indian plate is still moving north at 67 mm per year. Over the next 10 million years it will travel about 1,500 km into Asia. About 20 mm per year of the India-Asia convergence is absorbed by thrusting along the Himalaya southern front. This leads to the Himalayas rising by about 5 mm per year, making them geologically active. The movement of the Indian plate into the Eurasian plate also leads to earthquakes from time to time.

The Himalayas are very popular for tourists because it has a lot of wildlife. The types of plants and trees, which are common in the place, are Oak, Pine, Fir, Rhododendron, Birch, Juniper, and Deodar. Common animals, which are seen mostly in the different parts of the Himalayas, are snow leopards, blue sheep, musk deer, tigers, elephants, wild boar, and crocodiles. Even endangered species of animals and plants are also found there. In the north part of the Himalayas where the temperature falls below freezing point, animals cannot survive well. However, those who  can survive. During the cold winters most of the animals migrate to the lower regions of the Himalayas while others like the brown bear hibernate instead. The Yak is mostly seen in the cold desert. They are like wild ox and they are the largest animals in this region. In regions of Ladakh animals like Nyan, the wild and the most largest sheep are found.

Some of the major places for wildlife attractions in the Himalayas are:

The five main rivers of the Himalayas are the Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and Satluj. The rivers are the main source of human and animal life in those areas.

The Hebrew language, also referred to as the Hebraic language, is a Northwest Semitic language and is related to Arabic. It is the only dead language that has been revived.

Israeli Hebrew and Biblical Hebrew are separate languages with different grammar and different pronunciation, though speakers of Israeli Hebrew can usually read most of the Hebrew Bible.

Biblical Hebrew was spoken by the Israelites during the time of the composition of the Hebrew Bible but became rare in daily life after the Jews were forced to speak Aramaic.

In the 20th-century, Eliezer ben Yehuda was the leading force behind the revival of Hebrew as a spoken language and the primary inventor of Israeli Hebrew, which became the official language of modern Israel in 1948.

Many words used in Biblical Hebrew to write the Hebrew Bible are given different meanings in Israeli Hebrew.

Generally, Hebrew words are made by adding a vowel pattern to a root, though Israeli Hebrew has loanwords from many languages. People often need to study the grammar of Hebrew before they can read fluently without written vowels.

In Israeli Hebrew, the verb for "to be" has a future tense and a past tense but no present tense. In Biblical Hebrew, there are no tenses but only two aspects: perfective and imperfective. One way to describe this is a difference between past (perfective) and non-past (imperfective), though they can overlap. Biblical Hebrew has a special feature to explicitly mark a verb with somewhat of a future tense, which is the Vav Conversive.

Mishnaic Hebrew and Judeo-Aramaic were spoken at the time of Jesus and the time of the Bar-Kokhba revolt.

The Hebrew script was adapted to write Yiddish, which is a language that has Hebrew vocabulary and was adapted from German and a few other Indo-European languages.

Go is a board game for two players. It is called Wei-k'i (or Wei-chi) in Chinese, Patok or Baduk in Korean and  I-go in Japanese.

Go is played on a board with black and white game pieces called stones. Players take turns placing a stone of their color on intersections of a 19x19 square grid. The player with the black stones goes first. A normal Go board has 19 rows and columns of lines. Some players use 9x9 or 13x13 boards because smaller boards usually mean shorter, less complex games.

A game of Go ends when both players pass their turns without playing. This usually happens when adding another stone to the board doesn't change the score. The winner is the player whose stones surround more empty intersections (points). To that is added captured stones and komi. Komi are points added to the second player, which in this game is the white player. A game may also end when a player gives up and resigns.

In a game against a skilled player, a less skilled player may be given a "handicap" of extra stones on the board at the start of the game as well as playing black. These rules help make the game and final score fair for both players.

Besides the order of play (Black plays first, then White plays, then Black plays, and so on) and handicap or scoring rules, there are only two rules in Go:

Stones cannot be removed from the board except by the opponent surrounding it. A group of stones are all "alive" as long as one stone is next to an empty intersection. Stones with no liberties (no access to empty space) are captured and removed from the board. At the end of the game, the prisoners are usually deducted from the score of the player who lost them.

The second rule is called Ko (eternity). You can place stones on any clear intersection you want, as long it isn't taken off right after, or the board looks the same all over as it did before. This is to stop the game from going back and forth capturing the same stones forever. Players must make a move somewhere else on the board during a "ko fight" before they can re-capture a stone in the same position.

Its original Chinese name is "" (= wei qi or wei chi). It is also popular in Japan, and its common name "Go" comes from Japanese. In Korea the game is called "baduk". In these three countries the game is an important part of the culture, like chess is in many western countries.

Go and chess are both board games and games of strategy. They both have no luck or secret information, unlike some other classic games like backgammon (dice are rolled) or poker and other card games which also have secret information.

There are many places to play Go on the Internet, as well as local clubs and national organizations in many countries around the world. A 2016 survey by the International Go Federation (IGF) found that there are over 20 million players around the world. Most players live in East Asia.

Go was invented in China but the specific time is not known. Some say it was invented more than 2,500 years ago and is the oldest board game still played today. The historian of board games, H.J.R. Murray, said:

Grapes are the fruit of a woody grape vine. Grapes can be eaten raw, or used for making wine, juice, and jelly/jam. Grapes come in different colours; red, purple, white, and green are some examples. Today, grapes can be seedless, by using machines to pit the fruit. Wild grapevines are often considered a nuisance weed, as they cover other plants with their usually rather aggressive growth.

Raisins are the dried fruit of the grapevine, and the name actually comes from the French word for "grape."

Since the early 21st century, red grapes have gained recognition in the United States and other countries for their nutrient content and antioxidant properties. Within the global functional food industry, this has contributed to their commercial status as a "superfruit".

The leaves of the grapevine itself are considered edible (eatable). They are used to make dolmades.

Grapevines are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species.

According to the "Food and Agriculture Organization" (FAO), almost 76,000 square kilometres of the world is used to grow grapes. About 71% of grapes are used for wine. 27% are used as fresh fruit, and 2% are used as dried fruit. A part of grape production goes to making grape juice to be used as a sweetener for fruits canned "with no added sugar" and "100% natural". The area dedicated to vineyards is increasing by about 2% per year.

The following list of top wine-producers shows the areas used to grow grapes for wine making, although of course country size is a limiting factor, as well as the economic demand for their product.

Comparing diets among western countries, researchers have found that although the French usually eat more animal fat than other countries, the number of cases of heart disease remains low in France. Many scientists think this is because the French drink more red wine than other countries. Something in the grape helps lower the amount of cholesterol in the body. This helps prevent clogging of the arteries. Doctors do not recommend drinking a lot of red wine, but three or four glasses a week is good and encouraged.

Grapes of all colors offer benefits. Red wine offers health benefits that are not found in white wine. This is because many of the good nutrients are found in the skins of the grapes, and only red wine is fermented with the skins.

White grapes are derived from the green grape by evolution. Changes in two genes turn off creation of anthocyanin. Anthocyanin is what makes red grapes the color green.

A raisin is any dried grape. A currant is a dried Zante grape. The name is a corruption of the French raisin de Corinthe (Corinth grape). A sultana was originally a raisin made from a specific type of grape of Turkish origin. The word is now used for raisins made from common North American grapes and chemically treated to resemble the traditional sultana.

Note that, while raisin is a French loanword, the word in French means the fresh fruit. Grappe (Where the English word grape comes from) means the bunch (as in une grappe de raisin).

Note also that currant has also come to mean to the blackcurrant and redcurrant. These two berries completely unrelated to grapes.

The modern Greek alphabet has 24 letters. It is used to write the Greek language.  Greek letters are also frequently used in science and mathematics to represent various values or variables. Most letters in the Greek alphabet have an equivalent in the English language.

The twenty-four letters (each in uppercase and lowercase forms) are:

Α α, Β β, Γ γ, Δ δ, Ε ε, Ζ ζ, Η η, Θ θ, Ι ι, Κ κ, Λ λ, Μ μ, Ν ν, Ξ ξ, Ο ο, Π π, Ρ ρ, Σ σ or ς, Τ τ, Υ υ, Φ φ, Χ χ, Ψ ψ, and Ω ω.

The Greek alphabet is thought to be where most European alphabets came from. The alphabet was borrowed from the Phoenician alphabet around the 10th century BC, with many changes to make it fit the Greek language.

Some of the Phoenician letters for sounds not used in Greek were turned into vowels.  The Phoenicians wrote their abjad without any vowels, as with Hebrew and Arabic to the present day.  Obviously, their peoples knew how to say the words, so that worked well for them.  The Greek addition of vowels was better for countries where it might be a second language.

The Greek change made reading easier for trading with other cultures. In general,  Indo-European languages did not use consonant-based roots (where the word's central meaning is based on the consonants) like those in Semitic languages such as Phoenician, Arabic, Hebrew, and Aramaic.

At first, Greek was written from right to left, same as Phoenician, but after the 6th century BC, it was written from left to right.

There were some differences in the early Greek alphabet in different parts of the Greek world.  Over time, all Greeks started to use the same alphabet, especially after the Ionic alphabet of Miletus was officially adopted in Athens in 403 BC.  A little later, the rest of Greece did the same, and by 350 BC, during the life of Alexander the Great, almost all Greeks were using the same twenty-four letter Greek alphabet.

Later, Aristophanes of Byzantium (c. 257185 BC), a Greek scholar and grammarian, invented the three diacritics (accent marks): acute, grave, and circumflex, to mark the tone or pitch of Greek words.

Although the Greek letters accurately represented all the main sounds of the Greek language early on, the sounds of the Greek language changed over time. Some of the vowel sounds began to sound similar to one another, aspirated voiceless stops became voiceless fricatives, and voiced stops became voiced fricatives. One can get an idea of how older Greek pronunciations sounded, by looking at the Latin and English spellings of Greek loanwords like "philosopher", "Chimera", "Cyprus", and "Thessalonica".

Another diacritic is a comma, usually above initial vowels. This signaled whether or not the sound of the letter 'H' was present. It is not available in the English standard character-set.  If this comma-like diacritic above the vowel is reversed, it indicates the presence of an /h/ sound before a vowel, diphthong, or rho. Thus, the Greek name Ἕκτωρ is pronounced Hektōr, not Ektor. Another example is ἥρως, pronounced hḗrōs ("hero").

In 1982, a new, simplified orthography, known as "monotonic", was adopted for official use in Modern Greek by the Greek state. It uses only a single accent mark, the acute accent. This marks the stressed syllable of polysyllabic words, that is, words with more than one syllable.

A headache is when the head hurts. It is not head pain caused by hitting the head with something and causing injury, making it hurt that way. A headache is the head hurting from inside. Headache is the symptom of pain in the face, head, or neck.

The second edition of the International Headache Classification (ICHD-2) defines more than 220 different types of headaches in three categories:

In many cases headaches can be relieved naturally. Many methods such as massaging the temples near the eye, exercising your eyes (blinking, palming) and walking can all help relieve the tension of headaches. Maintaining a healthy diet, with rich proteins and iron, can keep your brain awake and healthy. One of the main factors is drinking plenty of water. These natural techniques tend to give you long-term relief whilst medication can often give you short term relief.

There are many medicines which can treat mild headaches, such as Paracetamol, Co-codamol, and Ibuprofen; but you should always consult your doctor or pharmacist before taking any.

The Great Depression was the global economic  that started after the U.S. stock market crash in 1929. The prices on the Wall Street stock market greatly fell from October 24 to 29, 1929. Many people lost their jobs. By 1932, 25–30% of people had lost their jobs. They became homeless and poor, which ended the wealth of the Roaring Twenties. Many people think that the Great Depression started on Tuesday, October 29, but economists think Black Tuesday was just one of the causes.

From 1929 to 1932, the depression worsened. Many suspect that one reason was the increased taxes on Americans such as tariffs (taxes on imports). The economist Milton Friedman said that the Great Depression was worsened because the Federal Reserve printed out less money than usual.

When the depression started, Herbert Hoover was the president of the United States and so he was blamed for it. A new president was elected in 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt.  He convinced Congress to pass many new laws and programs to help people who were hurt by the Great Depression, which were called the New Deal.

One of the programs was the Civilian Conservation Corps. The CCC put many young men to work outdoors.  The men were paid thirty dollars a month for their work, twenty-five dollars of which was sent home to support their families, and they got free food and shelter.

Another program, called Social Security, continues to this day. It gives retired seniors a small income to let them have money for things that they need. The depression was a difficult time, but with everyone's help, it would get better. Between 1939 and 1944, more people had jobs again because of World War II, and the Great Depression came to an end.

The Great Depression followed a decade of rapid economic growth and urbanization. After the Wall Street Crash of 1929, business declined as it had after previous stock market crashes. However, people still had hope. John D. Rockefeller said, "These are days when many are discouraged. In the 93 years of my life, depressions have come and gone. Prosperity (wealth) has always returned (come back) and will again."

However, the bad effects of the depression soon grew worse and worse. More people lost jobs, money, and homes. There were reports that in Germany and the United States, there were great hunger, disease, and even starvation. Nations used protectionism more than in recent decades. That reduced international trade.

Farmers were usually safe from the severe effects of previous depressions because they could at least feed themselves. During the Great Depression, the Great Plains were also hit hard with a drought and dust storms. The events were called the Dust Bowl.

Years of overgrazing, combined with drought, caused the grass to disappear. With the topsoil exposed, high winds picked up the loose dirt and carried it over long distances. The dust storms destroyed crops and left farmers without food or crops to sell.

Small farmers were hit especially hard. Even before the dust storms had hit, the invention of the tractor drastically cut the need for manpower on farms. Small farmers were usually already in debt since they borrowed money for seed and paid it back when their crops came in. When the dust storms damaged the crops, small farmers could not feed themselves or their families and also could not pay back their debts. Banks would then foreclose on the mortgage, and the farmers' families would be homeless, unemployed, and poor.

A hard disk drive (HDD), hard disk or hard drive, is a data storage device for computers which uses magnetic storage to store data.  The capacity of a hard drive is usually measured in gigabytes (GB), however hard disk capacity can also be measured in terabytes when the capacity is over 1000 or 1024 gigabytes. A gigabyte is one thousand megabytes and a megabyte is one million bytes, which means that a gigabyte is one billion bytes. Some hard drives are so large that their capacity is measured in terabytes, (TB) where one terabyte is a thousand gigabytes (1 TB = 1000 or 1024 GB). As of 2025, hard drives most people can buy hard drives as big as 32 TB in size, but special hard drives used by businesses can be even bigger.

Over the years, there have been many disk interface types, though all used the same rotating platter recording technology.  Differences were in how the data was encoded to binary, data integrity, data transfer speeds, cabling requirements, and cost.  In 2009, it was common to attach a hard disk using a Serial ATA connection.  The connection that came before that was called "IDE" and is called Parallel ATA today.  In large data centers, Fibre Channel is often used.

For servers, the SCSI interface is very popular. There are several types and versions of SCSI interface, like parallel and Serial Attached SCSI, each stepping-up in terms of speed and price. Within servers, several SCSI drives are often used in conjunction with each other, in order to safeguard against data loss or corruption (this is known as RAID—and there are many configurations to choose from).

An HDD has a disk motor and an actuator motor that positions the read/write head. Wires from the actuator connect to the read/write head to amplifiers. They are bridged by the head support arm. In modern drives, acceleration at the head reaches 550 g, so a head support arm connects the actuator and the read/write head.

The actuator controls the read/write head and acts as a permanent magnet. A metal plate supports a squat neodymium-iron-boron (NIB) magnet. Beneath this plate is the voice coil, which is attached to the actuator hub. Beneath the actuator hub is a second NIB magnet, mounted on the bottom plate of the actuator.

The voice coil is shaped like an arrow. It is made up of a magnet with plastic insulation. This magnet interacts with the actuator magnet, causing the disk to move. If the magnetic field were uniform it would cancel out, but the surface magnet is divided between north and south poles in the middle, so force is produced instead of canceled out.

There are several reasons behind the corruption of internal and external hard drive.

Virus & Malware Attack:- If a system is attacked by a virus, the important boot files stored in the internal hard disk may be deleted, leading to boot failure. Meanwhile, the crucial data and the complete partition may also be deleted by the virus or malware attack.

Due to Physical Damage:- It is also called hardware failure, and consists the following types: Overheating of hard drive, Read/write head crash, Cracked or poor-contact data line, Scratch on magnetic platters, Short circuit in the control circuit board and much more. The data lost due to these kinds of reasons can hardly be repaired. A user have no choice but to turn to expert for data recovery from hardware damaged hard drive.

Corruption of Boot Sector:- The boot sector is the first sector of the hard drive. This is used to load processor control and then move it to the Operating System. When, the boot sector is damaged, you will not be able to enter the system and access any data stored in the internal hard drive.

Damaged file system:- The file system is used by the Operating System to define the approach for organizing files on the storage device. To be particular, it is like a gateway to access data stored on hard drive partitions. If the file system on the internal hard drive is unluckily damaged somehow, the drive may become inaccessible and the system may fail to start.

Software Clash:- All kinds of applications you installed on your local machine currently may not able to be fully supportive with each other, so software clash occurs now and then to lead to sudden computer shutdown and cause internal hard drive corruption.

When a hard disk fails to read the data, the hard drive may start to click to indicate that it is damaged, or broken. This can happen if you drop the hard disk, or the hard disk is just too old. The hard drive makes a "click" sound when that happens.

The clicking sound itself arises from the unexpected movement of the disk's read/write actuator.  At start-up, and during use, the disk head must move correctly and confirm it is correctly tracking data on the disk.  If the head cannot do this, the disk controller may attempt to recover by retrying.  This may cause an audible "click".  In some devices, the process automatically retries, causing a repeated or rhythmic clicking sound, sometimes accompanied by the whirring sound of the drive plate spinning. In this case, when this happens, you might not be able to recover data on the hard disk without special data recovery services. However, there are reports that the hard drive may work again if you put it in the freezer overnight.

The platters in HDDs are spun at speeds varying from 4200 rpm in older portable devices designed for energy efficient operation, to 15000 rpm for high-performance servers (not for consumer use). The first HDDs spun at 1200 rpm and, for many years, 3600 rpm was the norm until the early 90s. However, in terms of performance per Watt then 7200 rpm hard drives are the most energy efficient per gb of data transferred using not a substantial increase of energy than 5400rpm hdds. 4200rpm hdds are less efficient in terms of performance per Watt over 5400 rpm hdds which are better for larger file reads/writes due to it simply writing the files for a shorter time. 4200rpm is generally less efficient than 5400rpm for most tasks.  5400rpm is better performing offering much better efficiency per Watt, though 7200rpm drives only use slightly more power than 5400rpm making them slightly less efficient especially when idle.

As for higher rpms (10000/15000rpm) they are faster but use significantly more power than 7200rpm drive offering the best balance of speed and power efficiency. Above 7200rpm, efficiency of performance per Watt decreases, especially with 15k rpm drives. So 7200rpm is most efficient followed by 5400, probably 4200 then 10000 and finally least efficient and mostly phased out 15000 rpm. 15k rpm doesn't offer much performance gains compared to 7200 and 10000rpm. 4200rpm isn't produced anymore due to performance concerns, while higher rpms are rare and only used in enterprise use but are mostly phased out because of falling SSD prices. 3600rpm is obsolete and the last drives with this rpm were made in the early/mid 90s. 10000rpm was a rare exception for WDs raptor drives which were 10k rpm sata drives marketed for both enterprise and consumer use. 15k rpm is only for enterprise hard drives. 4200rpm more common in older devices.

The Great Barrier Reef is the world's largest coral reef stretching over 1,400 miles. It is near the coast of Queensland, Australia. It is made up of nearly 2900 coral reefs and over 600 islands.

The reef is about 327,800km2 big and 2,600km long, and has been listed an important World Heritage Site by UNESCO.

The Great Barrier Reef is the biggest structure made by living things. It can be seen from outer space. The Reefs are threatened.

The biggest threat to the Great Barrier Reef today is coral bleaching caused by high sea water temperatures as a result of global warming.

During 2016, the worst die-off ever recorded occurred, due to seas warming around the Great Barrier Reef. Two-thirds of a 700-km (435 miles) stretch of coral in nine months were killed.

The Reef Research Centre has found the remains of coral that are half a million years old. Corals have been growing in the region for as long as 25 million years. The corals have not always formed coral reefs.

It is difficult to work out the age of the Great Barrier Reef. This is because of the way a reef can grow and shrink as the sea level changes. A coral reef can grow in diameter, that is how wide they are, from 1 to 2 cm per year. They can also grow upwards from 1 to 15 cm per year. Coral cannot grow if the water is too deep (150 metres or more) because it needs light from the sun. They cannot grow out of the water (above sea level).

The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority and Australian Institute of Marine Science say the current, living reef started growing about 20,000 years ago. It started to grow on an older reef. This makes the beginning of the reef. The land that forms the bottom of the Great Barrier Reef was a coastal plain. The plain had some large hills. Some of these hills were parts of older reefs.

From 20,000 years ago until 6,000 years the sea level began to rise. As it rose, the corals could grow higher on the hills of the coastal plain. 13,000 years ago, the sea level was 60 metres lower than the present day. Corals began to grow around the hills of the coastal plain. These became continental islands. As the sea level rose higher, most of these continental islands were covered by water. The corals could then grow over the hills. This formed the present cays and reefs. Sea level on the Great Barrier Reef has not risen much in the last 6,000 years. The CRC Reef Research Centre has worked out that the present, living reef is 6,000 to 8,000 years old.

The remains of a very old barrier reef have been found in the Kimberley area. This is in the northern part of Western Australia.

The Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area has been divided into 70 different areas. These are called bioregions. Each bioregion has its own special plants and animals. There are 30 reef bioregions, and 40 are non-reef bioregions. In the northern part of the Great Barrier Reef, there are ribbon reefs and deltaic reefs. These kinds of reef do not exist in the rest of the Great Barrier Reef system.

The Great Barrier Reef has 1,500 species of fish, and many other animals, algae, and corals. This includes many vulnerable or endangered species. Some of these exist only on this reef system.

Thirty species of whales, dolphins, and porpoises have been seen in the Great Barrier Reef. This includes the dwarf minke whale, the Indo-Pacific humpback dolphin, and the humpback whale. Most of the population of dugongs live there.

Six species of sea turtles come to the reef to breed. These are the green sea turtle, leatherback sea turtle, hawksbill turtle, loggerhead sea turtle, flatback turtle, and the olive ridley. There are two different groups of green sea turtles on the Great Barrier Reef. One group lives in the northern part of the reef and the other in the south. Fifteen species of seagrass attract the dugongs and turtles. They also provide a food and shelter for fish. The most common kinds of seagrasses are Halophila and Halodule.

Saltwater crocodiles live in mangrove and salt marshes on the coast near the reef. No crocodile nests have been found on the reef. The salt water crocodiles on the reef travel long distances. There are not many living around the reef. Around 125 species of shark, stingray, skates or chimaera live on the reef. About 5,000 species of mollusc live on the reef. These include the giant clam, nudibranchs and cone snails. Forty-nine species of pipefish and nine species of seahorse have been found. Seven species of frogs live on the islands. Also, the Moray eel lives on the bottom, preying on fish.

215 species of birds come to the reef or nest or roost on the islands. This includes 22 species of seabirds and 32 species of shorebirds. These include the white-bellied sea eagle and roseate tern. Most nesting sites are on islands in the northern and southern regions of the Great Barrier Reef. About 1.7 million birds use the sites to breed.

The islands of the Great Barrier Reef have 2,195 known plant species. Three of these do not live anywhere else. The northern islands have 300-350 plants which are woody. The southern islands have 200 plants which are herbaceous. The Whitsunday region has the most plant species placing at 1,141. The plant species are mostly spread by fish

Seventeen types of sea snake live on the Great Barrier Reef. They take about 4 years to become old enough to breed. They usually live on the sea floor. They live in warm waters up to  deep. They are more common in the southern part of the reef.

More than 1,500 species of fish live on the reef. These include the clownfish, red bass, red-throat emperor, and several types of snapper and coral trout. There are at least 330 species of sea squirts (ascidians) on the reef. These vary in size from 1 mm-10 cm in diameter. Between 300 and 500 species of bryozoans live on the reef system. These are small water animals that look like moss, or

Four hundred species of corals, both hard corals and soft corals live on the reef. Most of this spawn, releasing thousands of eggs, in huge events. This spawning is controlled by the rising sea temperatures. This happens in spring, summer and some parts of autumn, as part of the moons lunar cycle, and the day/night diurnal cycle. Reefs in the inner Great Barrier Reef spawn during the week after the full moon in October. Outer reefs spawn in November and December. The common soft corals on the Great Barrier Reef belong to 36 different types. Five hundred species of marine algae or seaweed live on the reef. This includes thirteen types of Halimeda. These deposit chalky (calcareous) mounds up to 100 metres wide. They have mini ecosystems on their surface which have been compared to rainforest cover.

A new report, the Reef Outlook Report, says that climate change will cause huge damage to the reef. The report was written by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. Warmer and more acidic water around the coral reef will slow down calcification, which is how the coral grows and becomes strong. The corals will become bleached (lose their colours) and many species that live on and around the reef will be in danger. The Australian government has already spent AU$325 million to improve the health of the reef in the last two years.

The Reef Outlook Report also warned of other dangers to the reef. These included poor quality water running into the sea from the mainland. This water is polluted with farm insecticides and rubbish from nearby towns. The increasing amount of development on the coast is destroying natural marine and coastal habitats. There is also some damage from fishing.

Globalization is the spread of products, technology, information, and jobs across nations.

It is a term which may be used broadly to mean doing things as distant people do them, or more narrowly to mean complying to global standards in economy, politics, culture, education, environment or other matters. It describes the way countries and people of the world interact and integrate. Many things have become globalized as people come into contact.

Economic globalization is how countries are coming together as one big global economy, This is all making international trade easier. In the late 20th century, many people agreed to lower tariffs, or taxes on goods that are imported from other countries. Telegraphy and other communication technologies have helped people to buy and sell products from around the world, thus bringing globalization. Herman E. Daly has said that there is an important difference between internationalization and globalization. Internationalization is about nations working together for the same goals. These are things like treaties, alliances, and other international agreements.  Globalization is about international trade that are

Political globalization is how institutions and countries can influence the whole world. The United Nations is an example of globalization because most countries of the world are members of its General Assembly. This international organization can make countries follow rules and apply economic sanctions to a country that doesn't. This means the countries in the U.N will punish them by not talking or trading with them, so they don't benefit from globalization.

Cultural globalization is how culture is becoming homogeneous, which means that people from all over the world act in similar way. For example, many people around the world write with the Latin alphabet, wear T-shirts and jeans and watch Hollywood movies and other media.

Some people, like Noam Chomsky, do not like globalization because they feel it only helps rich people get richer by making poor people poorer. Offshore outsourcing, such as a company hiring workers in a developing country, is often a part of globalization. This sometimes means that some people in a developed country lose their jobs. Joseph Stiglitz said that international groups like the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have made it harder for poorer nations to get richer.  Globalization also means that problems from other countries will affect your country. For example, the Great Depression of the 1930s started in the United States but affected the entire world.

Many countries also dislike it when international organizations such as the United Nations tell them what to do. However they obey to avoid sanctions. Many people also criticize the fact that globalization means that fewer people are deciding what  brands, like Coca-Cola and McDonald's, taking over smaller, local shops and businesses.  They criticize the fact that powerful countries have bigger influence on world culture than others. For example, the United States is the biggest cultural exporter, which means that countries around the world are becoming like the United States. However, this hurts local cultures. Jean Baudrillard believes that globalization hurts local cultures and is the cause of most terrorism.  He also believes that most supporters of globalization just want to stay in power.

Gregory Meyjes interprets globalization as a largely hegemonic, unequal process of socio-cultural imposition. Questioning the various processes (economic, political, cultural) by which globalization or globalisation has favored rapid Anglo-cultural dominance over a more gradual, egalitarian evolution towards an inclusive world civilization, Meyjes argues for cultural policies that support "ecological" relations between local ethnocultural traditions, by protecting cultural specificity in the short term and allow as many cultural groups as possible to organically contribute to the whole. At the global level, Meyjes therefore proposes the term universalization or universalisation to denote a process of (largely) non-imposed socio-cultural exchange between state-level and sub-state-level groups and "nations" – i.e. a transnational process that informs the gradual emergence of a universal civilization.

Others, like Thomas Friedman, believe that globalization can bring people together and make everyone richer without getting rid of local cultures.  People who support globalization also believe that it makes war less likely because it is bad for business. Francis Fukuyama also argued that globalization would eventually lead to a system of world governance which would cause wars to end.

Many believe that globalization helps out poorer nations by bringing them business.  A report by the World Bank said that poverty in India and Indonesia was cut in half because of globalization.  The report also said that people in poorer nations are living longer and better because they were making more money.

Hangeul () is the alphabet (or alphabetic syllabary) used for the Korean language. It was created by Sejong the Great, the 4th King of the Joseon Dynasty in 1443. It is still being used now. When Hangeul was spreading, King Sejong published Hunminjeong'eum Haeryebon (). It was chosen as the 'Memory of the World' by UNESCO in 1997.

In this book, the design ideas of Hangeul and information about its use were written down in detail. The book Hunminjeong'eum Haeryebon states the two design ideas of Hangeul. The first one is that the consonants of Hangeul look like vocal organs. The second one is that the vowels of Hangeul are based on Cheonji'in (). Cheonji'in refers to the three elements of philosophy which are sky (), earth () and human (). Because of these ideas, Hangeul is well known for being easy to learn.

Although it was only used by the lower classes at first, Hangeul became the official writing script of Korea in the late 19th century. Today it is the most used writing system of both North Korea and South Korea. North Korea abolished the use of Hanja, and today North Koreans write only in Hangeul. In South Korea, people write mostly in Hangeul, but sometimes Hanja is still used.

The vowels are transliterated into the Roman alphabet as follows:

Those with two small lines are pronounced with an extra "y" first.

There are 14 simple consonants: ㄱㄴㄷㄹㅁㅂㅅㅇㅈㅊㅋㅌㅍㅎ. Some of them can also be written next to each other at the end of syllables.

The consonants the Korean language uses written in Latin letters are:

The consonants and vowels are combined into blocks of syllables. A syllable means one vowel and a few consonants, like "han" and "geul".

Giovanni da Palestrina (born Palestrina, (c.1525 – February 2, 1594 in Rome) was a very important Italian composer of church music of his time.  He lived in the period called the Renaissance.  Most of his music was choral (written for choirs).  It is very polyphonic.  This means that the different voices (sopranos, altos, tenors or basses) are often singing different words and different parts of the tune at the same time.  Many composers since have studied the way that Palestrina wrote, because this is an excellent way to learn to write contrapuntal music.

Palestrina took his name from the town where he was born.  We are not sure of the exact date of his birth.  Any records of his birth were destroyed when the town burned in 1577.  He was probably a choirboy in Palestrina.  When he was grown up he got a job as organist and choir director at the Roman basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore.  He was not earning much money, but he married a lady who came from a very rich family, so he was comfortably off.  Pope Julius III heard about how good this young composer was.  He asked him to come and meet him.  He was given the job of master of the Capella Juliana, the choir that sang at the services in St Peter’s, Rome.  This was the top job in Italy and he was only 26.   Of course, Palestrina composed a mass in the pope’s honour.

Palestrina composed 93 masses (these are musical settings of the words of the ordinary of the Mass).  He also wrote motets and madrigals.  Palestrina and Lassus were the two greatest composers of the late Renaissance.

Gunpowder (or gun powder) is a mix of chemical substances (75%  saltpeter, 15% charcoal and 10% sulfur). It is used primarily in firearms, burns very quickly, and creates gases. Those gases use up more space than the gunpowder they come from, so they push outward. If the gunpowder is in a small space, the gases will push on the walls of the space, building up pressure. In a gun, the pressure pushes against a bullet, causing it to fly out at high speeds. If the pressure became too high, it could destroy the gun barrel.

Gunpowder was invented by the Chinese. The first references of black powder, the original form of gunpowder, date to the 9th century. According to legend, Chinese alchemists were looking for a formula to create the elixir of life, or the mythical potion that causes whoever drinks it to become immortal, when they accidentally created gunpowder. Because the powder was highly flammable, or burned very easily, they decided to call it "fire medicine" (Simplified Chinese: 火药 / Traditional Chinese: 火藥). The Chinese soon weaponized the substance, or made weapons out of it. In later centuries they made many weapons using gunpowder, including rockets, bombs, flamethrowers, and land mines, before making cannons and guns. The oldest weapon that uses gunpowder dates back to a bronze handheld cannon made in northeastern China in 1288. The first mention in Europe was in the 13th century when Roger Bacon described the formula of black powder. Gunpowder was extremely valuable to the Chinese civilization, in fact so valuable that sometimes it was traded for gold.

A myocardial infarction, also and commonly called a heart attack, happens when a blood vessel in the heart suddenly becomes blocked. Blood vessels carry blood and oxygen. When a blood vessel in the heart gets blocked, blood cannot get to part of the heart. This part of the heart does not get enough oxygen. This is called ischemia. When the heart muscle becomes ischemic (does not get enough blood and oxygen), the ischemia often causes chest pain. This is called Angina Pectoris. If the ischemia lasts long enough, the heart muscle that is not getting enough oxygen dies. This is called an infarction. "Myocardial infarction" means "infarction (muscle death) in the heart muscle."

A heart attack is a medical emergency. The first few minutes are very important for keeping the person alive. Some of the damage from the heart attack can be repaired if the person gets treatment within the first hour of the attack.

Most heart attacks are caused by Coronary Artery Disease (CAD). In coronary artery disease, a wax-like material called plaque builds up on the inside walls of arteries in the heart. This is called atherosclerosis. Plaque is made of cholesterol and other cells. The amount of plaque increases slowly. As more plaque builds up, the insides of the heart's blood vessels get narrower. This means that less blood can flow through the blood vessels. This can cause platelets (which make the blood clot) to build up in front of the plaque. This causes a blood clot in the blood vessel. If the clot breaks free and gets stuck in part of the blood vessel made narrower by the plaque, the plaque and the clot together block the blood vessel completely. This makes it impossible for blood to get to part of the heart, and causes a heart attack.

A person can lower their chances of getting coronary artery disease by eating healthy foods, exercising, not smoking cigarettes, and not drinking too much alcohol.

Signs that a person is having a heart attack show over several minutes, and ly come immediately. Most people having a heart attack have chest pain. Sometimes, people also have pain in the left arm, the lower jaw, the neck, the right arm, the back, or in parts of the abdomen. Heart attacks cause increased troponin.

Many women have different symptoms than men. The most common symptoms include shortness of breath (trouble breathing), weakness, and feeling very tired. Some women feel tired, do not sleep properly, and have shortness of breath for up to a month before they have a heart attack. Women may also have nausea and stomach upset when having a heart attack.

Sometimes, people have "silent heart attacks." These are heart attacks that do not cause any pain. They are more common in elderly people, women, and people with diabetes. In these people, suddenly feeling very tired, or fainting, may be the only sign of a heart attack.

A heart attack is a medical emergency that needs treatment as quickly as possible. The most important thing is to save as much myocardium (heart muscle) as possible and prevent more complications. As time passes, the risk of damage to the heart muscle increases.

Doctors or paramedics usually start certain treatments as soon as a heart attack is suspected. These treatments include:

Once doctors are sure that a person is having a heart attack, there are two main treatments: "clot-busting medicines" (thrombolytics) and percutaneous coronary intervention.

Prevention methods also include no smoking, increase in physical activity, a healthy, low saturated and low cholesterol diet, and minimal to no alcohol beverage intake. Secondary prevention may include additional rehabilitation and physical activity participation. Regularly and actively participating in physical activity can reduce the risk of a heart attack recurring by 34% and increase overall health, when comparing the highest activity group to the lowest.

"Clot-busting medicines" (called thrombolytics) can dissolve blood clots that are blocking the blood vessels in the heart. This makes it possible for blood and oxygen to flow again to the part of the heart that was not getting enough blood and oxygen. The most common clot-busting medicine is called tissue plasminogen activator (tPA).

Clot-busters work best if patients get them within 30 minutes after getting to the hospital. However, if a patient gets a clot-busting medicine within 12 hours after the heart attack starts, they have a better chance of surviving.

Clot-busting medicines do have some risks. Sometimes they can thin the blood too much and cause bleeding.

Percutaneous coronary intervention is a way of opening blocked coronary arteries. Percutaneous means that the procedure is not done by cutting a person open in surgery. Coronary intervention means "way to help the heart".  Percutaneous coronary intervention is also called "coronary angioplasty".

In a percutaneous coronary intervention, a doctor threads a flexible tube into one of the patient's blood vessels, usually one in the upper thigh. The doctor threads the tube up to the blocked blood vessels in the heart. On the end of the tube is a balloon. The doctor blows up the balloon, which pushes the plaque and blood clot against the side of the blocked blood vessel. This allows blood to flow through that blood vessel again. Sometimes, a doctor might also place a small mesh tube called a stent into the blood vessel. The stent will make sure the blood vessel stays open and does not get blocked again in the future.

As soon as a person thinks they may be having signs of a heart attack, they should call emergency service right away. (Emergency services can be reached dialling 911 in the US, and 112 in most of continental Europe) However, the average person waits about three hours before asking for help. When a person waits to get help, they are more likely to have more serious damage to their heart. The American Heart Association says "time is muscle": the more time a person waits to get treatment, the more heart muscle dies.

If a person is having trouble breathing, sitting straight up can help. The person should follow any instructions they get from the emergency operator or their doctor.

Hans Christian Andersen (2 April 1805 – 4 August 1875) was a Danish writer.

Andersen was born in Odense, Denmark. His father was a shoemaker, and his mother washed clothes for customers. The family was poor. When Andersen was 11, his father died. At 14, Andersen left his mother and his home. He moved to Copenhagen.

The king helped Andersen finish his education. Andersen wanted to be an actor or dancer. He did not have the talent for either. He started to write novels, plays, poems, short stories, and travel books. In 1835, he published four fairy tales that were liked by the readers. After this success, he wanted to write more fairy tales.

Andersen's stories were popular all over Europe. He was invited into the homes of rich and powerful people. He fell in love with several men and women. He was in love with singer Jenny Lind. He also fell in love with ballet dancer Harald Scharff.

Andersen was a happy and carefree man. He travelled all over Europe. He wanted to see the sights. He hoped travelling would make him even happier. He always carried a rope with him. He planned to use this rope as a fire escape if needed. In the spring of 1872, Andersen fell off of his bed and suffered major injuries. He never recovered fully. Soon after that, Andersen showed signs of liver cancer. He died on 4 August 1875 from liver cancer.

Gustav Mahler (born Kalischt (now Kalište), Bohemia, July 7 1860; died Vienna, May 18 1911) was a Czech-Austrian composer and conductor. He was one of the last great composers of the Romantic period. He wrote nine symphonies (he started writing a tenth symphony but left it unfinished) and several collections of songs with orchestral accompaniment. He was very interested in German folk song and he found new ways to use folk song in large orchestral symphonies. His work Das Lied von der Erde (The Song of the Earth) is one of his greatest works, combining song with the sonata form of a symphony. He was also a great conductor and helped to make the Vienna Opera world-famous.

Gustav Mahler was born on 7 July 1860 into a Jewish family. He was the second of 12 children and the first one of the six who were to survive childhood and grow up to adults. His father worked hard to build up his business. He owned a distillery and seven taverns in Iglau to where the family moved in the autumn of 1860. There he heard a lot of music: military music, folk music and different kinds of art music. He learned the piano and performed in public in 1870 and started to compose.

In 1875 he went to study at the Vienna Conservatory. After a while he gave up studying the piano and concentrated on composition and conducting. He was very interested in Wagner’s ideas about philosophy and politics, and he studied philosophy at the University of Vienna. He started to earn some money by teaching. His first important composition was a cantata called Das klagende Lied.

Mahler’s first job as a conductor was at Bad Hall in Upper Austria. The small opera company there was not very good and the music they sang was just light operetta. Mahler soon found another job at Laibach (now called Ljubljana). They sang better music there, but he only stayed one year. His next job was in Olmütz (now called Olomouc). The standard of singing was not very good, but Mahler was very strict. Although the singers did not like him at first he helped them to become better. Then he got a job in Kassel, but he had to conduct a lot of operettas. He had an unhappy love affair with one of the singers. This inspired him to write a collection of orchestral songs Lieder eines fahrenden Gesellen and he started his first symphony.

In 1885 he got a conducting job in Prague. For the first time he was able to conduct works for which he was to become famous: operas by Mozart, Wagner, and music by Beethoven. However, Mahler had arguments with the people he worked with and so he left Prague.

Mahler’s next job was in Leipzig. The orchestra of the Neues Stadttheater was larger and much better than any he had worked for until then. One of the conductors who worked there was Arthur Nikisch. He was very famous, and the young Mahler was often criticized because he was very different to Nikisch and the way he conducted. When Nikisch was ill Mahler conducted Die Walküre and Siegfried. This helped him to show that he was a great conductor. He met the grandson of the composer Carl Maria von Weber who gave him sketches for an opera Die Drei Pintos which Weber had left unfinished. The sketches were very difficult to read, but Mahler completed the opera and performed it. He also worked at his own compositions and he met Richard Strauss who was to remain a close friend until his death.

In 1888 Mahler got a job at the Royal Opera in Budapest. Although it was a good theatre they were in financial problems. The Hungarians wanted Mahler to make it a Hungarian national opera using Hungarian singers as much as possible. However, there were not many good Hungarian singers. The opera company did not like German operas, preferring light opera and ballet. He did not have much time to compose because he was too busy with administrative jobs. So he left Budapest. By this time both his parents had died.

From 1891 to 1897 Mahler had a conducting post at Hamburg. Here there was an opera company of international standard. Mahler soon became world-famous. He conducted many operas as well as orchestral concerts. He conducted in London in 1892 and was invited back again but he did not accept because he wanted time to compose. He spent the summer months composing, writing his music down in short score (not showing the orchestration) and during the theatre season he would revise and orchestrate them. The performance of his Second Symphony in Berlin in 1895 was a huge success.

Since the death of his parents Mahler had supported his two sisters. He had encouraged his brother Otto to become a musician, but Otto committed suicide. Mahler continued to support his two sisters until they married two famous brothers: Eduard and Arnold Rosé in 1898 and 1902.

Mahler was becoming very famous. In 1897 he went on tour to Moscow, Munich and Budapest. However, he really wanted a job in Vienna, but because he was Jewish it was going to be very hard for him to find work there, so he became a Roman Catholic. Soon afterwards he became Kapellmeister in Vienna.

In Vienna Mahler soon became famous for his conducting of Wagner and Mozart. His friend Guido Adler paid for the publication of his First and Third Symphonies. Mahler replaced Hans Richter as conductor of the Philharmonic Concerts. Mahler attracted bigger audiences, but he had disagreements with the players. They did not like some of his unusual ideas and he was very strict. After an illness in 1901 he resigned. He bought a house in Maiernigg in Carinthia where he spent his summers composing. In 1901 he fell in love with Alma Schindler whose father Anton Schindler was a famous landscape painter. She was nearly twenty years younger than Mahler. She was studying composition, but Mahler made her give up composing so that she could devote herself to being a good wife. This made the relationship between them rather difficult. In 1910 Mahler went to see the psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud. Freud helped him to understand not only his marriage problems but also his creative nature. He now felt a deeper love for Alma than he ever had before.

At the Hofoper Mahler conducted many of the great operas, but not many new ones. He wanted to conduct Richard Strauss’s new opera Salomé, but the censors did not allow it to be performed. Nevertheless, Mahler’s years conducting in Vienna were very important because he had many new ideas. Through his wife he met many artists, especially those connected with the Sezession movement. One of them, Alfred Roller, designed the sets for a new production of Tristan und Isolde. He became Mahler’s chief stage designer. At last Mahler could work closely with someone who shared his views. They staged many operas together: Fideleo, Don Giovanni , Die Entführung aus dem Serail, Le Nozze di Figaro, Die Zauberflöte and Iphigénie en Aulide.

Mahler felt much more secure now that he was married. This made him more creative. He composed his Eighth Symphony very quickly. It needs a huge orchestra and choir, which is why it is often called "Symphony of a Thousand". Mahler thought it was his best work.

Mahler never became a teacher, but he gave a lot of encouragement to young composers such as Arnold Schoenberg, Alban Berg, Anton Webern and Alexander Zemlinsky. However, there were music critics in Vienna who were anti-Jewish and made things difficult for him. In 1907 his elder daughter Maria died from scarlet fever. More bad news followed when Mahler was found to have a bad heart. The doctor said he must give up his favourite pastimes: going for walks, cycling and swimming. Mahler had done a tremendous amount for the cultural life of Vienna, but he decided it was time to leave. The last thing he conducted in Vienna was his Second Symphony.

Mahler was invited to go to America to conduct the Metropolitan Opera in New York City. It was very different from what he had been used to in Europe. Instead of working with a group of singers who worked together as a team, the operas at the Metropolitan Opera were sung by great operatic stars. Mahler did not try to change this. He even agreed to make cuts to Wagner operas. Then he was invited to be the conductor of the New York Philharmonic so he resigned from the Metropolitan. The last time he conducted there was as a guest artist.

In 1909 he finished his Ninth Symphony. He was very busy conducting in Europe. In January 1911 he conducted his Fourth Symphony in New York. Then he became ill and decided to go to Vienna. He arrived there on 12 May but he died a few weeks later at the age of 50.

Mahler was one of the last composers who belonged to the great musical tradition of Germany and Austria. Although many German composers had written great symphonies (e.g. Beethoven), Mahler found something new to say in his music. His symphonies often have long melodies and he uses folk song as well as new sounds in the orchestra. Mahler worked most of his life in the theatre, and this influences his musical language. A good example is Symphony No.4 which starts in the happy key of G major where the music describes the early life, but finishes in E major where the soprano soloist sings about the heavenly pleasures.

Mahler became very interested in German folksong and he composed several sets of orchestral songs. He took poems from the collection called Des Knaben Wunderhorn (The Boy’s Magic Horn). These songs were originally medieval, but Mahler made them feel very different by interpreting them through his own personality. The language of his songs is heard in his symphonies, four of which use singing (nos 2, 3, 4 and 8). He wrote nine symphonies and started a tenth, but died before it was finished.

Mahler was a great orchestrator. Some of his later works need a very large orchestra. He often used unusual effects, e.g. in his First Symphony there is a double bass solo playing very high notes, accompanied by timpani.

His set of orchestral songs Das Lied von der Erde (The Song of the Earth) are like a symphony, but he did not call it a symphony. This was for superstitious reasons: several great composers, including Beethoven, had written nine symphonies and then died.

As a conductor Mahler had a tremendous influence on musical life in Europe. He often conducted his own works. When he conducted works by other composers he played it according to his own ideas. He even made changes to the orchestration of some works by Beethoven. He was not the sort of conductor who tried to make the music as close as possible to what the composer had wanted. He always wanted the music to sound very clear.

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (also Leibnitz or von Leibniz) 1 July 1 (21 June OS) 1646 – 14 November 1716) was a German intellectual who wrote mostly in French and Latin.

He played an important role in both philosophy and mathematics. He invented calculus independently of Newton, and his notation for derivatives is the one in general use since then. He also invented the binary system, foundation of modern computers.

He was taught law and philosophy. He served as secretary to two major German noble houses: one became the British royal family while he served it. Leibniz played a major role in the European politics and diplomacy of his day.

In philosophy, he is most remembered for optimism. He thought our universe is the best possible one God could have made. He was one of the great 17th century rationalists. René Descartes and Baruch Spinoza are the other two. His philosophy also both looks back to the Scholastic tradition and anticipates modern logic and analysis.

Leibniz also made contributions to physics and technology, and anticipated ideas which surfaced much later in biology, medicine, geology, probability theory, psychology, and information science. He wrote on politics, law, ethics, theology, history, and philology. Sometimes, he even wrote in verse. His contributions are scattered in journals and in tens of thousands of letters and unpublished manuscripts. There is no complete edition of Leibniz's writings, and a complete account of his accomplishments is not yet possible. Leibniz is sometimes known as the last "universal genius".

Leibniz is perhaps most famous for his involvement in development of calculus independent of Isaac Newton and creation of Leibniz Notation which is the standard form of calculus today.

The Han dynasty came to power in 202 BC. They followed the laws of Confucianism and legalism. This was called 'the Han synthesis'.

The Han dynasty was considered the golden age of early China with many important events and discoveries.

The Han dynasty ruled China for over 400 years: from 206 B.C. to 220 A.D. Its first emperor was Liu Bang, known in Chinese as Emperor Gaozu of Han.

Emperor Gaozu maintained a legalist ideology, just like the Qin dynasty had. However, the emperor also had ideas related to Confucianism about having a centralized system showing benevolence.

After eighty years, Emperor Wu of Han launched a period of military expansion. The Han armies took control of many territories, including the extremely important Silk Road in Mongolia and Xinjiang. The Silk Road helped make the empire a political, economic, military, and cultural center, but it was very expensive to manage and further expansion was cut off.

Several factors contributed to the fall of the Han dynasty, including uprisings of desperate and hungry people, the spread of attacks by nomadic groups, and official corruption.

In the Han dynasty, many of the features of Chinese culture (including Confucianism and Chinese characters) became firmly established. For this reason, the dominant ethnic group in China today calls themselves the Han Chinese.

Fairbank, John King and Merle Goldman 1992. China: a new history. 2nd enlarged edition 2006. Cambridge: MA; London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Giuseppe Verdi (born Roncole near Busseto, 9 or 10 October 1813; died Milan 27 January 1901) was an Italian composer of operas.

Verdi and Richard Wagner were the greatest composers of opera in the 19th century although they were completely different from one another. When Verdi was a young man the most famous opera composers in Italy were Gaetano Donizetti and Vincenzo Bellini who wrote in the bel canto tradition. This meant that their operas had beautiful tunes which were written for singers to show off their voices, even if what they sang did not suit the story. During his long life, Verdi changed opera so that it did not have to obey old-fashioned rules.

The small village where Verdi was born lies in the valley of the Po River in the north of Italy. It was a poor district. His father was an innkeeper who had a small farm. The young boy must have been very talented. He was given a small harpsichord which he kept all his life. At the age of 9 he often played the organ for church services in the village when the organist was away.

A few years later he composed music for the amateur orchestra in Busseto. A man called Antonio Barezzi knew many important people and he helped Verdi a lot. Later Verdi married a daughter of a friend. Barezzi sent him to Milan so that he could study, but Verdi had not been taught the piano properly and he did not get a place in the music conservatory. He had some private lessons and learned a lot about opera as well as about literature and politics. In 1839 he composed an opera: Oberto, conte di San Bonifacio, which was performed in La Scala, the world-famous opera house in Milan. It is not one of his greatest operas, but it helped him to become well-known and he was asked to write three more operas for La Scala. When his next opera was produced it was not a success: the audience did not like it and they hissed and booed. There was also tragedy in his personal life at this time: his two children and his wife all died.

Verdi managed to overcome his unhappiness in 1842 when he produced his opera Nabucco. This was a great success and made him world-famous. He started to work very hard, composing two operas a year. He not only had to write the music but organize all the people to perform it. It was a huge workload. His opera Ernani (1844) was one of the best from this period. In 1847 he had another big success with Macbeth. This opera, based on Shakespeare’s famous play, is still one of the best-loved of all operas. He was becoming a success.

For centuries Italy had been a collection of several countries, each with their own ruler. In the 1850s there was a lot of political unrest in the country. Verdi often wrote music for large choruses in his operas. The words of these choruses were often about fighting for freedom, and it was often thought that the songs were encouraging people to revolt. The song Va pensiero from his opera Nabucco was about the Hebrew slaves who were captive in Babylon. People chanted it in the streets with the words suitably changed. Verdi became a great national hero. Italy eventually became one country in 1861.

Giuseppina Strepponi was the soprano who sang the part of Abigaille in Nabucco. Verdi fell in love with her. She had lived with another man and had three children so she felt that she was not good enough for Verdi. They eventually married in 1859. She was a great support to him until her death in 1897 although Verdi was not an easy husband to live with. He moved back to Busseto with her. He continued to travel a lot but did not let his wife come with him, leaving her behind in Busseto where she was not happy because many people there did not like her.

Three more famous operas were written at this time: Rigoletto in 1851 and Il trovatore (The Troubadour) and La traviata, both in 1853. These operas have many tunes which became famous. They are full of exciting drama in which the characters are very skilfully described by the music. The music is not divided so clearly into recitative and aria like it had been for two centuries. Instead, the music is developing all the time, the arias run straight into the following music. He had a brilliant sense of drama, but he often had to fight hard to stop producers making changes to what he had written.

Verdi often had trouble with the censors (the officials who decide whether the opera should be allowed to be performed). His opera Rigoletto was based on a story called Le roi s’amuse by Victor Hugo. The attempted murder of a king was not thought to be a suitable subject. Verdi had to change the king into a duke in his story and make some other changes before the opera could be performed. The story of his opera Traviata, based on a novel by Alexandre Dumas fils, was also thought to be immoral. At the first performance the audience laughed because the heroine, who is supposed to be dying of tuberculosis, then called "consumption", was very fat. However, the opera soon became enormously popular.

Regarding the instruments that Giuseppe Verdi was using for composing, there are a few known pianos that he had in different periods of his life. The instrument that Giuseppe Verdi was playing as a kid at the Bazezzi’s house, was a piano by Anton Tomaschek. Later, from the time of Rigoletto in 1851 to Aida in 1871 he was using the Viennese 6-pedal piano from Johann Fritz. This exact piano can be seen in the composer's Villa Verdi in the Italian province of Piacenza.

Verdi had become very famous by now, and was asked to compose for the Opéra in Paris. He had to write operas in the French style: operas with five acts and a ballet based on a serious story. None of the operas he wrote at this time for Paris belong to his best works. He was more inspired when writing for the Italian theatres. Simon Boccanegra has a complicated plot, but the characters are described beautifully by the music. Un ballo in maschera (The masked ball) was about the murder of King Gustav III of Sweden. Again the censors did not like it and he had to change the story to a setting in Boston which rather spoiled the story. In the 1860s his best works were La forza del destino (The Force of Destiny), written for St Petersburg, Don Carlos written for the Paris Opéra, and Aida for the new opera house in Cairo in Egypt. Aida is considered one of his most perfect works. The first performance was not without difficulties: Verdi was having a long argument with the conductor Mariani who refused to go to Cairo to conduct it. The argument was made worse by the newspapers who accused Verdi of taking Mariani’s girlfriend. This caused a great scandal.

Verdi retired in the 1870s. He was a rich man who owned a lot of land. He gave a lot of money to charities, particularly to one charity for elderly musicians. Even in retirement he was persuaded by his publishers to write two more operas. He became fascinated by Shakespeare and he wrote Otello to a libretto by Arrigo Boito. This was a brilliant libretto and it helped him to write a great masterpiece in which every little detail of the story is beautifully described by the music. His very last opera, Falstaff (1893) is based on Shakespeare’s Merry Wives of Windsor. Verdi continued to write a few religious pieces in his old age. He died of a stroke in Milan in 1901.

Giacomo Puccini (23 December 1858 - 29 November 1924) was the most famous Italian opera composer after Verdi. He wrote 16 operas. Most of them are performed very often today. Many of his operatic songs are known by many people, especially the aria Nessun dorma from Turandot which was sung by Luciano Pavarotti for the BBC’s television coverage of the Football World Cup which was held in Italy in 1990.

Puccini was born in Lucca, Tuscany into a musical family. He was expected to follow the family tradition and become a church organist. He started playing the organ in churches near Lucca. He liked to improvise on the organ, playing popular tunes from Verdi’s operas. He soon realized that he wanted to be an opera composer. Eventually he persuaded his family to let him study at the Milan Conservatory. His earliest compositions showed that he had a great talent for writing beautiful melodies and that he was good at writing for the orchestra. His first opera to be published, Edgar, had a story similar to that of Bizet’s Carmen, but it was not a suitable story for Puccini.

Manon Lescaut was the first opera for which Puccini chose the story himself. It is the same story as Massenet’s opera Manon. This made Puccini internationally famous. His next opera, La bohème, produced in 1896, is often thought to be his best opera. He worked with two poets on this opera and, although they quarrelled a lot, the result was a work in which the music flowed beautifully like a conversation.

His next opera was Tosca. When it was first performed in Rome in 1900 there were rumours that a bomb would be thrown, but nothing happened. Tosca was a great success. However, Madama Butterfly was hissed and booed at its first performance in Milan’s famous opera house La Scala in 1904.

It was at this time that Puccini married. He already had a son by Elvira, his wife, who had been married to someone else. When her husband died, she was able to marry Puccini. The marriage was not without difficulties. Elvira accused Puccini of having an affair with their servant girl. This servant girl committed suicide and there was a court case which resulted (after an autopsy) in Elvira being found innocent. Puccini was very upset by all this and did not compose much for several years.

When he finally started writing again his new opera La fanciulla del West was set in the American West at the time of the Goldrush. The music has very Impressionistic harmonies like that of Debussy. The way he writes for the orchestra shows the influence of Richard Strauss. The opera was first performed in New York. The world-famous tenor Enrico Caruso sang the main hero part and Arturo Toscanini was the conductor. With such a star cast it had to be a great success.

Puccini followed this by writing an operetta and two one-act operas. The best of these is Gianni Schicchi His last opera is Turandot, which has a fairy-tale like story. While he was working very hard at it he developed throat cancer. He died of complication of the disease in autumn 1924 in Brussels. The whole of Italy went into mourning and Mussolini spoke at the funeral. Puccini had not quite managed to finish Turandot. A man called Franco Alfano finished it using the sketches that Puccini had left.

Hagia Sophia (Greek: Ἁγία Σοφία, meaning the Holy Wisdom) is a mosque in the eastern Bosporus of Istanbul, Turkey. It was originally a Byzantine Eastern Orthodox cathedral and was turned into a mosque after the conquest of Constantinople by the Ottoman Empire.

The walls and floor of the building are from the Late Antiquity and the decorations, including mosaics and frescoes, are mostly from the Middle Ages.

Hagia Sophia was the third church built in this location. It was built between 532 and 537 as the cathedral of Constantinople, the capital city of the Eastern Roman Empire during Late Antiquity. Byzantine emperor Justinian the Great ordered the construction. The architects were Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus. Greek historian Procopius wrote about Hagia Sophia's construction. The building's roof (a large dome) fell and had been rebuilt many times. An earthquake in 994 damaged the cathedral, it was rebuilt by Trdat the Architect.

Hagia Sophia was used as an Eastern Orthodox cathedral until 1453, except during the Latin Empire when it was turned into a Roman Catholic cathedral.

In 1453, after the Fall of Constantinople, Ottoman Sultan Mehmed the Conqueror turned Hagia Sophia into a mosque.

It became a museum in 1935 after the decision of the secularist Turkish government under Kemal Atatürk in 1934. In July 2020, the Turkish government under Tayyip Erdoğan ordered the Hagia Sophia to be turned back into a mosque following a supreme court annulment of a 1934 presidential decree that made it a museum.

Khwajeh Shams al-Din Muhammad Hafez-e Shirazi (also spelled Hafiz) (born between 1310 and 1337, believed to have died at age 69) () or Hafez is a Persian poet. Hafez was born in Shiraz, Iran. Hafez learnt the Quran by heart at an early age. His poems are collected in Divan e Hafez. William Jones translated his work into English in 1771.

Despite his profound effect on Persian life and culture and his enduring popularity and influence, few details of his life are known, and particularly about his early life there is a great deal of more or less mythical anecdote. Some of the early tazkeras (biographical sketches) mentioning Hafez are generally considered unreliable. One early document discussing Hafez' life is the preface of his Divān, which was written by an unknown contemporary of Hafez whose name may have been Moḥammad Golandām. The generally accepted modern edition of Hafez's Divān is known as Qazvini-Ḡani, edited by Moḥammad Qazvini and Qāsem Ḡani.

Many semi-miraculous mythical tales were woven around Hāfez after his death. Four of them are:

Hindustani is an Indo-Aryan language. It is widely spoken in India and Pakistan. It is written in Devanagari and Nastaliq. The Devanagari variety is commonly called Hindi or Hindui. The Nastaliq variety is commonly called Urdu or Lashkari. There also is a Braille version, called Bharati Braille.

Because the English languge is important in the region, the Hindustani language is sometimes written using the Latin script. These transliterations are called Romainzed Urdu, and Roman Hindi.

Hindi and Urdu use different alphabets, but the grammar and pronounciation is almost the same. For this reason, the languages are mutually intelligible. Two peole will understand each other, when one of them speaks Urdu, and the other Hindi. As both languages use different writing systems, this may not be the case for written texts.

Henri Matisse (Le Cateau-Cambrésis, Nord, 31 December 1869 – 3 November 1954) was a French artist known for his use of color and his original ideas.

He is mainly known as a painter, but he was also a draughtsman, printmaker and sculptor. Matisse was one of the main artists who helped to create modern art early in the 20th century.

Although he was initially called a Fauve (wild beast), he painted many traditional themes. He painted from life, and his work includes many portraits and other figurative subjects.

His mastery of the expressive language of form and color, in work spanning over a half-century, won him recognition as a leading figure in modern art.

The Hundred Years' War (French: Guerre de Cent Ans; 1337–1453) was a long conflict between the kingdoms of England and France. It started because of disagreements over the Duchy of Aquitaine and the claim to the French throne by Edward III of England. The war grew into a larger struggle involving many countries in Western Europe, with both sides becoming more focused on nationalism. Even though it is called the Hundred Years' War, it lasted for 116 years, but the conflict was interrupted by things like the Black Death and several years of truces.

The Hundred Years’ War was a major conflict in the Middle Ages. During the war, five generations of kings from two rival families fought for the French throne, as France was the wealthiest and most populated kingdom in Western Europe. The war had a big impact on European history, leading to new military technologies and tactics, like standing armies and artillery, that changed warfare forever. Chivalry, which was important during the war, started to decline afterward. Stronger national identities began to grow in both France and England, which became more powerful and eventually global.

The name “Hundred Years’ War” was used by historians later to describe the connected conflicts that lasted the longest in European history. The war is often divided into three parts, separated by truces: the Edwardian War (1337–1360), the Caroline War (1369–1389), and the Lancastrian War (1415–1453). Both sides had many allies. English forces were successful at first, but in the end, the French, led by the House of Valois, kept control of France. Afterward, the English and French monarchies stayed separate, although English monarchs still claimed the French throne until 1802.

When the war started, France was stronger than England as it was wealthier.  French knights and heavy cavalry also enjoyed a great military reputation in all of Christendom.  Also, France had about 17 million people, but England had only about 4 million people. However, France was a decentralised feudal monarchy in the middle ages and so it was less unified than England.  France had an alliance with Scotland and Bohemia, and England was supported by parts of the Low Countries and by some regions in France loyal to the Plantagenet kings of England.

The English won a major victory at sea in the Battle of Sluys in 1340, which prevented France from invading England. Most of the rest of the war was fought in France. England then won an overwhelming victory at the Battle of Crécy in 1346 against all odds. The use of the English longbow and stakes to counter the French cavalry played a decisive role in that victory.

From 1348 to 1356, there was very little fighting because the Black Death killed many people in England and even more people in France. Edward, the Black Prince, then won a brilliant victory at the Battle of Poitiers for England. King John II of France was captured during the battle. The English invaded France again but were not able to take any more cities. A truce in 1360 gave England about one quarter of France. The first part of the Hundred Years' War is called the Edwardian War.

The war started again in 1369. The new king Charles V of France was more successful, with Bertrand du Guesclin as his best knight. France allied with Castile against England and Portugal, and some of the fighting spilled into Spain and Portugal. France won back most of the land that had been given to England, and Bertrand du Guesclin won great French victories at the Battles of Cocherel and of Pontvallain. A peace followed from 1389 to 1415. The second part of the war is called the Caroline War.

The most famous part of the war began in 1415, when Henry V of England invaded France and won the infamous Battle of Agincourt, again because of his great longbowmen. Much of the French nobility is said to have been killed in the battle. King Charles VI of France was insane and unable to rule, and nearly all of his sons died young.

The queen of France, Isabeau of Bavaria, married one of her daughters, Margaret of Anjou , to Henry V and signed the Treaty of Troyes to make Henry V the next king of France.  Both Henry V and Charles VI died around the same time in 1422.  The English believed that Henry V's son, Henry VI of England, was now the rightful king of France, and many French people agreed.

Charles VI's last son, Charles VII of France, said that he ought to be the new king, but many French people said that he did not deserve to be king because they thought he was a bastard.

The English continued to capture land in France and formed an alliance with Burgundy. They won another major victory at the Battle of Verneuil, but in 1429, Joan of Arc led the French to success at the Siege of Orleans. At the Battle of Patay the same year, French knights, led by La Hire, won a great victory, and the heavy cavalry killed most of the veteran English longbowmen. Joan regained many cities in northeastern France and brought Charles VII to his coronation, but she did not recover Paris.

She was captured by the Burgundians in 1430, convicted of heresy, and burned at the stake in 1431. After her death, the French continued to take back their territory piece by piece. France won diplomatically in 1435 with the Treaty of Arras, which made Burgundy stop being an English ally and make peace with the French. In 1450, France won another great victory at the Battle of Formigny and reconquered Normandy.

The war ended in 1453 by a crushing victory of the French at the Battle of Castillon in which nearly 300 cannons, made by Jean Bureau and his brother Gaspard, were used for the first time in a battle. The third and last part of the war is called the Lancastrian War.

The Gupta Empire was an Indian empire which lasted from around 320 to 550 AD. It managed to unify large parts of the Indian subcontinent. The time of the Gupta Empire is traditionally referred to as India's Golden age.

Plenty of information about this dynasty can be found through coins, inscriptions, monuments, and Sanskrit writings. The Gupta rulers were great conquerors and administrators. Eventually, provincial revolts and invaders from Central Asia weakened broke up the empire, but many of their cultural and intellectual achievements were saved and transmitted to other cultures and live on today. Fa Hien visited India during the reign of Chandragupta II and stayed in this country for several years.

People lived a simple life. Goods were affordable and all round prosperity ensured that their requirements were met easily. Gold and silver coins were issued in great numbers which is a general indicative of the health of the economy. Trade and commerce flourished both within the country and outside. Silk, cotton, spices, medicine, priceless gemstones, pearl, precious metal and steel were exported by sea.

The Gupta Empire was divided into 26 provinces. These were called Bhukti, Desha, or Rajya. Each province had smaller parts called Vishaya (districts), ruled by officers called Vishayapati. The Vishayapati was helped by a local council called the Adhikarana. This council had four members: the head of the city, a trade leader, a top artisan, and a government writer. A smaller area inside a district was called a Vithi.

The Gupta Empire had trade links with the Sassanids and Byzantines. The social system followed four main caste system (varna system). The Guptas used many different gold and silver coinages across their empire. This showed their wealth. Some were also trying to unify the empire by using the same coins over the empire.

Giza Necropolis (also called the Giza pyramid complex) is a necropolis on the Giza Plateau near the city of Cairo, Egypt. It is about 8 kilometres (5 mi) inland into the desert from the ancient town of Giza on the Nile, and about 25 kilometres (15 mi) southwest of Cairo city centre.  The Great Pyramid is the only remaining monument of the Seven Wonders of the World.  Construction is thought to have taken 20,000 workers and 20 years.

There have been many theories to explain how the pyramids were built. These theories include:

Germany is a country in the western region of Central Europe. The country's full name is sometimes shortened to the FRG (or the BRD, in German).

To the north of Germany are the North Sea and the Baltic Sea, and the kingdom of Denmark. To the east of Germany are the countries of Poland and the Czech Republic. To the south of Germany are the countries of Austria and Switzerland. To the west of Germany are the countries of France, Luxembourg, Belgium, and the Netherlands. The total area of Germany is 357,022 square kilometers (137,847 square miles). In 2024, Germany had a population of over 83 million people, the second-largest in Europe after Russia. After the United States, Germany is the second most popular country for migration in the world. Germany has 39 international airports as of 2026. These include Frankfurt, Munich, Berlin Brandenburg, Hamburg, Düsseldorf, etc.

Before it was called Germany, it was called Germania. From 900 to 1806, Germany was part of the Holy Roman Empire. From 1949 to 1990, Germany was made up of two countries called the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany). During this time, the capital city of Berlin was divided into a west and an east part. On 13 August 1961, the German Democratic Republic started building the Berlin Wall between the two parts of Berlin. West Germany was one of the countries that started the European Union.

Germany is one of the most developed countries and has the largest economy in Europe. It is a leading country in science and technology, and one of the largest trading nations of goods and services. Germany is part of many international organizations.

Germany gained importance as the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation, which was the first Reich (this word means empire). It was started by Charlemagne who became the first Holy Roman Emperor in 800 AD, and it lasted until 1806, the time of the Napoleonic Wars. After, German nation-states were made sovereign in Central Europe.

During the mid-1800s, Prussia was led by Chancellor Otto von Bismarck, who is sometimes known as the "Father of Germany". He led a process to bring the German people together under one country. In 1866, Prussia won a war against Austria and their allies. During this time, Prussia founded the North German Confederation. The treaty of unification of Germany was made in Versailles after Germany won the Franco-Prussian War in 1871. This began the Second Reich. The biggest state in the new German Empire was Prussia. The rulers were called Kaisers or "German Emperors", but they did not call themselves "Emperors of Germany". There were many smaller states in the Empire, but not Austria.

Germany stayed an empire for 50 years. It joined the other European empires in the Scramble for Africa and fought wars to make large parts of Africa and Oceania its colonies. It killed many Nama and Herero people who did not want to be ruled by Germany. Today, those colonies have become seven states: Togo, Cameroon, Namibia, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, and Papua New Guinea.

Germany was in World War I with their ally Austria-Hungary, and again declared war on France. The war became slow in the west and became trench warfare. Many men were killed on both sides without winning or losing. In the Eastern Front the soldiers fought with the Russian Empire and won there after the Russians gave up. The war ended in 1918 because the Germans could not win in the west and gave up. Germany's emperor also had to give up his power, and most of Germany's African colonies were taken by other European empires. France took Alsace from Germany and Poland got the Danzig corridor. After a revolution, the Second Reich ended, and the democratic Weimar Republic began.

After the war, there were a lot of problems with money in Germany because of the Peace Treaty of Versailles, which made Germany pay for the costs of World War I and the worldwide Great Depression.

The Third Reich was Nazi Germany; it lasted 12 years, from 1933 to 1945. It started after Adolf Hitler became the head of government. On 23 March 1933, the Reichstag (parliament) passed the Enabling Act, which let Hitler's government command the country without help from the Reichstag and the presidency. This gave him total control of the country and the government. Hitler, in effect, became a dictator.

Hitler wanted to unify all Germans in one state and did this by taking over places where Germans lived, such as Austria and Czechoslovakia; Hitler also wanted the land in Poland that Germany had owned before 1918, but Poland refused to give it to him. He then invaded Poland. This started World War II on 1 September 1939. In the beginning of the war, Germany was winning and even successfully invaded France. It managed to take over much of Europe. However, Germany attacked the Soviet Union in 1941 and after the Battle of Kursk, the German Eastern Front began a slow retreat until war's end. On 8 May 1945, Germany gave up after Berlin was captured, Hitler had killed himself a week earlier. Because of the war, Germany lost a lot of German land east of the Oder-Neiße line, and for 45 years, Germany was split into West Germany and East Germany. Other events happened during the war in Nazi Germany, including the Holocaust, the mass genocide of Jews and other peoples, for which some Nazis were punished in the Nuremberg Trials. West Germany was one of the countries that started the European Union.

After World War II Germany was occupied by the Allies and in 1949 it was divided into two states: West Germany and East Germany, who were stuck in the Cold War. The capital city of Berlin was divided between the two by the Berlin Wall. In 1989 there was a process of reforms in East Germany, which led to the opening of the Berlin Wall and to the end of socialist rule in Germany. These events are known as the Wende or the Friedliche Revolution (Peaceful Revolution) in Germany. After that, East Germany joined West Germany in 1990. The new Germany is a part of the European Union.

Germany is a constitutional federal democracy. Its political rules come from the 'constitution' called Basic Law (Grundgesetz), written by West Germany in 1949. It has a parliamentary system, and the parliament elects the head of government, the Federal Chancellor (Bundeskanzler). The current Chancellor since 2025 is Friedrich Merz.

The people of Germany vote for the parliament, called the Bundestag (Federal Assembly), every four years. Government members of the 16 States of Germany (Bundesländer) work in the Bundesrat (Federal Council). The Bundesrat can help make some laws.

The head of state is the Bundespräsident (Federal President). This person has no real powers but can order elections for the Bundestag. The current president is Frank-Walter Steinmeier (SPD).

The judiciary branch (the part of German politics that deals with courts) has a Bundesverfassungsgericht (Federal Constitutional Court). It can stop any act by the law-makers or other leaders if they feel they go against Germany's constitution.

Since the 2025 German federal election, the ruling parties are the CDU and the SPD, and the opposition parties are the AfD, The Greens, and The Left.

Germany is one of the largest countries in Europe. Its total area is 357,022 square kilometers (137,847 square miles). It stretches from the North Sea and Baltic Sea in the north to the high mountains of the Alps in the south. The highest point is the Zugspitze on the Austrian border, at .

Germany's northern part is very low and flat (lowest point: Neuendorf-Sachsenbande at ). In the middle, there are low mountain ranges covered in large forests. Between these and the Alps, there is another plain created by glaciers during the ice ages.

Germany also contains parts of Europe's longest rivers, such as the Rhine (which makes up a part of Germany's western border, while Oder River is on its eastern border), the Danube and the Elbe.

In these states there are 301 Kreise (districts) and 114 independent cities, which do not belong to any district.

Germany has a mostly continental climate, but the northern German coast has an oceanic climate.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Germany was , on 25 July 2019 in Duisburg and Tönisvorst.

The lowest temperature ever recorded in Germany was , on 24 December 2001 in Funtensee.

Germany has one of the world's largest technologically powerful economies. Bringing West and East Germany together and making their economy work is still taking a long time and costing a lot of money. Germany is the largest economy in Europe and the fourth-largest in the world by nominal gross domestic product (GDP). In September 2011, the inflation rate in Germany was 2.5%. The unemployment rate of Germany was 5.5% as of October 2011.

Germany is one of the G8 countries. The main industry area is the Ruhr area.

The country has companies like BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Audi, Porsche, Siemens, Bosch, SAP, BASF, Adidas and more. Germany's most exported products are cars.

In 2024, Germany had a population of over 83 million people, the second-largest in Europe after Russia.

Most of the people in Germany are ethnically Germans, but the country also has many ethnic minorities. There are at least seven million people from other countries living in Germany. Some have political asylum, and some are guest workers (Gastarbeiter). Many people from poor or dangerous countries go to Germany for safety. Many others move to Germany without permission.

About 50,000 ethnic Danish people live in Schleswig-Holstein, in the north. About 60,000 Sorbs (a Slavic people) live in Germany too, in Saxony and Brandenburg. About 12,000 people in Germany speak Frisian; this language is the closest language to English that is still spoken today. In northern Germany, people outside towns speak Low Saxon.

Most of the people who have come to Germany are from the Middle East. Such as Turkey and they own many businesses there. Other small groups of people in Germany are Croats (0.2 million), Italians (0.6 million), Greeks (0.4 million), Russians, and Poles (0.3 million). There are also some ethnic Germans who lived in the old Soviet Union (1.7 million), Poland (0.7 million), and Romania (0.3 million). These people have German passports, so they are not counted as foreigners. A lot of these people do not speak German at home.

Christianity is the biggest religion; Protestants are 38% of the people (mostly in the north) and Catholics are 34% of the people (mostly in the south). There are also many Muslims, while the other people (26.3%) are either not religious, or belong to smaller religious groups. In the eastern regions, the former territory of the GDR (known as the DDR in German), only one fifth of the population is religious.

Germany has one of the world's highest levels of schooling, technology, and businesses. The number of young people who attend universities is now three times more than it was after the end of World War II, and the trade and technical schools of Germany are some of the best in the world. German income is, on average, $25,000 a year, making Germany a highly middle class society. A large social welfare system gives people money when they are ill, unemployed, or similarly disadvantaged. Millions of Germans travel outside of their country each year.

The four recognized minorities in Germany are Danes 50,000 (concentrated in Schleswig-Holstein state), Frisians 60,000-70,000 (based in Eastern and Northern Frisia), Sorbs 60,000 (primarily in Saxony and Brandenburg) and Romani and Sinti.

After the United States, Germany is the second most popular country for migration in the world.

Germany is a very densely populated country, and especially in cities the housing situation is difficult and rents are high. Already in 2014 there were 39,000 homeless people in Germany and 339,000 people without an apartment. A video from the German news magazine Der Spiegel documented refugees who have been living in a sports gym in Berlin for over a year with no privacy. In the video people discuss amongst others why there are problems to find living space in containers. The containers are similar to those in Zaatari refugee camp.

Germany's constitution says that all people can believe in any religion they want to, and that no one is allowed to discriminate against somebody because of the person's religion.

In ancient times, Germany was largely pagan. Roman Catholicism was the biggest religion in Germany up to the 15th century, but a major religious change called the Reformation changed this. In 1517, Martin Luther said that the Catholic Church used religion to make money. Luther started Protestantism, which is as big as the Catholic religion in Germany today. Before World War II, about two-thirds of the German people were Protestant and one-thirds were Roman Catholic. In the north and northeast of Germany, there were a lot more Protestants than Catholics. Today, about two-thirds of German people (more than 55 million people) call themselves Christian, but most of them do not practice it. About half of them are Protestants and about half are Roman Catholics. Most German Protestants are members of the Evangelical Church in Germany. The previous Pope, Benedict XVI, was born in Germany.

Before World War II, about one percent of the country's people were German Jews. Today, Germany has the fastest-growing group of Jewish people in the world. Many of them are in Berlin. Ten thousand Jews have moved to Germany since the fall of the Berlin Wall; many came from countries that were in the Soviet Union. Schools teaching about the things that happened when the Nazis were in power, as well as teaching against the ideas of the Nazis, has helped to make Germany very tolerant towards other people and cultures, and now many people move there from countries that may not be so tolerant.

About three million Muslims live in Germany, 3.7% of the total population. The country also has a large atheist and agnostic population, and there are also large about 0.6 million Hinduism follower and some small group of Jain, Buddhist and Zoroastrian communities. The 20th century has also seen a neopagan revival.

Germany has a long history of poets, thinkers, and artists. There are 240 supported theaters, hundreds of orchestras, thousands of museums and over 25,000 libraries in Germany. Millions of tourists visit these attractions every year. Some of the greatest classical musicians including Johann Sebastian Bach, Ludwig van Beethoven and possibly Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart were German. Some of the most revered scientists today like Albert Einstein are German. Artists like Marc Engelhard are active in the 21st century.

Germany has created a high level of gender equality, disability rights, and accepts homosexuality. Gay marriage has been legal in Germany since 2017.

Traditional foods of German cuisine are sausage based such as Bratwurst and Currywurst. Other foods include Doner kebab and Sauerkraut. German food varies from region to region. For example, in the southern regions, such as Bavaria and Baden-Württemberg, they share their type of food with Switzerland and Austria. Everywhere in Germany, sausages are common. Meat is also consumed as roasts, meat patties and in stews, as well as in regionally traditional pasta dishes. Even though wine use is increasing, the national alcoholic drink is beer. The number of Germans who drink beer is one of the highest in the world. German restaurants are often rated the second-best, with France rated first place.

Football (soccer) is the most popular sport in Germany. The national team has won the FIFA World Cup 4 times, and appears in the finals a lot. The top football league in Germany is Bundesliga. Also, the German Football Association (Deutscher Fußball-Bund) is the largest in the world. A lot of big football teams are from Germany, like FC Bayern Munich, Borussia Dortmund, RB Leipzig and many others. Some of the world's best footballers come from Germany too. These would include Mesut Özil, Manuel Neuer, Serdar Tasci, Michael Ballack, Bastian Schweinsteiger, Franz Beckenbauer, and so on. Plus, many tournaments have taken place in Germany. The most recent was the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and the 2011 FIFA Women's World Cup. The Audi Cup takes place in Germany every year in Munich.

Germany is also known for its motor sports. Successful German racing drivers include Michael Schumacher and Sebastian Vettel.

Successful tennis players have also come from Germany, including Steffi Graf and Boris Becker. More recently, Sabine Lisicki reached the Women's Singles final at Wimbledon in 2013.

Lastly, Germany is one of the best countries in the Olympic Games. Germany is the third in the list of the most Olympic Games medals in history (mixed with West and East Germany medals). The country finished first place in the 2006 Winter Olympics, second place in the 2010 Winter Olympics. Germany also got fifth place in the 2008 Summer Olympics.

A human, or human being, is a member of the species Homo sapiens, which means 'wise man' in Latin. Carolus Linnaeus put humans in the mammalian order of primates. Humans are a species of hominid, and chimpanzees, gorillas and orangutans are their closest living relatives.

Humans are mammals. They are also social animals, and usually live in groups. They help and protect each other. They care for their children for many years until they can do so for themselves. Humans are bipedal, which means they walk on two legs.

Humans have complex brains, which is much larger than that of other living apes. They use language, make ideas, and feel emotions. This brain, and the fact that arms are not needed for walking, lets humans use tools. Humans use tools far more than any other species. Their tools can range from simple sticks as weapons, to very advanced projectile weapons, such as guns.

Humans first evolved in Africa. They soon spread out across the world, and began living on every continent. In 2023, there were more than 8.1 billion humans living on Earth.

Humans have a long period of development after birth. Their life depends less on instinct than other animals and more on learning. Humans are also born with their brains not so well developed as those of other mammals. This makes for an unusually long childhood, so family life is important. If their brains were better developed at birth, their head would be larger, and this would make birth more difficult. In birth, the baby's head has to get through the 'birth canal', the passageway through the mother's pelvis.

Many animals use signs and sounds to communicate with each other. But humans have language. It lets them express ideas by using words. Humans are capable of abstract ideas and can communicate them to others. Human language can express things which are not present or talk about events that are not happening at that time. The things might be elsewhere, and the events may also have occurred at another place or time.

No known animals have a system of communication that is as elaborate as human language. By using words to communicate with each other, humans make  communities with laws, traditions and customs. Humans like to understand the world around them. They try to explain things through myth, science and philosophy. Wanting to understand things has helped humans make important discoveries.

Humans are the only species living today known to build fires, to cook their food and wear clothes. Humans use more technology than any other animal on Earth ever has. Humans like things that are beautiful and like to make art, literature and music. Humans use education and teaching to pass on skills, ideas and customs to the next generations.

Humans are part of the animal kingdom. They are mammals, which means that they give birth to their young, and females feed their babies with breast milk. Humans belong to the order of primates. Apes like orangutans, gorillas, chimps and gibbons are also primates.

The closest living relatives of humans are the two chimpanzee species: the common chimpanzee and the bonobo. Scientists have examined the genes of humans and chimpanzees and compared their DNA. The studies showed that 95% to 99% of the DNA of humans and chimpanzees is the same.

Biologists explain the similarity between humans and other hominoids by their descent from a common ancestor. In 2001, a hominid skull was discovered in Chad. The skull is about 7 million years old and has been classified as Sahelanthropus tchadensis. This skull may show that the date at which humans started to evolve (develop differently) from other primates is 2 million years earlier than scientists had previously thought.

Humans are part of a subfamily called the Homininae (or hominins), inside the hominids or great apes.

There used to be other types of hominins on Earth. They were similar to but not the same as modern humans. Homo sapiens are the only type of hominins who are alive today. The earliest known fossils of genus Homo have been called Homo habilis (handy man). The first fossils of Homo habilis were found in Tanzania. Homo hablilis is thought to have lived about 2.2 to 1.7 million years ago. Another human species thought to be an ancestor of the modern human is Homo erectus. There are other extinct species of Homo known today. Many of them were likely our 'cousins', as they developed differently to our ancestors. Different species of plants and animals moved from Africa to the Middle East, and then elsewhere. Early humans may have moved from Africa to other parts of the world in the same way.

The first truly modern humans seem to have appeared between 300,000 and 200,000 years ago in East Africa. In paleontology, 200,000 years is a "short" time. So, scientists speak of a "recent single origin" of humans. Some of these early humans later moved out from Africa. By about 90,000 years ago, they had moved into Russia. This was the area where Neanderthals, Homo neanderthalensis, had been living for a long time (at least 350,000 years).

By about 42,000 to 44,000 years ago Homo sapiens had reached western Europe, including Russia. In Europe and western Asia, Homo sapiens replaced the Neanderthals by about 35,000 years ago. The details of this event are not known.

At roughly the same time, Homo sapiens arrived in Australia. Their arrival in the Americas was much later, about 15,000 years ago. All these earlier groups of modern man were hunter-gatherers.

Early human history is commonly divided into three ages. The time periods are labeled with the material used for tools.

The "Stone Age" is commonly subdivided into the Paleolithic, Mesolithic, and Neolithic periods.

Up to about 10 thousand years ago, most humans were hunter-gatherers. They did not live in one place. Instead, they moved around as the seasons changed. The start of planting crops for food, called farming, made the Neolithic revolution. Some people chose to live in settlements. This also led to the invention of metal tools and the training of animals. About 6,000 years ago, the first proper civilizations began in places, like Egypt, India, and Syria. The people formed governments and armies for protection. They competed for area to live and resources, and sometimes they fought with each other. About 4,000 years ago, some states took over or conquered other states and made empires. Examples include ancient Greece and the Roman Empire.

Some modern-day religions also began at this time, such as Judaism and Hinduism. From the Middle Ages and beyond, humanity saw an explosion of new technology and inventions. The printing press, the car, the train, and electricity are all examples of this kind of invention. As a result of the developments in technology, modern humans live in a world where everyone is connected, for example by telephone or by internet. People now control and change the  around them in many different ways.

In early times, humans usually settled near to water and other natural . In modern times, if people need things, they can transport them from somewhere else. Therefore, basing a settlement close to resources is no longer as important as it once was. Since 1800, the number of humans, or population, has  by six billion. Most humans (61%) live in Asia. The rest live in the Americas (14%), Africa (14%), Europe (11%), and Oceania (0.5%).

Most people live in towns and cities. This number is expected to get higher. In 2005, the United Nations said that by the end of that year, over half the world would be living in cities. This is an important change in human settlement patterns: a century earlier in 1900, only 14% of people lived in cities; in 2000, 47% of the world's population lived in cities. In developed countries, like the United States, 80% of the population live in cities.

Humans have a large effect on the world. Humans are at the top of the food chain and are generally not eaten by any animals. Humans have been described as super predators because of this. Because of industry and other reasons, humans are said to be a big cause of  climate change.

Human body measurements differ. The worldwide average height for an adult human male is about , and the worldwide average height for adult human females is about . The average weight of an adult human is  for females and  for males. Body weight and body type is influenced by genetics and environment. It varies greatly among individuals.

Human hair grows on the underarms, the genitals, legs, arms, and on the top of the head in adults of both genders. Hair will usually grow on the face of most adult males and on the chest and back of many adult males. In human children of both genders, long hair grows only on the top of the head. Although it might look like humans have fewer hairs than most primates, they actually do not. The average human has more hair follicles, where hair grows from than most chimpanzees have. Human hair can be black, brown, red or blond. When humans get older, hair can turn grey or white.

Human skin colors vary greatly. They can be a very pale pink all the way to dark brown. There is a reason why people in tropical areas have dark skins. The dark pigment (melanin) in the skin protects them against ultraviolet rays in sunlight. The damage caused by UV rays can and does cause skin cancer in some people. Therefore, in more sunny areas, natural selection favors darker skin color. Sun tanning has nothing to do with this issue, because it is just a temporary process, which is not inherited. In colder climates, the advantage of light-coloured skin is two-fold. It radiates less heat and absorbs more sunlight. In weaker sunlight, a darker body produces less vitamin D than a lighter body. The selection for lighter skin is driven by these two reasons. Therefore, in less sunny areas, natural selection favours lighter skin colour.

Humans are not as strong as other primates of the same size. An average female orangutan is at least three times as strong as an average human.

The average human needs 7 to 8 hours sleep a day. People who sleep less than this are generally not as healthy. A child needs even more sleep, 9 to 10 hours on average.

The human life cycle is similar to most other mammals. However, there are some differences. The young grow inside the female mother for nine months. After this time, the baby is pushed out of the woman's vagina, with its brain only half developed.

Unlike most other mammals, human childbirth is somewhat dangerous. Babies' heads are large, and the mothers pelvis bones are not very wide. Since people walk on two legs, their hips are fairly narrow. This means that birth can be difficult. Rarely, mother or baby may die in childbirth. The number of mothers dying in childbirth is lower in the 21st century. This is because of better medication and treatment. If a difficult birth is foreseen, the foetus can be removed surgically, and incubated (developed, but not in the womb).

In many poor countries, the number of mothers dying is higher. Sometimes it is up to 10 times as many as richer countries.

In the human female, her fertile period in the oestrous cycle is hidden, and mating can take place at any time. That is quite unusual. In mammals generally, the fertile period is very noticeable. Mating only takes place when the female signals her fertility. The human cycle is unusual, and it is thought that there is a reason. Humans band together in tribes which have many people. It helps the tribe if the father of a child is not known for certainty. Men live together and work together in much larger groups than do chimpanzees (our nearest living relatives). They have a collective interest in the tribe. It is thought that the human mating system helps this.

The average human baby weighs 3–4 kg at birth and is 50–60 cm tall. Babies are often smaller in poorer countries and may die early because of this.

Humans have four stages in their lives: childhood, adolescence, adulthood and old age.

Life expectancy is how long you are expected to live. This depends on many things including where you live. The highest life expectancy is for people from Monaco, 89.52 years. The lowest is for people from Chad where life expectancy is only 49.81 years. Human lifespans can be longer than other mammals, even elephants.

Psychology is the study of how the human mind works. The human brain is the main controller of what a person does. Everything from moving and breathing to thinking is done by the brain. The human neocortex is huge compared with other mammals. It gives us our thinking ability and the ability to speak and understand language.

Neurology is the study of how the brain works while psychology is the study of how and why people think and feel. Many aspects of life are also influenced by the hormone system, including growth and sexual development. The hormonal system (especially the pituitary gland) is partly controlled by the brain.

Human behaviour is hard to understand, so sometimes, psychologists study animals because they may be simpler and easier to know. Psychology overlaps with many other sciences, including medicine, biology, computer science and linguistics.

Language at its most basic is talking, reading and writing. The study of language is called linguistics. Humans have the most complicated languages on Earth. Although almost all animals communicate, human language is unique. Its use of syntax and its huge learnt vocabulary are its main features. There are over 7,300 languages spoken around the world. The world's most spoken first language is Mandarin Chinese, and the most spoken language is English. This includes speakers of English as a second language.

This is to explain the difference between features which are long established, and ones which are relatively recent in evolution. The human ability to walk and run upright on two legs is recent. The ability to speak is even more recent. Contrast those two with something ancient, like the way most land vertebrates walk on four legs.

In every case, the older way is very reliable in its development, and the new tactic is more variable, and involves some learning.

Art has existed almost as long as humans. People have been doing some types of art for thousands of years as the picture on the right shows. Art represents how someone feels in the form of a painting, a sculpture or a photograph.

Music has also been around for thousands of years. Music can be made with only your voice, but most of the time, people use instruments. Music can be made using simple instruments only such as simple drums all the way up to electric guitars, keyboards and violins. Music can be loud, fast, quiet, slow or many other different styles. Music represents how the people who are playing the music feel.

Literature is anything made or written using language. This includes books, poetry, legends, myths and fairy tales. Literature is important as without it many of the things we use today, such as Wikipedia, would not exist.

Humans often categorize themselves by race or ethnicity. Modern biologists know that human gene sequences are very similar compared to many other animals. This is because of the "recent single origin" of modern humans. That is one reason why there is only one human race.

Ethnic groups are often linked by linguistic, cultural, ancestral, and national or regional ties. Race and ethnicity can lead to different social treatment called racism.

Religion is a belief of faith in a higher being, spirit, or any system of ideas that a group of people believe in. To have faith in a belief is to have the belief without proof that it is true. Faith can bring people together because they all believe in the same thing. Some of the things that religions talk about are what happens after death, why humans exist, how humans came to exist (creation), and what is good to do and not to do (morality). Some people are very religious. Many people believe in one all-powerful god; some people believe in more than one god; some people are atheists who do not believe in a god; and some people are agnostics who are not sure if there is a god.

Technology are the things and methods which humans use to make tasks easier. Science is understanding how the universe and the things in it work. Technology used to be quite simple. It was passed on by people telling others until writing was invented. This allowed technology to  much quicker. Now people understand more and more about the world and the universe. The use of the telescope by Galileo, Einstein's theory of relativity, lasers, and computing are all scientific discoveries. Technology is important to science, to medicine, and to everyday life.

A war is a  fight between large groups of people, usually countries or states. A war involves the use of lethal weapons as both sides try to kill the other. It is estimated that during the 20th century, between 167 and 188 million humans died because of war. The people who fight for a state in wars are called soldiers. The people who fight in wars, but not for a state, are usually called "fighters".

Modern wars are very different from wars a thousand or even a hundred years ago. Modern war involves sabotage, terrorism, propaganda, and guerrilla warfare. In modern-day wars, civilians (people who are not soldiers) are often targets. An example of this is the nuclear bomb dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki at the end of World War II. The bombs killed as many as 140,000 people in Hiroshima and 80,000 in Nagasaki by the end of 1945, about half on the days of the bombings. Since then, thousands more have died from wounds or illness because of exposure to radiation released by the bombs. In both cities, the overwhelming majority of the dead were civilians. In Germany, Austria, and Great Britain, conventional bombs were used. About 60,595 British and 550,000 German civilians were killed by planes bombing cities.

Hydrogen is the lightest and most abundant element in the universe. It is the simplest element and the first in the periodic table. It has the chemical symbol H and atomic number 1, which means it has just one proton in its nucleus. Hydrogen also has a standard atomic weight of 1.008. Hydrogen is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas at room temperature. It is also highly flammable. When hydrogen burns in oxygen, it creates water and releases a lot of energy.

Hydrogen can be found as H₂ molecules. This means two hydrogen atoms join together to make a stable gas. It has a very low boiling and melting point, so it becomes a liquid or solid only at extremely cold temperatures. There are also different forms, or isotopes of hydrogen. The most common is protium, which has just one proton. There is also deuterium, which has one proton and one neutron, and tritium, which has one proton and two neutrons and is radioactive. Hydrogen is very reactive, especially with oxygen and other nonmetals. It often forms compounds like water (H₂O), methane (CH₄), and ammonia (NH₃).

Hydrogen is the most common element in the universe. It makes up 75% of all normal matter by mass. Most of the hydrogen is found in stars, including the Sun. It fuels the process of nuclear fusion, giving off light and heat. On Earth, hydrogen is not usually found as a pure gas because it is so light and reactive. Instead, it is most commonly found in compounds. It can be found especially in water (H₂O), which covers about 70% of Earth’s surface. Hydrogen is also found in living things, because it is part of many organic compounds, such as sugars, fats, and proteins. Hydrogen can be found in fossil fuels and in some minerals. It can also be found in volcanic gases and the upper atmosphere, where it slowly escapes into space because of its lightness.

Hydrogen is very reactive, especially because it has only one electron. This makes it easy for hydrogen to form bonds with other elements. It usually forms molecules like H₂, where two hydrogen atoms share their electrons to become more stable. Hydrogen reacts easily with oxygen to form water (H₂O). This reaction releases a lot of energy and is why hydrogen is used as a fuel in rockets and fuel cells. It also reacts with many nonmetals, such as chlorine, to form compounds like hydrogen chloride (HCl). Hydrogen can act as both a reducer (it gives electrons) and, in some cases, as an oxidizer (it takes electrons). Hydrogen can also form acids when combined with certain elements. For example, when it bonds with chlorine, it creates hydrochloric acid when dissolved in water. It can also form hydrides when it reacts with metals, where hydrogen behaves like a negatively charged ion.

The history of hydrogen goes back to the 1700s, when scientists first began studying gases. In 1766, the British scientist Henry Cavendish was the first to recognize hydrogen as a separate gas. He called it “inflammable air” because it burned easily and produced water when it reacted with air. Later, in 1783, the famous French scientist Antoine Lavoisier gave the gas its modern name: hydrogen, which means “water-former” in Greek. He realized that water is not an element but a compound made from hydrogen and oxygen. In the 1800s and 1900s, scientists learned more about hydrogen’s properties and uses. It became important in chemical industries, like making ammonia for fertilizer. It was also used in airships, although this was dangerous because hydrogen can catch fire easily. One tragic example was the Hindenburg disaster in 1937, when a hydrogen-filled airship caught fire. In the 20th and 21st centuries, liquid hydrogen was used as rocket fuel. It has also gained attention as a clean energy source.

Hydrogen does not exist freely in large amounts on Earth, so it must be produced by us. The two main ways to make hydrogen are steam reforming and electrolysis. Steam reforming is the most common method. It involves heating natural gas (mostly methane) with steam to release hydrogen. This process is widely used in industries. Electrolysis is another method that uses electricity to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. However, electrolysis is more expensive than steam reforming. Hydrogen can also be produced using other methods, such as biological processes (using bacteria or algae) and thermochemical reactions that use heat from nuclear or solar energy. Once produced, hydrogen is usually stored as a gas under pressure, or as a liquid at very low temperatures, so it can be used in industries, fuel cells, and rockets.

Hydrogen has many important uses in industry, science, and energy. One of its biggest uses is in making ammonia (NH₃) through the Haber process. Ammonia is used to produce fertilizers, which help grow food for people around the world. Hydrogen is also used in oil refineries to help remove sulfur from fuels. It is used in making methanol, which is a basic chemical for making plastics and other products. In energy, hydrogen is used as a clean fuel. It can power fuel cells, which produce electricity without pollution. The only byproduct is water. Fuel cells are used in some cars, buses, and even spacecrafts. Hydrogen is also important in space exploration. It is used as a rocket fuel because it burns with a lot of energy and produces only water vapor. Liquid hydrogen, combined with liquid oxygen, has been used to launch many rockets.

Hydrogen is grouped as a reactive nonmetal. This is different from the other elements found in the first group of the periodic table, which are called alkali metals. Only the solid form of hydrogen should behave like a metal, though.

When hydrogen is by itself, it will normally bind with itself to make dihydrogen (H2). Dihydrogen is very stable because of its high bond-dissociation energy of 435.7 kJ/mol.

At normal temperature and pressure, hydrogen gas (H2) has no color, smell, or taste. It is also not poisonous. This is because it is a nonmetal and burns very easily. Hydrogen gas at this state also has low density and is not corrosive.

Hydrogen gas can be very dangerous. It can explode when mixed with air or certain gases. If hydrogen gas makes up between 4% and 74% of the air, it can catch fire and explode. It can also explode when mixed with chlorine gas. This happens if the mixture has between 5% and 95% hydrogen.

Hydrogen can catch fire by itself if it gets hot enough. This happens at a temperature of about 500°C (932°F). In some cases, if hydrogen leaks out under high pressure, the force of the leak can heat the air around it to that temperature. This can cause the gas to burst into flames or even explode.

Hydrogen flames are hard to see. They burn with a faint blue color and give off ultraviolet light. The human eye cannot see ultraviolet light. In daylight, it is almost impossible to see a hydrogen fire. That is why special flame detectors are used to find hydrogen fires and keep people safe.

While hydrogen gas in its natural form is not reactive, it does form compounds with many elements, especially halogens, which are very electronegative, meaning they want an electron very badly. Hydrogen also forms massive arrays with carbon atoms, forming hydrocarbons. The study of the properties of hydrocarbons is known as organic chemistry.

The H- anion (negatively charged atom) is named a hydride, though the word is not commonly used. An example of a hydride is lithium hydride (LiH), which is used as a "spark plug" in nuclear weapons.

Acids dissolved in water normally contain high levels of hydrogen ions, in other words, free protons. Their level is generally used to determine its pH, that is, the content of hydrogen ions in a volume. For example, hydrochloric acid, found in people's stomachs, can dissociate into a chloride anion and a free proton, and the property of the free proton is how it can digest food by corroding it.

Though uncommon on Earth, the H3+ cation is one of the most common ions in the universe.

Hydrogen has 7 known isotopes, two of which are stable (1H and 2H), which are commonly named protium and deuterium. The isotope 3H is known as tritium, has a half-life of 12.33 years, and is produced in small amounts by cosmic rays. The 4 isotopes left have half-lives on the scale of yoctoseconds.

In its natural form on Earth, hydrogen is generally a gas. Hydrogen is also one of the parts that make up a water molecule. Hydrogen is important because it is the fuel that powers the Sun and other stars.

Natural hydrogen is normally made of two hydrogen atoms connected together. Scientists name these diatomic molecules. Hydrogen will have a chemical reaction when mixed with most other elements, though it has no color or smell.

Natural hydrogen is very uncommon in the Earth's atmosphere, because nearly all  hydrogen would have escaped into space because of its weight. In nature, it is generally in water. Hydrogen is also in all living things, as a part of the organic compounds that living things are made of. In addition, hydrogen atoms can join with carbon atoms to form hydrocarbons. Petroleum and other fossil fuels are made of these hydrocarbons and commonly used to make energy.

Hydrogen is the simplest element in the universe, made of just one proton and one electron. It is also the most common element, and most of it was formed very early in the history of the universe. Scientists believe that hydrogen was created about three minutes after the Big Bang, when the universe had expanded and cooled enough for protons and neutrons to stick together without being torn apart by high-energy radiation. This moment is known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis.

In the first few seconds after the Big Bang, the universe was so hot that particles like quarks and gluons were free. As things cooled, these particles combined to form protons and neutrons. Because neutrons are less stable, there were fewer of them compared to protons, about one neutron for every six protons. When the universe cooled even more, protons and neutrons could join together to make heavier particles. The first step was forming deuterium, which is one proton plus one neutron. Before this, deuterium could not survive because the universe was still too hot. This stage is called the “deuterium bottleneck.”

Once deuterium could survive, it allowed more nuclear reactions to happen. Most of the neutrons quickly got locked inside helium-4, a stable form of helium. Small amounts of helium-3, lithium-7, and beryllium-7 were also made. However, the majority of matter remained as hydrogen, mostly in the form of single protons. This meant that about 75% of the ordinary matter in the universe was hydrogen. At first, this hydrogen existed as plasma, with free protons and electrons spread everywhere.

It was not until about 380,000 years later that the universe cooled enough for electrons to join protons and form neutral hydrogen atoms. This event is called recombination. Once hydrogen atoms formed, light was able to travel freely through space, making the universe transparent. The leftover glow from this moment is called the cosmic microwave background, and scientists can still detect it today. Almost all hydrogen in the universe comes from this process, and its presence, along with small amounts of deuterium and helium, provides strong evidence that the Big Bang really happened.

Hydrogen is being studied as a possible fuel of the future, but one of the hardest parts is figuring out how to store it safely and efficiently. Unlike gasoline or diesel, which are dense liquids, hydrogen is the lightest element in the universe. It exists as a gas made of two atoms (H₂). Because it is so light and has a very low density, storing enough hydrogen in a small space is very hard. It does not dissolve well in liquids either, which means you cannot just “mix” it into something like water or other solvents to store it. For example, at normal room temperature and pressure, only a tiny amount of hydrogen can dissolve in a liquid like diethyl ether. This is why scientists focus on other methods of storage, such as gas, liquid, or solid storage.

One common way to store hydrogen is by compressing it into high-pressure tanks. These tanks can hold hydrogen gas at pressures hundreds of times higher than normal air pressure. Cars that run on hydrogen often use this method. But there are problems. It takes a lot of energy to squeeze hydrogen into these tanks, the tanks themselves are heavy and expensive, and hydrogen is so tiny that it can leak out through materials. Another way is to cool hydrogen down until it becomes a liquid. This makes it much denser and easier to store, but hydrogen only becomes liquid at extremely cold temperatures, almost minus 240 °C. Keeping it that cold requires a lot of energy and special equipment, and liquid hydrogen tends to evaporate (called boil-off), wasting fuel.

Because of these problems, researchers have looked at “hydrogen carriers.” These are substances that can absorb hydrogen, hold onto it, and then release it later when needed. One example is metal hydrides, where hydrogen atoms fit into the tiny spaces inside a metal’s structure. This is useful in some ways, but most metals can only hold a small amount of hydrogen by weight, often just around 1%. Hydrogen can also damage metals, making them weaker in a process called embrittlement, which is a problem for pipes and storage containers.

Other chemical carriers can hold more hydrogen. Ammonia borane, for instance, contains about 20% hydrogen by weight, which is much better. However, once it releases hydrogen, the leftovers can’t easily take hydrogen back in, so the process is one-way and not very practical for long-term use. A more promising idea is using liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHCs). These are special liquids that can absorb hydrogen and then release it when needed, over and over again. The advantage is that they can be stored and transported using the same systems we already use for liquid fuels like gasoline, which makes them easier to fit into today’s infrastructure.

In the end, storing hydrogen is still a big challenge. Compressing and cooling it works but costs a lot of energy. Metals can hold it safely but do not store much. Some chemicals can carry a lot of hydrogen but cannot be reused easily. LOHCs look like one of the better solutions, but they are still being developed. Until scientists find the best balance of safety, efficiency, and cost, hydrogen storage will remain one of the key obstacles in making hydrogen a major energy source for the world.

The most common uses are in the petroleum industry and in making ammonia by the Haber process. Some is used in other places in the chemical industry. A little of it is used as fuel, for example in rockets for spacecraft. Most of the hydrogen that people use comes from a chemical reaction between natural gas and steam.

Nuclear fusion is a very powerful source of energy. It depends on forcing atoms together to make helium and energy, as in a star like the Sun, or in a hydrogen bomb. This needs a large amount of energy to get started, and is not easy to do currently. A big advantage over nuclear fission, which is used in today's nuclear power stations, is that it makes less nuclear waste and does not use a poisonous and uncommon fuel like uranium. More than 600 million tons of hydrogen undergo fusion every second on the Sun.

Hydrogen is mostly used in the petroleum industry, to change heavy petroleum parts into lighter, more useful ones. It is also used to make ammonia. Smaller amounts are burned as fuel. Most hydrogen is made by a reaction between natural gas and steam.

The electrolysis of water breaks water into hydrogen and oxygen, using electricity. Burning hydrogen joins with oxygen molecules to make steam (natural water vapor). A fuel cell joins hydrogen with an oxygen molecule, releasing an electron as electricity. For these reasons, many people believe hydrogen power will replace other synthetic fuels in the future.

Hydrogen can also be burned to make heat for steam turbines or internal combustion engines. Like other synthetic fuels, hydrogen can be made from natural fuels such as coal or natural gas, or from electricity, and therefore represents a valuable addition to the power grid; in the same role as natural gas. Such a grid and infrastructure with fuel cell vehicles is now planned by a number of countries, such as Japan, Korea and many European countries. This lets these countries buy less petroleum, which is an economic advantage. The other advantage is that, used in a fuel cell or burned in a combustion engine as in a hydrogen car, the engine does not make pollution. Only water, and a small amount of nitrogen oxides, forms.


Italy has become famous for Italian food and wine. Some foods are different between regions. Famous dishes include various types of pasta, pizza, and grapes. Olives are also often used.

Before Italian unification in 1861, Italy was made up of smaller kingdoms and city-states.

The country's capital, Rome, is one of the most famous cities in the world. It was the capital of the Roman Empire. Other famous cities in Italy include Venice, Naples, Turin, Genoa, Florence, Palermo, and Milan.

Italy is a peninsula. It is surrounded by the sea on all of its sides except its north side. Northern Italy is separated from France, Switzerland, and Austria by the Alps, a chain of mountains. Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco in Italian or white mountain in English), the highest mountain in Western Europe, is in this chain. The second important chain of mountains in Italy is the Apennines (), which are in central and southern Italy.

The Po River is the longest river in Italy. It flows through 5 cities: Turin, Piacenza, Cremona, and Ferrara. The Tiber River runs through the city of Rome.

Northern Italy has some of the biggest lakes in the country, such as Lake Garda, Lake Como, Lake Maggiore and Lake Iseo. Because it is surrounded by the sea, Italy has a very long coast, which brings tourists from all over the world. Tourists also come to see Italy's historical places.

The country has a number of islands, the biggest of which are Sicily and Sardinia, which can be reached by ship or aircraft. Italy has a sea border with France the island of Corsica.

The capital of Italy is Rome. This is where the Roman Empire started. Other large cities in Italy include Milan, Naples, Turin, Florence, Palermo, and Venice.

Two enclaves (separate countries) are located within Italy. They are San Marino, which is surrounded by Northern Italy, and the Vatican City, which is surrounded by the city of Rome. Vatican City is also the only enclave in the world to also be surrounded by a city.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Italy was  on 25 June 2007 in Foggia.

The lowest temperature ever recorded in Italy was  on 10 February 2013 at Pale di San Martino

People from Italy are called Italians. Even if an Italian were to leave Italy, it is possible that their descendants could also claim Italian citizenship. This is because of Italian nationality law relying mostly on ius sanguinis, or "right of blood" in Latin. Almost all Italians are Christians. Most of these are Roman Catholics. Roman Catholicism is based in the Vatican City, which is home to its leader, the Pope.

The population of Italy is about 60 million people. Almost 3 million of them live in Rome, and 1.5 million in Milan. As of December 2015, over 5 million foreigners were living in Italy, which is 8.3% of the total population.

The official language of Italy is Italian. German, Slovenian, French, and a few others are also recognized. People also speak dialects of Italian such as Sicilian and Sardinian. There are many different dialects spoken in Italy. They vary between regions and sometimes between provinces.

The people of Italy are mostly descendant from the ancient Romans.

Italy is home to more World Heritage Sites than any other country in the world. These sites are culturally important and valued according to UNESCO. About 60% of the works of art of the world are in Italy. Italy is also a big wine producer. In 2005, it made over 5 million tonnes of wine.

Linguistic minorities in Italy include Sardu-speakers 1 million, Tyrolese German-speakers 350,000, Albanians 70,000 – 100,000, Slovenes 60,000, Franco-Provençal-speakers 50,000 – 70,000, Occitans 20,000 – 40,000, Ladins 30,000, Catalans 15,000, Greek-speakers 12,000 and Croatians 3,000, as well as Friulians 600,000. The Roma community in Italy is one of the largest ethnic minorities in the country. Italy has a growing immigrant population. This foreign population includes Romanians 1,190,100, Albanians 440,500, Moroccans 416,500, Ukrainians 237,000, Chinese 290,700, Filipinos 167,900 and Indians 151,800.

A partial list of famous Italian foods include pasta, pizza, risotto, polenta, gelato and gnocchi. 67

Italy has a modern social welfare system. The labor market is very strong. Many foreigners, especially from Romania, work in Italy where the wages are much higher.

Italy's modern society has been built up through loans. Now the country has a very high debt of 1.9 trillion euros or 120% of the country's total GDP.

Most people in Italy are Roman Catholics, but the Catholic Church is no longer officially the state religion. Around 50% of the people said they were Roman Catholic.

Only about a third said they were active members (40%). There are also other Christian groups in Italy, with more than 700,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians. 180,000 of them belong to the Greek Orthodox Church.

550,000 are Pentecostals and Evangelicals (0.8%). 235,685 Jehovah's Witnesses (0.4%), 30,000 Waldensians, 25,000 Seventh-day Adventists, 22,000 Mormons, 20,000 Baptists, 7,000 Lutherans, 4,000 Methodists.

The country's oldest religious minority is the Jewish community. It has about 45,000 people. It is no longer the largest non-Christian group. There are also about 50,000 Buddhists 70,000 Muslims and 70,000 Hindus in Italy.

Italy has 20 regions (). Every region is divided into provinces.

There are 20 regions. Five of them have a special status, called autonomous. This means that they can make certain local laws more easily. These regions are marked with an asterisk (*) below.

The head of state is Sergio Mattarella. He became President of the Italian Republic in February 2015. The first president was Enrico De Nicola.

The head of government is Giorgia Meloni. She became Prime Minister on October 22, 2022, the first woman in that role. She succeeded Mario Draghi. Draghi's cabinet, fell after support for his coalition fell.

Italy was one of the first members of the European Union. In 2002 along with 11 other European countries, it changed to using the euro as its official currency. Before this, the Italian lira had been used since 1861.

Anyone who wants to be President of Italy must have Italian citizenship, be at least 50 years old, and must be able to uphold political and civil rights.

The capital of Italy is Rome, a city that was founded in 753 BC. The Roman Kingdom, Roman Republic and Roman Empire in a series of wars conquered various neighbors, including the Etruscan civilization in the north and the states in the south known as Magna Graecia.

Before 1861, Italy was not a state. The area included a group of separate states that were ruled by other countries (such as Austria, France, and Spain). In the 1850s, Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour was the head of government of the "State of Sardinia." He told the Austrians in Lombardy and Veneto that they should fight to create a state in Northern Italy. This happened, but other Central and Southern Italian states also joined Piedmont to create a bigger state.

In 1860, Giuseppe Garibaldi took control of Sicily, creating the Kingdom of Italy in 1861. Victor Emmanuel II was made the king. In 1861, Latium and Veneto were still not part of Italy, because they were ruled by the Pope and Austrian Empire.

Veneto was made part of Italy in 1866 after a war with Austria. Italian soldiers won Latium in 1870 and they took away the Pope's power. The Pope, who was angry, said that he was a prisoner to keep Catholic people from being active in politics. That year, Italian unification was mostly complete.

Italy participated in World War I as an ally of the United Kingdom, France, and Russia against the Central Powers. Almost all of Italy's fighting was on the eastern border, near Austria. After the defeat at the Battle of Caporetto, Italy could have lost the war to Austria-Hungary, but in 1918, the Central Powers surrendered. Italy gained the Trentino and South Tyrol, which had been part of Austria.

In 1922, a new Italian government started that was ruled by Benito Mussolini, the leader of fascism in Italy. He became head of government and dictator, calling himself "Il Duce" (which means "leader" in Italian). He became friends with the German dictator, Adolf Hitler. Germany, Japan, and Italy entered the Axis powers. In 1940, they entered World War II together against France, the United Kingdom, and later the Soviet Union. During the war, Italy controlled most of the Mediterranean Sea.

On July 25, 1943, Mussolini was removed by the Great Council of Fascism. On September 8, 1943, Badoglio said that the war as an ally of Germany was ended. Italy started fighting as an ally of France and the United Kingdom, but Italian soldiers did not know whom to shoot. In Northern Italy, The Italian resistance movement started to fight against the German invaders. On April 25, 1945, much of Italy had become free, while Mussolini ruled a small Northern Italian fascist state that was a German puppet state, called the Republic of Salò. The fascist state failed, and Mussolini tried to flee to Switzerland and escape to Francoist Spain, but he was captured by Italian partisans. On 28 April 1945, Mussolini was executed by a partisan.

The state became a republic on June 2, 1946. For the first time, women were allowed to vote. The Italian people ended the monarchy and adopted a republican form of government.

In February of 1947, Italy signed a peace treaty with the Allies. Italy lost all of its colonies and some territorial areas (Istria and parts of Dalmatia).

Italy joined NATO in 1949 and the European Economic Community, both as a founding member. The country has one of the seven largest industrial economies in the world.

The railway network in Italy totals , the 17th longest in the world. High speed trains include ETR-class trains, which travel at speeds of up to .

Infinity () is a mathematical concept which is about things that never end. It is written in a single digit. Infinity means many different things, depending on when it is used. The word is from Latin origin, meaning "with endless". Infinity goes on forever, so sometimes space, numbers, and other things are said to be 'infinite', because they never come to a stop.

Infinity is usually not an actual number, but it is sometimes used as one. Infinity often says how many there is of something, instead of how big something is. For example, there are infinitely many whole numbers (called integers), but there is no integer which is infinitely big. But different kinds of math have different kinds of infinity. So its meaning often changes.

There are two kinds of infinity: potential infinity and  infinity. Potential infinity is a process that never stops. For example, adding 10 to a number. No matter how many times 10 is added, 10 more can still be added. Actual infinity, on the other hand, refers to objects that are accepted as infinite entities (such as transfinite numbers).

Mathematicians have different sizes of infinity and three different kinds of infinity.

The number of things, beginning with 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., to include infinite cardinal numbers. There are many different cardinal numbers. Infinity can be defined in one of two ways: Infinity is a number so big that a part of it can be of the same size; Infinity is larger than all of the natural numbers. There is a smallest infinite number, countable infinity. It is the counting number for all of the whole numbers. It is also the counting number of the rational numbers. The mathematical notation is the Hebrew letter aleph with a subscript zero; . It is spoken "aleph null".

It was a surprise to learn that there are larger infinite numbers. The number of real numbers, that is, all numbers with decimals, is larger than the number of rational numbers, the number of fractions. This shows that there are real numbers which are not fractions. The smallest infinite number greater than  is  (aleph one). The number of mathematical functions is the next infinite cardinal number, .

A different type of infinity are the ordinal numbers, beginning "first, second, third, ...". The order "first, second, third, ..." and so on to infinity is different from the order ending "..., third, second, first". The difference is important for mathematical induction. The simple first, second, third, ...  has the mathematical name: the Greek letter omega with subscript zero: . (Or simply omega .) The infinite series ending "... third, second, first" is .

The third type of infinity has the symbol . This is treated as addition to the real numbers or the complex numbers. It is the result of division by zero, or to indicate that a series is increasing (or decreasing) without bound. The series 1, 2, 3, ... increases without upper bound. This is written: the limit is . In calculus, the integral over all real numbers is written:

Division by infinity (for example, with omegas or alephs) is not meaningful. Subtraction with infinity is not meaningful.

The Indian Ocean is the world's third-largest ocean, at . It is surrounded by Asia to the north, Australia and the Pacific Ocean to the east, the Southern Ocean to the south, and Africa and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. It is named for the Indian subcontinent which projects into it. The Bay of Bengal, the Arabian Sea, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea are all parts of the ocean.

The deepest point in the Indian Ocean is in the Java Trench, near the Sunda Islands, in the east, at . The ocean's average depth is . The majority of the ocean is in the southern hemisphere.

The International System of Units is the standard modern form of the metric system. The name of this system can be shortened or abbreviated to SI, from the French name Système International d'unités.

The International System of Units is a system of measurement based on 7 base units: the metre (length), kilogram (mass), second (time), ampere (electric current), kelvin (temperature), mole (quantity), and candela (brightness). These base units can be used in combination with each other. This creates SI derived units, which can be used to describe other quantities, such as volume, energy, pressure, and velocity.

The system is used almost globally. Only Myanmar, Liberia, and the United States do not use SI as their official system of measurement. In these countries, though, SI is commonly used in science and medicine.

The metric system was created in France after the French Revolution in 1789. The original system only had two standard units, the kilogram and the metre. The metric system became popular amongst scientists.

In the 1860s, James Clerk Maxwell and William Thomson (later known as Lord Kelvin) suggested a system with three base units   length, mass, and time. Other units would be derived from those three base units. Later, this suggestion would be used to create the centimetre-gram-second system of units (CGS), which used the centimetre as the base unit for length, the gram as the base unit for mass, and the second as the base unit for time. It also added the dyne as the base unit for force and the erg as the base unit for energy.

As scientists studied electricity and magnetism, they realized other base units were needed to describe these subjects. By the middle of the 20th century, many different versions of the metric system were being used. This was very confusing.

In 1954, the 9th General Conference on Weights and Measures (CGPM) created the first version of the International System of Units. The six base units that they used were the metre, kilogram, second, ampere, Kelvin, and candela. The seventh base unit, the mole, was added in 1971.

SI is now used almost everywhere in the world, except in the United States, Liberia and Myanmar, where the older imperial units are still widely used. Other countries, most of them historically related to the British Empire, are slowly replacing the old imperial system with the metric system or using both systems at the same time.

The SI base units are measurements used by scientists and other people around the world. All the other units can be written by combining these seven base units in different ways. These other units are called "derived units".

Derived units are created by combining the base units. The base units can be divided, multiplied, or raised to powers. Some derived units have special names. Usually these were created to make calculations simpler.

Very large or very small measurements can be written using prefixes. Prefixes are added to the beginning of the unit to make a new unit. For example, the prefix kilo- means "1000" times the original unit and the prefix milli- means "0.001" times the original unit. So one kilometre is 1000 metres and one milligram is a 1000th of a gram.

Indonesia, () officially the Republic of Indonesia; ) is a nation in Southeast Asia and Oceania. As the biggest archipelago country in the world, Indonesia has 17,504 islands. The most important islands of Indonesia are Java, Bali, Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and Sumatra. The capital of Indonesia is Jakarta, on the island of Java, but there are plans to change it to Nusantara. The current president is Prabowo Subianto. Modern Indonesia began on the 17th of August 1945. At 10 o'clock on that Friday morning, Soekarno and Hatta read Indonesia's Declaration of Independence. Indonesia's Independence Day is a national holiday.

Indonesia is the fourth most populated country in the world with 238,452,952 people (2004 est.). Half of the population lives in Java. There are 111 people per km. The land area is , or slightly smaller than Mexico. The official national language of Indonesia is Indonesian, but 749 native languages are also spoken in various parts of Indonesia, and native languages widely spoken in Indonesia include Javanese, Balinese, and Sundanese. Indonesia's neighbors are Australia to the south, Singapore to the northwest, and Philippines to the northeast. Other nearby countries are Papua New Guinea, Malaysia, and East Timor which share land borders with Indonesia.

Indonesia has the most active volcanoes of any country in the world. It is also close to fault lines so there are many earthquakes and tsunamis.

Most people in Indonesia follow Islam, but Indonesia is not an Islamic country by law. Indonesia has the largest Muslim population on earth. Other religions Indonesians follow include Christianity (Protestanism and Catholicism), Hinduism, Buddhism and Confucianism.

Indonesia has a written history as far back as the 7th century and a much longer oral history. Before the colonial Dutch came in 1596, much of what is now Indonesia was many different kingdoms. Often they were fighting each other.

Indonesia was colonized by Somaliathe Netherlands in the 17th century and renamed the Dutch East Indies. During this time, the Dutch captured thousands of Malagasy people from Madagascar and forced them to work on pepper plantations in their colonies as slaves. The Dutch treated the islands like their property until World War II.

During World War II, the Japanese drove out the Dutch and took control of Indonesia. After Japan surrendered in the war, Indonesia claimed its independence on the 17th of August 1945. The proclamation was read by Sukarno and Hatta in Jakarta. Sukarno later became Indonesia's first President and Mohammad Hatta became Indonesia’s first vice President.

British troops came into Indonesia to restore peace and to rescue Europeans who had been prisoners of the Japanese. The British troops also had the job of shipping home 300,000 Japanese troops. The Indonesian Republicans fought the British troops, because it was expected that the British would give Indonesia back to the Dutch. The Indonesian Republicans killed many of the Japanese prisoners, before they could be sent home. They also began killing people from minority groups who might be against the new Republic. Many Europeans and Indonesian Europeans people were killed. Many Chinese business people and other minority groups were killed or made homeless. In Java there were many thousands of homeless people.

In 1946, the Dutch came back. When the British left in 1946, there were 55,000 Dutch soldiers in Indonesia. The Dutch action was called "Operatie Product" or "Politionele Acties". The Indonesian Republicans fought the Dutch until 1949. But the Indonesian Republicans were badly organised and often fought among themselves.  As the Dutch forced the Republican soldiers out of different areas, they moved in more troops until there were 100,000 Dutch troops. The Dutch refused to obey the United Nations who said they should stop the fighting in Indonesia. The United States of America organised for meetings between Dutch and Indonesian leaders. The Dutch finally agreed to recognise Indonesia's independence in November 1949.

Because of the fighting and the bad organisation, it took a long time for the country to become peaceful, and for the economy to get better. Many Indonesian soldiers had died, between 45,000 and 100,000. Also, a very large number of civilians, Indonesians, Europeans and Chinese, had died; perhaps as many as 100,000.

Sukarno was an early leader of Indonesia. Suharto followed his rule.

Indonesia has 38 provinces, and nine of them have special status. Each province has its own legislature and governor. The provinces are divided into regencies (kabupaten) and cities (kota).  These are further divided into districts (kecamatan), and again into village groupings (either desa or kelurahan).

There are people of many different cultural groups living in Indonesia, has more than 700 ethnic groups. It is affected by Indians, Chinese people, Arabs, Malays and Europeans. There are many dances in Indonesia too, like the Piring and Payung dances of West Sumatra, the Gandrung dance of Java and the Saman dance of Aceh. The Javan hawk-eagle is the national bird. Indonesia is a popular destination to travel to experience the new culture and beautiful land scape.

The word "information" is used in many different ways. Originally, it comes from a word that meant to give a form to something. Information  is something that people can learn, know about, or . For example, a newspaper contains information about the world. This article contains information about "Information".

People who use computers often use the words information and data in the same way. There are special fields of study called "information science", "information technology" (IT), and data science.

In the 1970s and 1980s, some people gave a new, specific meaning to "information". At that time, the first computer databases were built. In computer science, data often means a kind of information that has not been checked. That means data has not been changed or fixed, and you may not be able to trust it. With the new meaning, information means data that has been checked and passed tests for what it must be. A person can  that "information" is .

Information can only be correct and good enough to trust if there are very good and complete ways to check the data (data checking, validation or verification) and decide it is good enough (acceptance process).  A person must know rules were used to check the data or trust the person who checked the data.  If a person cannot tell that this was done, the information still seems to be data for that person, so that person must check the data again, in that general view about data.

Iran, officially the Islamic Republic of Iran and also known as Persia, is a country in Western Asia. It is officially known as Islamic Republic of Iran. Prior to 1935, the country was referred to by majority in the Western world as Persia. Iran is quite significant due to its ancient history and its positioning between the Middle East, Central Asia, and South Asia.

Iran is ranked as the 17th largest nation in the world. It is primarily a plateau which is high and arid land with high mountains such as the Zagros and Alborz.

The capital city is Tehran. It is the capital city in the country and also the business and government hub.

By 2026, the population of Iran is estimated to be approximately 93 million. The majority of the population talks Persian (also known as Farsi), yet most of the population also speaks such languages as Azeri, Kurdish, and Luri.

The majority of Iranians embrace Shia Islam which is the official religion. Iran has a very rich culture. It is well known in terms of its beautiful carpets, poetry and ancient art. It also contains 29 UNESCO World Heritage Sites which are unique places preserved due to their history.

Iran is a theocracy. It implies that the religious leaders possess the greatest power. The Supreme Leader is the most influential individual. Mojtaba Khamenei assumed the position of the new Supreme Leader in March 2026. The President and the Parliament also exist in the country, though they are obliged to obey the rules of the religious leaders.

Iran relies heavily on oil and natural gas in the economy. Iran possesses some of the largest energy reserves in the world. Nevertheless, due to the conflicts with other countries and the recent civil wars in 2025 and 2026, the economy has undergone numerous problems, including the high prices (inflation).

Tehran is the capital and largest city of Iran. Iran is the eighteenth largest country in the world. It has more than 84.9 million people. Iran has been a member of the United Nations since 1945. It is a member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC). It is an Islamic republic. Iran is a powerful country in the region. It has a lot of natural gas and oil, which is important for its economy. It's also a significant place because it's where Shia Islam is most important.

The country's economy is big, and it's a member of many important groups like the United Nations. Iran has a long history and a rich culture. That's why it has many special places that are recognized by the United Nations. It's also famous for its cultural traditions, like music and dance. In 2019, many people visited Iran, making it one of the fastest-growing tourist destinations in the world.

In the past, Iran was called "Persia" by people outside of the country. The people that lived there called the country "Iran". The official name was Persia; the name Persia was used when dealing with other countries and in government papers.

In 1935, Reza Shāh Pahlavi was Shah of Iran. He officially asked foreigners to call the country "Iran". This was done to show that Iran belongs to all the non-Persian Iranians as well as to Persian Iranians. The name Iran means land of the Aryans. It is used in the ancient book of the Zoroastrians, the Avesta. In the 19th and early 20th century, the name Aryan was used by Europeans to mean all Indo-Europeans.  The "Aryan Race" was a term that Hitler used to describe his "Superior" or "perfect" race, but it first meant Iranians. "Aryan" means "noble" in Iranian languages.

Around 500 BC, the area that is now Iran was the center of the Achaemenid Empire. The Greek city states fought against the Persian armies led by Darius the Great and Xerxes. Then Alexander the Great took the country by fighting the Achaemenid dynasty of Persia. He ruled until he died, then the Greek Seleucids ruled until they were defeated by the Parthian Empire which later fought the Roman Empire.

After the Parthians, the Sassanian dynasty (224 – 651) took over. Other people took Persia by conquest, like the Arabs (7th century), Turks (10th century) and Mongols (13th century).  However, Iran has always had a different and distinct native Iranian culture which has continued to survive. After the Muslim Arabs conquered the Iranians, Persian women were enslaved as domestic servants while Persian men were forced to build and farm and engage in hard labour. The Arab Abbasid Harun caliph had Persian concubines like Marajil al-Badghisiyya whom the later Abbasid caliph Al-Ma'mun descended from in the maternal line.

The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) worked in Iran to create 1953 riots which led to the removal of Prime Minister Mosaddegh. The United States and the United Kingdom then made the Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi the most powerful person in Iran, again. The Shah left Iran in 1979 in the face of a revolt. The Iranian government was changed to an Islamic Republic by Islamic Revolution. Soon afterwards, the Iranian Students Movement (Tahkim Vahdat), with the backing of the new government, took over the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. They held most of the diplomats hostage for 444 days.

Relations between the two countries have not been good since. For example, the United States claims that Iran supports terrorist groups against Israel. Iran does not see Israel as a country. Iran, along with many Arab League countries, believes that Israel does not have the right to co-exist. However, Iran has collaborated with the United Nations at times. These deals have been about energy or about fighting terrorism. Iran fought the Iran–Iraq War in the  1990s-1980s.  Many foreign countries supported Iraqi people’s regime.

Now, the West and United Nations is trying to prevent Iran from  becoming nuclear technology country, even though Iran is a member of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)’s has reported many times that there is no evidence that Iran is developing nuclear weapons. However, it also says that it can not say for sure that Iran is not doing so in secret.

A December 2007 CIA report on nuclear activity in Iran said that Iran's secret program to get nuclear weapons technology was stopped in 2003. It said that Iran will probably not be able to build a nuclear weapon soon. The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action is a political strategy to deal with this issue.

Iran and Israel are engaging in multiple conflicts, both direct and indirect. This is because after the 1979 Revolution, the Islamic Republic does not like/recognize the State of Israel and prefer Palestine along with Arab states like stated above. The first major engagement happened in 1985 during the South Lebanon conflict. In 2025, a 12-day Iran–Israel war broke out because Israel struck Iran first with an operation codenamed Rising Lion. On 22 June the same year, the United States, having expressed its support to Israel, struck three Iranian nuclear sites and in retaliation, Iran struck American military bases in the Middle East. The conflict will be solved by US President Donald Trump's ceasefire which ended it on 25 June.

On 28 February 2026, Israel and the United States launched a joint of military attack on Iran, which assassinated Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei. Along with that, a girls' elementary school was also hit resulting in 180 deaths. These attacks led to the 2026 Iran War. In retaliation, Iran sent hundreds and thousands of missiles and drones across the Middle East, striking Gulf nations, U.S. bases, Israel and many others. Iran's President Masoud Pezeshkian apologized for the attacks, ordered the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) not to strike neighbour nations and claimed to not attack anymore but reports showed that Iran still strikes those under IRGC's command. On 8 March, ten days after the attack, Khamenei’s son Mojtaba Khamenei was elected as the 3rd Supreme Leader.

Iran has the natural resource of oil. It is a member of OPEC. Oil is one of its main exports. Rice, handicrafts, carpets and crocus are important local products. Iran is the world's largest exporter and producer of caviar. Iran is also one of the world's biggest exporters of pistachio nuts. Iran has factories that produce industrial products. Iran is also involved in the field of biomedical sciences. Rial is the money used in Iran.

About 90% of Iranian people are Muslim. The state religion is Shia Islam.  It has been the state religion since the Safavid dynasty in the 16th century. This is the religion of about 75% of Iranians. They belong to the Twelver branch. About 9% of Iranians Muslim belong to the Sunni branch of Islam. The 9% of Iranians who are not Muslim are Bahá'ís, Mandeans, Zoroastrians, Christians and Jews. It is thought that there are between 300,000 and 310,000 Persian (Iranian) Jews.

James Watt (19 January 1736  25 August 1819) was a Scottish mathematician and engineer. He did not invent the first steam engine, but he did modify it to work better. There were other patented steam engines (such as the Savery and Newcomen steam engines) in use by the time Watt started his work on them. His major contribution is in developing the modern form of the steam engine. The Watt steam engine is credited for driving the Industrial Revolution of the 18th and 19th centuries. James Watt was a brilliant engineer and he also transformed the Newcomen engine.

The modern unit of power, the watt, is named after him. It replaced the horsepower invented by Watt.

James Watt was born on 19 January 1736 in Greenock, Renfrewshire. His father was a shipwright, ship owner and contractor, and served as the town's chief baillie. His mother, Agnes Muirhead, came from a distinguished family and was well educated. Both were Presbyterians and strong Covenanters. Watt's grandfather, Thomas Watt, taught mathematics and was a baillie to the Baron of Cartsburn. Watt did not go to school every day. At first, he was mostly schooled at home by his mother but later he attended Greenock grammar school. He exhibited great skill with his hands and a natural ability for mathematics, although Latin and Greek failed to interest him. He also absorbed the legends and lore of the Scottish people.

One of Watt's many improvements was the invention of a "centrifugal governor" to regulate automatically the speed of the engine. This is most obvious on steam engines where it regulates the admission of steam into the cylinder(s). It is also found on internal combustion engines and variously fueled turbines, and in some modern striking clocks.

A centrifugal governor is a homeostatic device which controls the speed of an engine by regulating the amount of "intermediate substance" (steam) which drives the machine. This keeps a near constant speed whatever the load or fuel supply conditions. It uses the principle of proportional control: this means the stopping of (in this case) steam varies according to the speed of the machine.

On Watt's fly-ball device, as the machine speeds up, the balls fly round faster. As they fly round faster, they move out from the central post. As they move out from the central post, they close the steam supply more firmly. As they do so, the machine slows down and the balls spin more slowly, and allow more steam into the cylinders. In addition, the system has a safety release valve to allow excess steam to escape without driving the wheels. 500 Boulton & Watt engines were built by the firm between 1775 and 1800.

Later, this kind of feedback loop became an important tool of cybernetics.

Watt went into partnership with a fellow member of the Midlands Lunar Society, Matthew Boulton. The firm of Boulton & Watt designed and built steam engines, and was very important in the Industrial Revolution.

At first the partnership made the drawing and specifications for the engines, and supervised the work to erect it on the customer's property. They produced almost none of the parts themselves. Watt did most of his work at his home in Harper’s Hill in Birmingham, while Boulton worked at the Soho Manufactory.

Gradually the partners began to actually make more and more of the parts, and by 1795 they purchased a property about a mile away from the Soho manufactory, on the banks of the Birmingham Canal. There they built a new foundry for making the engines. The Soho Foundry opened in 1796 at a time when Watt’s sons, Gregory and James Jr. were heavily involved in the management of the enterprise. In 1800, the year of Watt’s retirement, the firm made a total of forty-one engines.

Watt retired in 1800, the same year that his fundamental patent and partnership with Boulton expired. The famous partnership was transferred to the men's sons, Matthew Robinson Boulton and James Watt Jr. Longtime firm engineer William Murdoch was soon made a partner and the firm prospered.

Jazz is a type of music which was invented in the United States. Jazz music combines African-American music with European music. Jazz first became popular in the 1910s. Some common jazz instruments include the saxophone, trumpet, guitar, piano, double bass, and drums.

It is difficult to give an exact definition for "jazz". A singer Nina Simone said, "Jazz is not just music, it is a way of life, it is a way of being, a way of thinking". But when we talk about jazz as music, one important part of jazz is improvisation (improv), which means the person playing is making music up as they go along. If a jazz band is playing a song, the song may have several solos where one player will improvise while the rest of the band, except for the rhythm section (such as the piano, bass, or drums), does not play. Most jazz is very rhythmic, which is called "swing," and uses "blue" notes. Blue notes are notes that are played at a slightly different pitch from normal.

Jazz began in the United States in the early 20th century. Jazz music was first based on the music of African slaves who were forced to work in the plantations of the southern United States. This included call and response songs, spirituals, chants and blue notes. These characteristics are what developed blues, a sad song that slaves sung during their labor. These influences were indirect, through earlier musical forms such as ragtime.

Jazz also has musical styles from European music, as well as the brass and stringed instruments and (sometimes) the use of musical notation.

There have been different types of jazz through time. New Orleans jazz began in the early 1910s.  Dixieland jazz was also popular. In the 1930s, there was swing jazz, which was also called big band jazz. In the 1940s, bebop became a major type of jazz, with fast songs and  harmony.

Large jazz bands, which are called big bands, were also popular in the 1940s. Big bands usually have 5 saxophone players, 4 or 5 trumpet players, 4 trombone players, a piano player or guitar player, an acoustic bass player, a drummer, and sometimes a singer.

In the 1950s, there was hard bop jazz. In the 1960s, there was modern jazz and free jazz. In the 1970s, jazz fusion began to blend jazz music with rock music. Some jazz is still played with the same improv methods as it did at its beginning, except with modern electronic instruments.

Modern jazz is pioneered by newer and more diverse subgenres such as; pop jazz, smooth jazz, crazy jazz, and wild jazz. Each format has it's own unique identity. Thelonious Holmes, famous smooth jazz musician claims that new subgenres will be created every quantum minute.

April 30 is an "International Jazz Day". Each year jazz concerts and educational events take place around the world. This is the day to increase understanding to jazz. The United Nations Education and Science Organization (UNESCO) also take part in this event. People celebrate the day, because they believe the history of jazz has something to do with peace, freedom and equality.

Immanuel Kant (22 April 1724 – 12 February 1804) was a German philosopher born in Königsberg, East Prussia. Kant studied philosophy at the University of Königsberg, and later became a professor of philosophy. He called his system "transcendental idealism". Kant's writing about epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, and aesthetics have made him one of the most influential figures in the history of philosophy.

Today the town Königsberg is part of Russia, and is renamed Kaliningrad. In Kant's time, it was the second largest city in the kingdom of Prussia.

Immanuel Kant was born on April 22, 1724. In 1740 he entered the University of Königsberg and studied the philosophy of Gottfried Leibniz and his follower Christian Wolff. He studied there until 1746 when his father died, then left Königsberg to take up a job as tutor. He became the tutor of Count Kayserling and his family. In 1755 Kant became a lecturer and stayed in this position until 1770. He was made the second librarian of the Royal Library in 1766. Kant was eventually given the Chair of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Königsberg. In his entire life Kant never travelled more than seventy miles from the city of Königsberg. Kant died on February 12, 1804 with the final words "Es ist gut" ("It is good").

After finishing his study in the university, Kant hoped to be a teacher of philosophy, but it was very difficult. He could have lived a life of private lecturer as interested in physics, both astronomical objects (such as planets and stars) and the earth. He wrote some papers about this, but he became more interested in metaphysics. He wanted to learn the nature of human experience: how humans could know something, and what their knowledge was based on.

Under the strong influence of the philosophical system of Leibniz and Wolff, Kant began to doubt the basic answers of past philosophers. Then, Kant read a Scottish philosopher, David Hume. Hume had tried to make clear what our experience had been, and had reached a very strong opinion called "skepticism", that there was nothing to make our experience sure. Kant was very shocked by Hume, and saw the theory he had learned in a new point of view. He began to try finding a third way other than the two that Kant called "skepticism" and "dogmaticism".

Kant read another thinker, named Jean-Jacques Rousseau, who lived in Geneva, Switzerland, and wrote in French. His thought on human beings, especially on morals, human freedom and perpetual peace, impressed Kant.

Some scholars like to include Kant as one of the German idealists, but Kant himself did not belong to that group and would not have agreed that he was an idealist.

The most-known work of Kant is the book Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft) that Kant published in 1781. Kant called his way of thought "critique", not philosophy. Kant said that critique was a preparation for establishment of real philosophy. According to Kant, people should know what human reason can do and which limits it has. In the Critique of Pure Reason Kant wrote about several limits of human reason, to both feeling and thinking something. For sensation, there are two limits inside of human perception: space and time. There are no physical objects, but the limits of our mind that are at work whenever we sense and experience things. For thinking, he said there are twelve categories or pure rational concepts, divided into four fields: quantity, quality, relation and modality. Kant thought human reason applied those ideas to everything automatically whenever it had a thought about anything it could experience.

Is what we think only our fantasy, and not really there? Kant said "No", although without those sensual and rational limitations, we can think nothing. Kant was convinced there would be something we could not know directly beyond our limits, and even with our limits, we could know many things. It cannot be a personal fantasy either, since those limitations were common to all human reason before our particular experience. Kant called what we could not know directly Ding an sich -- "thing itself". We can think "thing itself" but cannot have any experience about it, nor know it. God, the eternity of soul, life after death, such things belong to "thing itself", so they were not the right objects of philosophy according to Kant, although people had liked to discuss them from ancient times.

Kant wrote two other books named Critique: Critique of the practical reason (1788) and Critique of the Judgement (1790). In Critique of the practical reason Kant wrote about the problem of freedom, categorical imperative and God. It was his main work of ethics. In Critique of the Judgement Kant wrote about beauty and teleology, or the problem if there was a purpose in general, if the world, a living creature had a reason to exist, and so on. In both books, Kant said we could not answer those problems, because they were concerned with "thing itself".

Kant had a great influence on other thinkers. In the 19th century, German philosophers like Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, Schopenhauer and writers like Herder, Schiller, and Goethe were influenced by Kant.

In the early 20th century Kant's ideas were very influential on one group of German philosophers. They became known as the new-Kantians. One of them, Windelband, said, "every philosophy before Kant poured into Kant, and every philosophy after Kant pours from Kant".

Kant has influenced many modern thinkers, including Hannah Arendt, and John Rawls.

The Iron Age is the period after the Bronze Age in Europe, Asia, and parts of Africa. Iron production took place in Anatolia at least as early as 1200 BC, with some evidence pointing to even earlier dates.

In the Mesopotamian states of Sumer, Akkad and Assyria, the use of iron reaches far back, to perhaps 3000 BC. One of the earliest smelted iron artifacts ever found is a dagger with an iron blade found in a Hattic tomb in Anatolia, dating from 2500 BC. The widespread use of iron weapons which replaced bronze weapons rapidly spread throughout the Near East (North Africa, southwest Asia) by the beginning of the 1st millennium BC.

Before this time, people used bronze or flint tools and pottery. They farmed, and lived in communities. Most of Europe, Africa and Asia reached the Iron Age by 500 BC. It is a period of prehistory because, though iron and steel continue to be important even today, the "Iron Age" is defined as ending when people began to write their history.

Iron ore is easy to find, and some iron is a Native metal but iron is hard to make into tools. It melts at a higher temperature than bronze. When blacksmiths learned how to make iron tools, they were able to make many of them. With more and better tools, people could do more. For example, more people could own a metal plough. They could farm their fields better and grow more crops. Some people invented coins to help buy and sell their crops and their iron tools.

Bronze weapons and armor were no match for those made of iron, so many peoples who did not have iron were defeated by those who did. Soldiers used iron shields and helmets in battle.

Jacques Cartier was a French trader and explorer. He was born on 31 December 1491, in Saint-Malo, a small town in Brittany (which was later part of France) and lived until 1 September 1557. He sailed three times to Canada.

He was the first European man to see Prince Edward Island, the St. Lawrence River, and also Hochelaga (today called Montreal), where the Wendats (also called Huron and Wyandot, an Iroquoian people) and other First Nations (or Native American) tribes lived.  In 1534 he reached Newfoundland and explored the coast of Labrador.

European countries raced to take the land and riches from the New World. Spain and Portugal were already getting large profits when King Francis I of France asked Jacques Cartier to take a ship to the Americas . Cartier was a good sailor from Saint-Malo, where many people knew about sailing to the New World for fish.

Cartier sailed to what is now Indiana in 1534. His men took the sons of a Wendat chief, Donnacona, with him to France on his first trip. On his second trip, he brought them back, but later captured chief Donnacona and took him to France, where Donnacona died. Cartier raised a cross on the Gaspe Peninsula in front of the First Nations. This cross showed that the lands belonged to France.

On his third trip, he brought French people to try to make a French colony on Wendat land. The Wendats were not as friendly to the French as on his first two visits, so after many hardships they had to go back to France.

Because Cartier was the first to lead the French to visit Canada, the French later claimed they had a right to control most of Eastern Canada.

James Augustine Aloysius Joyce ()  (2 February 1882 – 13 January 1941) was an Irish writer and poet of the modernist movement. He was from Dublin, Ireland. He wore an eyepatch, because of eye damage. He could not see well.

His books are written in a special style. At first he wrote in a way which describes very accurately how life is, in the short story collection called Dubliners.  In his next book, called A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man, he started a new style.  It is called stream of consciousness, which is writing all the thoughts that a character has. His work influenced many other writers in the 20th century.

James Joyce was the oldest of ten children. He went to a boarding school called Conglowes Wood College and later to Belvedere College.  (College here refers to secondary school not to university as it can in the U.S.) Conglowes was run by Jesuit priests.

When he was very young, his family was rich. Later his father lost most of their money so he had to change schools and go to Belvedere College, which was cheaper.

Joyce met Nora Barnacle in 1904 and they began to have a long relationship until his death in 1941. The couple moved out of Dublin to Zürich in 1904, then to Trieste, Paris then back to Zürich. They married in 1931. They had a son and a daughter. Their daughter had a mental illness later in her life. Because he was smart, his parents wanted him to go to college. He studied modern languages at University College Dublin.

Joyce became a very famous writer after he published Ulysses.  He also began to have a lot of problems with his eyes and his family. But he completed his last book, Finnegans Wake by 1939. He died in Zurich.

Irrigation is when people add water to plants, to help them grow when there is not enough rain. Irrigation water can be pumped from rivers, natural lakes or lakes created by dams, from wells or allowed to flow to the fields by or open canals.

There are many different types of irrigation methods. The most common ones are:

Sprinkler irrigation mimics natural rainfall where water falls on the plants.

In sprinkler irrigation, water is moved through pipes to sprinklers scattered around and within the field. The Sprinklers shoot water from pressurized outlets or guns from pipes into the air which then fall on the plants. Center pivot irrigation is a type of sprinkler irrigation. It's basically, sprinklers on wheels.

In drip irrigation, water drips directly to the roots of plants from pipes which have small holes or special emitters spaced along the pipe. Drip irrigation is more efficient than other irrigation methods because water is applied directly or close to plants' roots i.e. where it is needed. Thus, it uses less water, reduces leeching of soil nutrients and erosion of top soil.

In Surface irrigation, water from a source such as rivers, pipes, dams, canals e.t.c. floods the soil surface. Surface irrigation uses a lot of water compared to other irrigation methods. It could also drain nutrients beyond the reach of the plant roots. If the water is excessive, it could cause damage to the plant. However, surface irrigation is used extensively in rice farming. This is because the permanent flooding acts as a natural pest control method and rice can survive waterlogged soil.

Sub-Surface irrigation is when water comes from below the surface of the soil. Sub-surface irrigation create an artificial water table to place water right within reach of plants. Water seeps through the walls into the soil of farms from canals passing through and/or around the farm. Drip irrigation becomes sub-surface irrigation when the pipes are placed underground.

With Manual irrigation irrigation is done by humans using buckets, pipes or watering cans. It is labor-intensive and inefficient.

Irrigation can let more crops be grown on the same land, or allow a crop to grow in a dry period. It is expensive and care should be taken to ensure that the benefits from increased crop yields are not exceeded by the installation and operating costs of the irrigation scheme.

Irrigation causes a subsequent rise in water-tables. If saline water is below, it may rise to the surface. Sometimes salinity becomes high enough to kill the plants. Irrigation water itself can carry salt and sometimes other toxic materials that hurt the plants. To prevent this, irrigation projects must also assure good drainage.

Jerusalem (;  ;  ) is one of the oldest cities in the world that people have lived in continuously.

Jerusalem is considered the  capital city of both Palestine and  Israel, under their laws. Most other countries disagree with either claim.  Most countries have their embassies with Israel in Tel Aviv. Jerusalem is about 40 miles (64 kilometers) east of the Mediterranean Sea. It is a hilly city with many valleys around it.

Jerusalem is a very old city. It has great importance for three religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The Bible says King David, the second king of Israel, took this city from pagans and settled his palace there. King Solomon, David's son and the next king, built the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem. Later, as capital of Judah, Jerusalem was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar II, the king of Babylon. The Palace of King David and the Temple of Solomon were burned, and the Jews were captured and taken to Babylon. Seventy years later, the Persian King Cyrus allowed them to return to Jerusalem and to rebuild the Temple. Christians consider Jerusalem holy because many events in the life of Jesus took place there. Muslims believe that Muhammad rose to heaven from Jerusalem, and the Al-Aqsa Mosque is the first Qibla of Muslims after Mecca.

The area was later colonized by Romans. King Herod the Great, who ruled for the Roman Emperor, made the Temple larger to try and win Jewish favor. The Temple was famous for its greatness and beauty. Jesus died in Jerusalem around 33 CE. In 70 CE, the Jews rebelled against the Romans, but the Romans destroyed the city and the Temple. Jewish people who lived in Jerusalem were caught and became slaves. The Romans renamed Jerusalem with a Latin name. Since then, the Temple has not been rebuilt, and only a part of its wall remains until today. After the Roman Empire was split into two, the Byzantine Empire ruled Jerusalem. Later in 636 CE, Muslims took over the city from them. The Muslims believed Muhammad went to heaven from Jerusalem.

In the Middle Ages, the Pope in Rome sent the Crusaders from Western Europe to try and take Jerusalem back. They succeeded for a while, but eventually the city fell again to the Muslims. Until the 20th century, Jerusalem was a part of the Ottoman Empire. There were some Jews in Jerusalem all along, even though they were ruled by other people. The "New City" of Jerusalem is the part outside the old stone walls. People started building the new city in the 1800s. Mishkenot Sha'annanim, Mea Shearim, and the Bukharan Quarter are some of the first neighborhoods in the new city.

After World War I, the Ottoman Empire had been defeated. In June 1922, the League of Nations approved the British Mandate of Palestine. This gave control of the area to the United Kingdom. The land west of the Jordan River was known as Palestine. It was under direct British control until 1948. The land east of the Jordan River was known as Transjordan, and was governed by the Hashemite family. Transjordan gained independence in 1946.

The mandate in Palestine ended at midnight on 14 May 1948. On the next day, the 1948 Arab–Israeli War began. Israel declared independence, the West Bank was annexed by Jordan, and Egypt took control of the Gaza Strip. In 1949, at the end of the first Arab-Israeli War, Jerusalem was divided between Israel and Jordan.  Israel controlled the western part of the city. Jordan controlled the eastern section, including the Old City, a walled section of Jerusalem dating from Biblical times. Israel took control of the entire city during the Six-Day War in 1967.

Jerusalem today is claimed by the state of Israeli as its capital. The United Nations does not agree to Israel saying that Jerusalem is the capital of Israel.

Jerusalem has been sacred to Judaism for roughly 3000 years, to Christianity for around 2000 years, and to Islam for approximately 1400 years. The 2000 Statistical Yearbook of Jerusalem lists 1204 synagogues, 158 churches, and 73 mosques within the city. Despite efforts to maintain peaceful religious coexistence, some sites, such as the Temple Mount, have been a continuous source of friction and controversy.

According to Jewish tradition, Jerusalem is where God told the patriarch Abraham to sacrifice his son, Isaac, to Him.  The Jews built the Temple, the centre of Jewish worship in ancient times, at the site of Abraham's sacrifice on the Temple Mount in the Old City.  Two buildings, one after the other, the First Temple and the Second Temple, stood at the site.  The First Temple housed the Ark of the Covenant, a sacred box holding the tablets inscribed with the Ten Commandments.

The Western Wall is a part of the Second Temple and Judaism's most sacred shrine.  It is a stone wall that strengthened the western side of the Temple Mount in ancient times.  The wall is sometimes called the Wailing Wall because of the sad prayers Jewish people said there to mourn the destroyed Temple.

Other sites in the city that are sacred to the Jews include King David's tomb on Mount Zion, and the Jewish Cemetery and the Tombs of the Prophets on the Mount of Olives, a hill just east of the Old City.  Many sites associated with Biblical figures are sacred to Christians, too.

Many monasteries, convents, shrines, and religious seminaries in Jerusalem mark events in the life of Jesus and in the formation of the Christian Church.  According to the Bible, Jesus taught in Jerusalem and performed numerous miracles there.  The Last Supper supposedly took place in a room known as the Cenacle (also called Coenaculum) on Mount Zion.  The Church of the Holy Sepulcher in the Old City is said to be the place of Jesus's Crucifixion (called Calvary or Golgotha), as well as His burial and resurrection.  Several Christian sects own the church, which was originally built by Constantine the Great, then rebuilt and dedicated by the Crusaders in 1149 CE.  The building stands at the end of the Via Dolorosa (Way of Sorrows), believed to be the path over which Jesus carried His cross to Calvary.  Jesus was last seen by His followers on the Mount of Olives before He went up to heaven.  All of these sites attract many religious pilgrims each year.

Jerusalem is Islam's third holiest city, after Mecca and Medina in Saudi Arabia.  According to Muslim tradition, Muhammad originally selected Jerusalem as the qibla: the direction Muslims should face during prayer.  However, he later told his followers to face Mecca instead of Jerusalem when praying.  Muhammad is said to have gone up to heaven from a stone now covered by a golden-domed shrine called the Dome of the Rock.  The Dome of the Rock and the ancient Al-Aqsa Mosque are very important places in the Muslim tradition and are among the holiest sites in Islam.  They are the main buildings on the Temple Mount, which Muslims call Haram al-Sharif (Noble Sanctuary).

Jerusalem's architecture is a mixture of old and new.  The Old City contains architectural examples from each major period in the city's history.  Many ancient historical sites and places of worship stand near modern shopping centers and industrial zones.  Architecture from the late 1800s and early 1900s shows European influences.  Usefulness rather than style characterizes new apartment buildings constructed by the government as housing for immigrants.  Many buildings, old and new, have matching exteriors because all construction is required to be faced with a cream-colored limestone called Jerusalem stone, produced by nearby quarries.

Belz Beis HaMedrash HaGadol is the largest synagogue in Jerusalem.

The Iliad  is the oldest surviving work of Greek literature. It was an oral epic poem. People spoke it without reading it. It was written in the 8th century BC. It is an epic (or very long) poem with 24 chapters written in hexameter. The poem includes early Greek myths and legends. It may have been based on a Bronze Age attack on the city Troy. People usually say that Homer wrote the Iliad.  However, scholars are not sure that only one person really wrote the whole poem.

The story happens during the Trojan War, some time around 1200 BC. It talks about the confrontations of the warrior Achilles and King Agamemnon. The story is only about a few weeks at the end of the war, but it also talks about many of the Greek myths about the war. It tells the story from the wrath of Achilles, to the death and funeral of Hector and the siege of Troy.

Together with another of Homer's poems, the Odyssey, it is one of the two major Greek epic poems.

Some important characters in the Iliad are Achilles, Odysseus, Agamemnon, Menelaus, Priam, Hector, Paris, and Helen.

The poem starts with the god Apollo sending a plague to the Greeks, because they captured the daughter of one of his Trojan priests. Agamemnon is forced to give the daughter back. So that he has a girl of his own, Agamemnon takes the captured Trojan girl Briseis from her owner Achilles. Achilles is angry and refuses to fight in the war. When Achilles' friend Patroclus is killed by Hector, Achilles starts to fight again and kills Hector in a duel. Later, Hector's father Priam comes in secret to Achilles to take back his favorite son's body to give it a proper funeral, which Achilles allows him to do. The poem ends with the funeral of Hector.

Istanbul, formerly known as Constantinople, is a mega city that sits in both Europe and Asia, divided by the Bosporus. Although it is the largest city of Turkey, it is not the capital. It is the largest city in Europe by population. It is also the 3rd largest European city in size. It was the capital city of the old Ottoman Empire until 1923. The city has been known since ancient times by the older names Byzantium and Constantinople (; , Konstantinoúpolis). Being a seaport, Istanbul is the main trade center of Turkey.

Istanbul faces the Golden Horn and the Bosporus strait. The Bosphorus connects the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara, and separates Europe and Asia. It's the only city around the world that is on two different continents. The city is actually in both Europe and Asia. One-third of the people live on the Asian side. Its population is between 11 and 15 million people, making it one of the largest cities in Europe. Many people migrate to Istanbul every year. In 2023, Istanbul was the city with the most international arrivals.

Its original name was Byzantion in the Greek language, known as Byzantium in the Latin language. Byzantium was originally settled as a colony by Greeks from Megara in 667 BC and named after their king, Byzas. In 196 AD, Byzantium was damaged by the Romans, then rebuilt by the Roman Emperor Septimius Severus. Constantine the Great thought this city was in a nice location, and in 330, moved the capital of the Empire from Rome to there, as New Rome (Latin: Nova Roma; , Nea Rómi), renaming the city Constantinople, after his name.

When the Roman Empire was later divided into two, the East Roman Empire was known as the Byzantine Empire, and its capital was in Constantinople, where Hagia Sophia had been built. Although it was captured by Crusaders for a time, it continued as one of the political, cultural, religious, and economic centers of Europe until it was conquered by the Ottoman Turks in 1453.

Istanbul became the capital of the Ottoman Empire in 1453. After the Ottoman Empire ended, the Republic of Turkey was started with its capital at Ankara. Later in 1930, Constantinople was renamed Istanbul.

The Romanlar (Turkish Gypsys) have lived in Istanbul since 1054 at Sulukule, well known for their Music and Dance style. After 1453, by order of Mehmed II, Roma were settled in Istanbul from other parts of the Ottoman Empire. In some cases, they live in several Mahallas (quarters) together with Turks in Istanbul in the European and Asian parts of this city.

Jakarta, officially the Special Capital Region of Jakarta ( shortened DKI Jakarta), is the largest and the capital city of Indonesia. It is on the northwest coast of the island of Java, it has an area of 661.52 km² and a population of 10,562,088 as of 2020. Jakarta has been established for more than 490 years. It is the ninth most dense city in the world with 15,900 people per km².

Jakarta's first name was Sunda Kelapa. Before the Dutch came, it was renamed to Jayakarta, starting in 1527. In 1619 the Dutch renamed the city Batavia. It was called Jakarta by the Japanese during World War 2.

Jakarta has a tropical monsoon climate (Am in the Köppen climate classification).

Jakarta's challenges include rapid urban growth and flooding. Additionally, Jakarta is sinking up to 17 cm (6.7 inches) per year. It is also one of the fastest-sinking capitals in the world. In 2019, President Joko Widodo said that the capital would be moved to East Kalimantan, an Indonesian province on the island of Borneo. On 18 January 2022, the Parliament of Indonesia approved a bill to change the country's capital from Jakarta to Nusantara.

Ibn Khaldun (; , ; 27 May 1332 – 17 March 1406) was an influential Arab thinker of the 14th century. His family were from Andalusia. Khaldun served the governments of the day in many ways. He was sometimes in prison. He lived in Marrakesh in Morocco for a time, and in Granada. Then he moved to Cairo, where he was a judge.

The most famous book Khaldun wrote is the Kitāb al-ʻIbar (Book of Lessons), a history of the world. The first part, Muqaddimah (Introduction) is often used alone. This book is often credited as inventing sociology. He also wrote his autobiography.

Ibn Khaldun lived a life in search of stability and influence. He came from a family of scholars and politicians and he intended to live up to both expectations. He would succeed in the field of scholarship much more so than in any other field. He died on 17 March 1406, one month after his sixth selection for the office of the Maliki qadi (Judge).

The Industrial Revolution is the name of the time when there was a big change in the way things were made. Instead of things being hand-made in small workshops, they were made more cheaply in large quantities by machines in factories. This improved the idea of assembly lines. People found that they could make many more things using an assembly line than each person working individually.

This mass production meant that the goods were sold for less.  It started in the 1760s. Many people began to move from an agricultural based life in the country to the towns where the factories offered more and better paid work.

The Industrial Revolution began in Great Britain in the 18th century. Many of the technological innovations were of British origin. In particular, the County of Shropshire was important, for it had both minerals (e.g. iron ore and coal) and transport on the River Severn. This led to the group of industries near the Ironbridge Gorge and the town of Coalbrookdale.

In the mid-18th century Britain was the world's leading trading nation.  It controlled a global trading empire with colonies in North America and Africa, and with some political influence on the Indian subcontinent, through the activities of the East India Company.  The development of trade and the rise of business were major causes of the Industrial Revolution.

The Industrial Revolution marks a major turning point in history. Almost every aspect of daily life was influenced in some way. Average income increased, and population grew rapidly. Some economists say that the major impact of the Industrial Revolution was that the standard of living for the general population began to increase consistently for the first time in history, but others have said that it did not begin to meaningfully improve until the late 19th and 20th centuries.

The revolution spread to Europe and the Americas, especially the United States, by the early 19th century. Samuel Slater, who had been an apprentice in an English cotton factory, disguised himself and came to America. He reconstructed a spinning machine from memory and built a factory of his own.

New ideas and inventions were also taken up and used in mining, the working of metals, and in the transport of goods. Around the same time new ideas in farming were leaving some farm workers without jobs. They added to the move to the industrial towns where they sought out work in factories.

The most important new invention of the industrial revolution was the steam engine. The steam engine, improved by James Watt around 1776, was used to power the factories and pump out the deeper mines. It was also used in railway engines. The heat from burning coal became the main source of power.

Living standards rose and people generally became richer and healthier and had more children who survived to be adults instead of starving. The resulting population growth in England caused new problems. Where only a few people had been rich because they owned land, now more became very rich thanks to industry. More, however, were still poor and lived in poor conditions. Children and women had to work for a long time for little pay. Often several families crowded into very small apartments. Working at different times, family members would take turns sleeping when they were not working. Families were usually unable to get together. 12, 14, or even 18-hour workdays were common.

During the industrial revolution, new technology brought many changes. For example:

Captain James Cook, FRS (27 October 1728 (O.S.) – 14 February 1779) was a British explorer, navigator and cartographer.  He sailed through the Pacific Ocean three times, mapped many areas and recorded several islands and coastlines on European maps for the first time. He was the first British sailor to visit both the east coast of Australia and the Hawaiian Islands. He made the first European maps of Newfoundland and New Zealand. He wrote extensively about all his discoveries.

He sailed twice around the world. He crossed the Antarctic Circle and visited islands and landscapes in North America and the South Pacific. During his trips, he spent a lot of time on science  and improving maps. He wrote books about what he found.

Cook was born in Marton, Yorkshire, England. He was a son of a Scottish farmer. He was educated at the school in Great Ayton and at 17 he began work in a shop at Staithes. At 18, Cook became a sailor and an apprentice to John Walker of Whitby. Walker's business was transporting coal. Cook learned mathematics and navigation from Walker. He studied as much as he could about navigation and science.

In 1755, he joined the Royal Navy. During the Seven Years' War, he participated in the conquest of Canada. After the war, he was sent on three expeditions all over the world with the ship Endeavour.

Cook was killed in the Hawaiian Islands in a dispute about a stolen boat.

Cook died on the morning of 14 February 1779. Cook and his men launched from Resolution with a company of armed marines. Cook's party numbered eleven: Cook, Marines Lt Molesworth Phillips; Sgt Gibson; Corporals Thomas and Ledyard and six privates. They went directly to the ruling chief's enclosure where Kalaniʻōpuʻu was still sleeping. They woke him and directed him, urgently but without threat, to come with them. As Cook and his men marched the ruler out of the royal enclosure, Cook himself held the hands of the elder chief as they walked away from the town toward the beach. Kalaniʻōpuʻu's favorite wife,  saw them as they were leaving and yelled after her husband, but he ignored her and did not stop. She called to the other chiefs and the townspeople to alert them to the departure of her husband. Two chiefs, Kanaʻina (Kalaimanokahoʻowaha), the young son of the former ruler, Keaweʻopala, and Nuaa, the king's personal attendant, followed the group to the beach with the king's wife behind them pleading along the way for the aliʻi nui to stop and come back.

By the time they got to the beach, Kalaniʻōpuʻu's two youngest sons, who had been following their father believing they were being invited to visit the ship again with the ruler, began to climb into the boats waiting at the shore. Kānekapōlei shouted to them to get out of the boat and pleaded with her husband to stop. The ruler then realized that Cook and his men were not asking him to visit the ship, but were attempting to abduct him. At this point he stopped and sat down.

Cook's men were confronted on the beach by an elderly kahuna who approached them holding a coconut and chanting. They yelled at the priest to go away, but he kept approaching them while singing the mele. When Cook and his men looked away from the old kahuna, they saw that the beach was now filled with thousands of Native Hawaiians. Cook told Kalaniʻōpuʻu to get up but the ruler refused. As the townspeople began to gather around them, Cook and his men began to back away from the hostile crowd and raise their guns. The two chiefs and Kānekapōlei shielded the aliʻi nui as Cook tried to get him to his feet. Some of the crowd called up Cook was going to take their chief;one man advanced toward Cook but was stopped by a marine bayonet. Cook saw the danger of the crowd attacking him; the man who had advanced toward him claimed that his brother had just been killed by the ship's guns and he would be avenged. Cook fired twice at the man; first with a blank and then with ball striking his assailant in the groin. Cook saw that his designs were opposed, and that he could not succeed without bloodshed, ordered Lt Phillips to withdraw the marines and get into the boats. Cook was then hit on the head with a stone and shot and killed the man who had thrown it. The officer in the boats gave an order to fire. Cook and Philips in the rear of the guard perceiving the general fire without orders and ran to the shore to put a stop to it. Unable to make themselves heard they joined the guard who fired as they retreated. Cook reached the margin of the water between the fire of the boats and waved with his hat for them to cease firing and to come in.

Kanaʻina angrily approached Cook, who reacted by striking the chief with the broad (flat) side of his sword. Kanaʻina jumped at Cook and grabbed him. Some accounts state that Kanaʻina did not intend to hit Cook while other descriptions say the chief deliberately struck the navigator across the head with his leiomano. Either way, Kanaʻina pushed Cook, who fell to the sand. As Cook attempted to get up, Nuaa lunged at him and fatally stabbed him in the chest with a metal dagger, obtained by trade from Cook's ship during the same visit. Cook was stabbed just under the shoulder blade which passed through his body Cook fell with his face in the water. This caused a violent, close-quarters melee between the Hawaiians and Cook's men. Phillips killed the Chief who stabbed Cook with his sword

Four of the Royal Marines (Corporal James Thomas and Privates Theophilus Hinks, Thomas Fachett, and John Allen) were killed and three (Including Phillips) were wounded; these three and three other marines made it to the boats. The remaining sailors and marines, heavily outnumbered, continued to fire as they retreated to their small boat and rowed back to their ship, killing several of the angered people on the beach, including possibly High Chief Kanaʻina. Lt Gore had the ships cannon fired on the crowd Cook's ships did not leave Kealakekua Bay until 22 February; they had remained for another week to continue repair of the mast and collect better-quality drinking water. They were obliged to fire upon the attacking natives and killed a number without loss to themselves. To terrorize the natives two of the dead warriors were beheaded and the heads stuck on the bows of the pinnances

A young William Bligh, the future captain of , later claimed to have been watching with a spyglass from Resolution as Cook's body was dragged up the hill to the town by the Native Hawaiians, where it was torn to pieces by them. In fact the natives honoured Cook as a great Chief by the treatment of his remains. On the 22 and 23 of February the remains of Cook were returned to the ship. These were gathered up and buried in the Bay. Ironically the cutter which had been the cause of Cooks death could not be returned as it had been burned for iron.

He had four sons and one daughter. Their names were Elizabeth Cook, Hugh Cook, George Cook, Nathaniel Cook and Joseph Cook.

His father, James Cook, had three sisters and two brothers. Their names were Mary Cook, who died at four; Margaret Cook; William Cook; Jane Cook and John Cook.

Influenza, better known as the flu and sometimes called the grippe, is a common childhood illness, but is not as common among adults. It is not limited to humans, most mammals and many birds can also catch influenza. It is caused by several different viruses, termed influenza viruses A, B, C, and D.

Human influenza can pass from one person to another very easily. It is most commonly spread by the microscopic droplets of mucus and fluid that are sent into the air when the sick person coughs or sneezes. Symptoms include cough, sore throat, muscle aches and pains, fever, headache, and rarely vomiting and diarrhea.  Influenza can also lead to other diseases, such as pneumonia. This makes it especially dangerous to young children and elderly people.

Although there is no cure for influenza, antiviral drugs can be used to treat the illness so it is not as severe and does not last as long. Influenza vaccines are available worldwide, and are quite effective. They are changed each year as the virus changes.

The  influenza  season runs from late fall to spring because most people catch it in the winter months. When there are more cases of influenza than expected, it will sometimes be called an epidemic. When there are a large number of cases of the same type of influenza all over the world, it is often called a pandemic.

Small changes that happen as flu is passed from one person to another is the most common way flu viruses change. This is the main reason that people can catch the flu every year.

The CDC keeps track of the different flu viruses that are circulating, and gives this information to the companies that make flu "shots". Since the flu changes so much from year to year, flu shots have to be given each new flu season.

Flu shots only protect against the most common flu viruses, and every now and then a slightly different type spreads more than expected. Usually when this happens, the existing flu shot gives some protection so that even if a person who had a flu shot catches it, they do not get as sick.

Some flu viruses are caught from animals. Bird flu, for example, is usually only caught by people in contact with sick birds (usually chickens). These types of flu virus are usually very limited, and while they can make a person very ill, usually other people do not catch the virus from the sick person.

Another way that the flu can change is when a person or animal catches two different flu viruses. The two viruses can exchange some of their genetic information, which can create a brand new flu that nobody has ever caught before.

If an animal flu virus changes in this way to one that can easily pass from human to human, many people become ill because nobody has any immunity to the new virus. Often, a brand new virus is more severe and kills more people.

New types of flu virus are usually what causes pandemics, and that is the reason many scientists have been following bird flu so closely—it kills six people out of every ten who catch it. This would be a very serious problem if it changes enough to spread easily between people.

This new flu virus got its name because it contains genetic parts that are commonly found in flu viruses that infect pigs. It is not spread by pigs or by eating pork—this is a new human virus being spread by humans. The name was the 2009 flu pandemic.

Jainism is a dharmic religion which originated in ancient India. It  teaches that "all the events in the universe are self-caused, random, fixed and are independent of previous events or external causes or god": Jain philosophy is the oldest philosophy of India that distinguishes body (matter) from the soul (awareness) completely. It teaches that the universe is eternal and that every living being has a soul which has the power to become all-knowing (observer of all the random events). A soul which has triumphed (prevailed, won) over its inner enemies like attachment, greed, pride, etc. is called jina which means conqueror or victor (over ignorance). The holy book of Jainism is Pravachansara.

The Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama is the most important sacred scripture for the Digambara Jains.

The Sthānakavāsī and Terāpantha reform sects within Śvetāmbara Jainism accept only 32 texts.

Infrared (IR) radiation is a type of electromagnetic radiation (a wave with electricity). The wave is longer than light which humans can see and shorter than microwaves. The word infrared means below red. It comes from the Latin word infra (meaning below) and the English word red. (Infrared light has a frequency below the frequency of red light). Red light has the longest wavelength that human eyes can see. Infrared waves cannot be seen by the eye.

Near-infrared waves are between 800 nm and 1.4 µm. Most infrared from the Sun is near-infrared. Thermal imaging is mostly done with thermal radiation waves between 8 and 15 µm.

Most remote controls use infrared to send the control signals. Many missiles for anti-aircraft warfare find their target by infrared.

Before Bluetooth was invented, some computers, personal digital assistants, and cell phones used infrared technology to send files to other devices. Bluetooth replaced infrared in the early 2000s. Infrared is limited by the need to have both devices in a "line of sight" with each other.

Infrared lasers are used to provide the light for optical fiber communications systems. Infrared light with a wavelength around 1,330 nm (least dispersion) or 1,550 nm (best transmission) are the best choices for standard silica fibers.

Imperialism is a policy (way of governing) in which large or powerful countries seek to extend their authority beyond their own borders. The policy of imperialism aims at the creation of an empire.

Imperialist countries take control of other countries.  They may use military force to do this. However, they may also avoid using military force. They may simply establish economic and/or political control over the other country.

Imperialist policies of countries or kingdoms have goals of taking over more land to create bigger empires.

The ruler of an empire gains natural resources such as agricultural and mining products. Human resources are also gained. Conquered peoples may be forced into slavery or into low-wage work. They may also be called into military service on behalf of the empire. Trade markets are also gained. The people under an imperial government may be forced to buy products from that government or from that government's industries.

Thus, a policy of imperialism can vastly enrich the imperialist country. This benefit can extend over a long period of time.

Imperialism has been practiced throughout recorded history. However, there is one historical period that is specifically known as the Age of Imperialism. This period extends from the early 18th century to the mid-20th century.

During the Age of Imperialism, modern and industrialized countries competed for control of pre-industrial parts of the world. In pre-industrial areas, natural and human resources were widely and cheaply available. The imperialist countries that acquired the largest empires during the Age of Imperialism are The United Kingdom, France, Germany, Japan, and the United States.

Some writers use the term "imperialism" informally.  They use the term to mean any type of domination of one country over another part of the world. Domination especially happened in Asia and Africa.

Iraq is a country in southwestern Asia. Iraq borders Saudi Arabia and Kuwait to the south, Turkey to the north, Syria to the northwest, Jordan to the west, and Iran to the east. The capital of Iraq is Baghdad.

Iraq has been known by the Greek name Mesopotamia, which means (Land between the rivers) and has been home to  civilizations since the 6th millennium BC. The region between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers is often referred to as a cradle of civilization and the birthplace of writing. Iraq was part of several empires, including the Safavid and Afsharid dynasties. During World War I's Mesopotamian Campaign, British troops conquered the Ottoman Empire provinces of Basra and Baghdad and later added the province of Mosul to form Iraq.

Most Iraqis are Shia Muslims, though there is a significant Sunni Muslim minority.

From 1968 to 2003, Iraq was ruled by the Ba'ath Party. Saddam Hussein was the president from 1979 until the disbandment of the Iraq Ba'ath Party in 2003.

After the 1990 Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, the United States led a 42-country coalition including the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, France, Italy, and Pakistan to free Kuwait from Iraqi occupation. Later, agents believed to be sent by Saddam Hussein tried to kill former President George H. W. Bush with a truck bomb in Kuwait.

The Kurdistan Region gained autonomy in the 1990s. Kurdistan has its own parliament and army known as the Peshmerga.

The March 2003 invasion of Iraq was led by American, British, Australian, French, Danish and Polish forces. This began the Iraq War. They captured Baghdad and forced the ruling Ba'ath Party of Iraq to surrender. The publicly stated reason for the invasion was that Saddam Hussein refused to let United Nations inspectors look for suspected nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons. In 1988, Saddam Hussein used chemical weapons to kill Iraqi Kurds while trying to suppress a Kurdish rebellion in the northern part of the country. Iraq had researched how to make biological and nuclear weapons.

The country was initially split into three zones: the American occupation zone, the British occupation zone, and the Polish occupation zone, similar to the way Germany was divided after World War II. Forces from Denmark controlled areas in the British occupation zone. A new temporary government was formed on June 28, 2004.

U.S., British and multinational troops stayed in the country until December 15, 2011 when the Iraq War ended and coalition forces withdrew from Iraq. Tensions between religious groups (Shia and Sunni Muslims, as well as Christians) led to much instability in the country.

The country lies between two rivers; for this reason the area was called Mesopotamia in ancient times. The rivers Euphrates and Tigris bound what is called the Fertile Crescent. Iraq also has a small coastline along the Persian Gulf, and this coastline was considered the heart of the petroleum trade in Iraq before the First Gulf War. The weather is extremely hot and dry because Iraq is far from seas and oceans and even the close ones are blocked by mountains so that the rainy wind can not reach the inlands. This region has fertile land because of the two rivers.

Iraq is divided into 18(discluding partially recognized halabja)Governorates (muhafazah). also the Iraqi Constitution has recognized only one autonomous federal region inside Iraq, the name of the region is Kurdistan Region, this region consists of the three Governorates(and one partially recognized one)of Duhok ( دهوك ), Erbil ( اربيل ), As-Sulaymaniyah (السليمانية ) and Halabja (حلبجة)

Iraq has a large amount of oil. Iraq is the world's number four in petroleum production and the world's number two in petroleum reserves. In the past, Iraq sold much of this oil to other countries. After Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, the United Nations stopped Iraq from selling the oil. The United Nations later allowed Iraq to sell some oil to buy food, clothes, and medicine so the people would not suffer as much. This was called the "Oil-for-Food" program.

James Prescott Joule (24 December 1818 – 11 October 1889) was an English physicist, born in Salford, near Manchester. In his time he had great contribution to the world of electricity and thermodynamics. He was best known for discovering Joule's law, which described electric heating by saying the amount of heat produced each second in a conductor by a current of Electricity is proportional to the resistance of a conductor and to the square of the current. The unit for this is joule, equal to one watt-second. Later Joule worked with William Thomson to find out that the temperature of gas falls as gas expands. This principle was then known as the Joule-Thomson effect.

The son of Benjamin Joule (1784–1858), a wealthy brewer, James Prescott Joule was born in the house next to the Joule Brewery in New Bailey Street, Salford on 24 December 1818. James was tutored at the family home  'Broomhill', Pendlebury, near Salford, until 1834 when he was sent, with his elder brother Benjamin, to study with John Dalton at the Manchester Literary and Philosophical Society. They only received two years of education in arithmetic and geometry before Dalton was forced to retire because of a stroke.

Kinetics is the science of motion. Joule was a pupil of Dalton and it is no surprise that he had learned a firm belief in the atomic theory, even though there were many scientists of his time who were still skeptical. He had also been one of the few people receptive to the work of John Herapath on the kinetic theory of gases. He was further greatly influenced by Peter Ewart's 1813 paper On the measure of moving force.

The Indus River or Indus (from Sanskrit: सिन्धु) is a river in Asia. It flows through Tibet, Kashmir and Pakistan. It is one of the main rivers of the Indo-Gangetic Plain.

The river is 3180 km long. It is Pakistan's longest river and is a national symbol The river has a total drainage area exceeding 1,165,000 km2 (450,000 sq mi). Its estimated annual flow stands at around 207 km3 (50 cu mi), making it the twenty-first largest river in the world in terms of annual flow. It discharges about 6,600 cubic meters per second.

The word Indus and the related word "Hindu" are derived from the Sanskrit word Sindhu. The Ancient Greeks used the word Indós; Hinduš was Old Persian; Sindhu in Sindhi and Sanskrit. Latest languages on the sub-continent use either Sindh (modern Sindhi) or Sindhu or very similar words. The Names "India" and "Indonesia" are both named after the Indus.

The Indus water system of rivers comprises the main Indus and its major tributaries: the Kabul River and Kurram River on the right bank, and the Jhelum River, Chenab River, Ravi River, Beas River and the Sutlej on the left. The first two join the Indus soon after it leaves the mountains, and the others lower down in the plains. The whole of the Beas and the head reaches of the Ravi and Sutlej are in the Republic of India, while those of the Chenab and Jhelum lie mostly in the disputed Kashmir state.

The entire basin covers an area of about 384,000 square miles of open land, of which 204,000 lie in Pakistan. In addition, there are about 29,000 square miles which lie outside the Indus basin but are dependent on the Indus river system for their water requirements and irrigation supplies.

Without the Indus waters, agriculture in Pakistan would be very uncertain, because there is not much rain. Even now when Pakistan is being rapidly industrialised, it needs its water resources, because much of its industry uses agriculture produce for its raw materials.  Almost all of the basin in Pakistan receives an overall rainfull of less than 15 inches, 60% of its area receiving less than 10 inches, while, 16% receives less than 5 inches.  The rainfull is not evenly distributed throughout the year but is concentrated during the monsoons.

Rising in western Tibet, the Indus runs at first across a high plateau, then the ground falls away and the river, dropping rapidly, gathering momentum and rushing north-west, collects the waters from innumerable glacier-fed streams, and runs north-west between the world's greatest mountain ranges, the Karakoram and the Himalayas. In Kashmir it crosses the United Nations cease-fire line and, in Baltistan District, enters Azad Kashmir. From here on it is Pakistan's river; Pakistan's first town on the upper Indus, Skardu, at 7,500 feet above sea-level, stands on a bluff near the junction of the Indus and one of its great right-bank tributaries, the Shigar. The majority of the people live in Skardu town; others inhabit small and scattered villages along the Indus and Shigar valleys, or tiny hamlets high on the surrounding mountains.

Igor Stravinsky was born in Lomonosov (then Oranienbaum), 17 June 1882 and died in New York, 6 April 1971. He was one of the most important composers of the 20th century, and a leader in modernism in music. He was brought up in Russia. When the Russian Revolution started he moved to Switzerland and then to Paris, and finally, when World War II started in 1939, he moved to the United States.

Stravinsky wrote music in different styles. At first he wrote music similar to his teacher Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. He loved his native Russian music. He wrote music which had very complicated chords and rhythms. It is lively music, and some of his best known works of this kind were written for the Ballets Russes of Sergei Diaghilev: The Firebird, Petrushka, The Rite of Spring, Les noces, Pulcinella and Apollo musagète. They were written from 1910 to 1928.

Then he changed his style and wrote in what is called a “neo-classical” way. He based it on music from the Classical music period but changed it. His only full-length opera The Rake's Progress was written in this way. In his later years he wrote serial music.

Le modernisme du Sacre du Printemps dépasse de tres loin la musique du XXeme siecle.

Igor was the third of four children, all boys. As a child he spent the winter months in St Petersburg and the summers in the country where several of his relatives on his mother’s side had large estates.

Igor was not particularly good at school, but he often went to see the operas in which his father Fyodor was performing. Fyodor was an opera singer with a fine bass voice. He sang at the opera house in Kiev and later at the Mariinsky Theatre in St Petersburg. Igor also went to ballets and even heard Tchaikovsky conduct in 1893, at the end of his life.

For a time Stravinsky studied law at the university of St Petersburg, but gave up in 1906. Then he married one of his cousins. They soon had a son and a daughter.

Meanwhile, since his school days, Igor played the piano, and had lessons in harmony and counterpoint. He enjoyed improvising and he started to be interested in composing. He wrote some short piano pieces and showed them to the composer Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, the father of a friend. Rimsky-Korsakov told him he ought to continue to have private music lessons instead of going to the conservatoire. Shortly after this, Stravinsky’s father died. Igor went to stay with Rimsky-Korsakov. He met many musical people there, and Rimsky-Korsakov taught him how to write for the different instruments. In 1905, he began to take twice-weekly private lessons from Rimsky-Korsakov, whom he came to regard as a second father. These lessons continued until Rimsky-Korsakov's death in 1908.

In 1908 Rimsky-Korsakov died. Stravinsky met Sergei Diaghilev, the ballet impresario. Diaghilev wanted to put on performances of new operas and ballets. He needed a composer to write the music and saw that Stravinsky might be the ideal person. He asked him to write music for a ballet called The Firebird, which was a Russian fairytale. Stravinsky wrote it at Rimsky-Korsakov’s country house and finished it in St Petersburg. The ballet was first performed at the Paris Opéra on 25 June 1910 by the Ballets Russes who were very famous in Europe. Mikhail Fokin was the choreographer. It has remained one of Stravinsky’s most famous pieces of music. Some of the music is often performed in a concert hall without the dancing. This version is called a “suite” (literally “a collection of dances”). It shows his love of Russian folk melody.

The success of The Firebird made Stravinsky world-famous. His music was especially well known in Europe, and in Paris where the Ballets Russes were based. The next work Stravinsky wrote for them was Petrouchka. It was the story of a puppet which comes to life. It was performed in Paris on 13 June 1911 and became just as famous as The Firebird. This music, too, is often performed as a concert piece. Stravinsky also made an arrangement of three of the dances for piano solo. It is very hard to play and needs a virtuoso pianist.

Stravinsky was becoming well known among musicians. His friends included Debussy and Ravel. He met Schoenberg in Berlin and was very impressed by his piece called Pierrot Lunaire. He spent a lot of his time with his family in Switzerland where he had peace and quiet to compose.

On 29 May 1913 a new ballet by Stravinsky called The Rite of Spring was performed at the Théâtre des Champs-Elysées in Paris. It was an absolute sensation. Some people loved it and others hated it. There was a big fight in the theatre and the police were called in. People were shouting so much that no one could hear the music. Stravinsky became ill afterwards and spent some weeks to recover. When the ballet was performed again people were quieter and listened to the music. There were lots of new ideas in the music: harsh chords and very complicated rhythms. The music of The Rite of Spring had an great influence on the development of music in the 20th century.

Stravinsky’s next idea for a ballet was Les noces, French for 'The Wedding'. Stravinsky went back to Russia to collect some things that would help him to compose it. When he returned to Switzerland World War I started.

Stravinsky’s family spent most of their time in Switzerland during the war. He was short of money because there was no more income from the Russian estates. The Ballets Russes could not perform any more in Paris. Stravinsky spent a lot of time working at Les Noces. He finished it in 1917 and played it to Diaghilev. It was another six years before it was performed. Stravinsky eventually chose to arrange it for four pianos, percussion, chorus and vocal soloists. It was performed at the Théâtre de la Gaîté Lyrique on 13 June 1923.

Because Switzerland was neutral in the war, Stravinsky was able to travel. He went to Italy where he met Gerald Tyrwhitt (who later became Lord Berners) and Prokofiev. He wrote Reynard and Rag-Time. He performed in America with Ballets Russes.

When the Russian Revolution broke out in February 1917 Stravinsky thought this would be good, but when the Bolshevik Revolution followed it became obvious that he would never be able to go back to Russia. He wrote L’histoire du soldat (The Soldier’s Tale). It was performed in Lausanne with Ernest Ansermet conducting. There would have been more performances but many people had influenza. When the war ended Stravinsky decided to move to France. He wrote a ballet called Pulcinella which was based on music by the 18th century composer Pergolesi. It was performed at the Paris Opéra on 15 May 1920. For some years Igor became interested in the music of the late 18th century, and the style of his work after 1920 is often described as neoclassical.

In 1920 Stravinsky’s family moved from Stravinsky to Brittany, then the following year they moved to Biarritz. Stravinsky composed a piece called Symphonies for Wind Instruments. It was soon performed in London at a concert which also included The Rite of Spring, conducted by Eugene Goossens in the Queen's Hall. He met a theatre designer called Serge Soudeikine and fell madly in love with Vera, who would later become his second wife.  Meanwhile, his first wife, Katerina, was in a sanitorium suffering from tuberculosis. Vera and Stravinsky saw one another as much as possible for the next 18 years. Meanwhile, Stravinsky’s mother managed to get out of Russia and she joined Stravinsky’s family in Biarritz. Stravinsky had to support a large family, and he decided he needed to work more as a conductor and pianist instead of composing large works. He composed smaller pieces, including the piano version of three dances from Petrouchka. Later, when his son was grown up, he composed a Concerto for two solo pianos for himself to play with his son. He did not compose any more for the Ballets Russes, but he did compose Oedipus rex as a special tribute to them. This work was a mixture of opera and oratorio. The words were in Latin and were written by Jean Cocteau. It was performed as a concert performance. Although he did not write for Diaghilev any more, he accepted an invitation from Ida Rubinstein to write a ballet called Le baiser de la fée (The fairy’s kiss) which was based on music by Tchaikovsky. Diaghilev was annoyed, but then he died in 1929 and the Ballets Russes company no longer carried on.

In 1926 Stravinsky, who belonged to the Russian Orthodox Church, had a deep religious experience which effected his music. The best of these religious pieces is the Symphony of Psalms, written for the Boston Symphony Orchestra’s 50th birthday celebrations.

Stravinsky met the violinist Dushkin and composed a Violin Concerto as well as the Duo concertante for violin and piano which the two musicians played together at many concerts. He became more and more in demand in the United States and wrote several works for American people. He was offered a job as professor at Harvard University. At this time a lot of his family were ill. Then his daughter died, his wife died and his mother died. He was ill himself. Then, by September 1939, just as World War II started, he was well enough to travel to North America.

Stravinsky was immediately invited to conduct many concerts in America. Vera arrived in America four months later and she and Stravinsky were married in Bedford, Massachusetts. They applied for American citizenship and settled in Hollywood. He was quite short of money and he accepted any invitation to compose music. He even accepted a private pupil.

Stravinsky composed a mass. It was not commissioned, he just wanted to compose it. It was performed in La Scala, Milan, in 1948 conducted by Ansermet. He then decided to compose a full-length opera in English. This was The Rake’s Progress. It was first performed in Venice in 1951. It is the best of his works in the neo-classical style. Another work from this period is his Symphony in C. It shows a different way of composing tonal music to the tonal works of classical composers.

He met a musician called Robert Craft who came to live with the family and helped Stravinsky sort out his compositions and papers. He was surprised to find that Stravinsky never visited Schoenberg, who only lived a few streets away. After Schoenberg died in 1951 Craft encouraged Stravinsky to listen to Schoenberg’s serial music. Soon Stravinsky started to use serialism in his own compositions. Craft travelled with Stravinsky and helped him a great deal, for example, by conducting some of the concerts, or rehearsing the orchestras before Stravinsky came.

In 1962 he was invited to the White House by President Kennedy. In the same year he returned to Russia for a visit. He had not been there for nearly half a century. It was a great success, and people in the USSR became more interested in Stravinsky’s music. It made Stravinsky very happy to know that Russians were interested in him again.

During his last years he became rather ill. Threni is one of his last compositions. It is a setting of the parts of the Lamentations of Jeremiah for voices and orchestra. He composed other religious works including Requiem Canticles. In 1969 he moved with his family to New York where he died two years later.

The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is a movement to save human life and health. Its headquarters are in Geneva, Switzerland.

Although it is a big international organisation, it is privately run. No government controls the Red Cross.

The Red Cross has a special job, given by international law. It is the only private group to have its jobs set out by international law.

The Red Cross, the Red Crescent and the Red Crystal,the three international symbols of the Red Cross

According to the Geneva conventions, there are five goals for International red cross and red crescent movements;

The International Monetary Fund (IMF) is an international organization. 189 countries are members of the International Monetary Fund. It has its headquarters in Washington, D.C., USA.

In the 1930s, many countries faced economic problems. The standard of living declined, and a great many people were unemployed. International trade became much smaller. Some countries reduced the value of their currencies. All these factors combined in the 1930s, and an economic depression resulted. By late 1939, the Second World War had started.

As the Second World War ended, most countries found that international values faced many restrictions and were not smooth. Leaders of many countries thought over these matters and discussed them in meetings and agreed on the Bretton Woods system. Thus, after the Second World War, many countries felt the need to have an organization to get help in monetary matters between countries. To begin with, 29 countries discussed the matter, and signed an agreement. The agreement was the Articles of Association of the International Monetary Fund. The International Monetary Fund came into being in 29th December 1945.

Any country may apply to become a member of the IMF. When a country applies for membership, the IMF’s executive board examines the application. If found suitable, the executive board gives its report to IMF’s Board of Governors. After the Board of Governor clears the application, the country may join the IMF. However, before joining, the country should fulfill legal requirements, if any, of its own country. Every member has a different voting right. Likewise, every country has a different right to draw funds. This depends on many factors, including the member country’s first subscription to the IMF. Currently IMF consists of 191 countries as stated on the official website.

The IMF does a number of supervisory works relating to financial dealings between different countries. Some of the works done by IMF are:

A Board of Directors manages the IMF. One tradition has governed the selection of two most senior posts of IMF. Firstly, IMF’s managing director is always European. World Bank's president is always from the United States of America.

Current managing director is Bulgarian economist Kristalina Georgieva.

The major countries of Europe and America control the IMF. This is because they have given more money to IMF by way of first subscriptions, and so have larger share of voting rights.

The International Court of Justice [French: La Cour internationale de justice (CIJ)], is an international organization. It is the main judicial organ or branch of the United Nations. In short, International Court of Justice is ICJ; sometimes people call it the World Court. In French language, it is Cour internationale de justice. Established ICJ in 1945, ICJ has its headquarters at The Hague, Netherlands. The ICJ began its working from 1946. It replaced an earlier similar court named Permanent Court of International Justice. The International Court of Justice is different from the International Criminal Court. The ICJ uses two languages, the English language and the French language.

The International Court of Justice has two major functions. Firstly, it settles disputes, which the member countries may bring before it. Secondly, it may give its opinions on legal matters. Since 1980s, many developing countries have been using the services of the ICJ. But, in 1986, the United States of America did not accept the court’s views on all matters, but rather selectively, on a case-to-case basis. Since the year 2000 the docket went down from 23 to 12 cases. In the meantime the staff tripled.

The ICJ has fifteen permanent judges. The UN General Assembly and the UN Security Council elects the judges. A judge serves for a nine-year period and may be re-elected if necessary. If a serving judge dies, another judge, from the same country he or she belonged to is generally elected to fill the vacant position. Elections are staggered, thus five judges (one-third of the Court) come up for election every three years.

The fifteen permanent judges are elected from a list of persons nominated by the national groups in the Permanent Court of Arbitration. The election process is set out in Articles 4-12 of the ICJ statute Generally, five members of the Security Council of the United Nations always have a judge from their country. These countries are China, France, Russia, United Kingdom, and the United States of America.

In some case, the ICJ allows Ad hoc judges. Thus, the countries in dispute have a right to nominate one judge each for that particular case, if desired. This right is not available if that country already has a judge of its nationality in the ICJ. Thus, sometimes, instead of fifteen, seventeen judges may be deciding a case.

There are many rules, which lay down the qualifications and conduct of the judges of the ICJ.

Generally, all the judges of the ICJ sit together to hear and decide any matter. However, sometimes smaller chambers of three to five judges hear and decide a case. Such chambers may be for special types of cases. Sometimes, the ICJ sets up ad hoc chambers to hear and decide particular disputes.

While deciding the case, the ICJ applies the principles of international law. It also uses the laws of the civilized world. This may be the civil and criminal law of major countries. It may also refer to legal writings, law books, and earlier decisions while deciding any matter.

James Clerk Maxwell FRSE (born 13 June 1831 in Edinburgh – died 5 November 1879) was a British mathematician, physicist and discoverer of Maxwell's equations.

Maxwell grew up in a rich religious family. In 1845, when he was only 14, he wrote a paper describing a way of drawing mathematical curves with a piece of string. In 1847 he started studying mathematics at the University of Edinburgh. In 1850 Maxwell changed to Peterhouse and then Trinity College at the University of Cambridge. He won prizes from the university for his work and was given his degree in 1854. From 1855 to 1872 he did research on colour blindness.

In 1856 Maxwell was made a professor of 'Natural Philosophy' (which is what science was called then) at Marischal College, Aberdeen. He worked there until the two colleges in Aberdeen joined together in 1860 and he lost his job. He then became a professor at King's College London. In 1861 he was elected to the Royal Society.

In 1871, he became the first Cavendish Professor of Physics at Cambridge. He studied many things, but is known best for his mathematical work on electromagnetism and on the behaviour of gases. He used the experiments of Michael Faraday  to see how magnetism and electricity were connected.  This helped him to make his  equations that allowed scientists to understand light and radio waves.

He lived at Glenlair House, his family estate near the village of Parton, Castle Douglas in Kirkcudbrightshire. Maxwell died in 1879 from cancer, and is buried in the graveyard at Parton Church.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau, (28 June 1712 – 2 July 1778) was a famous French-speaking philosopher. He was born in Geneva, Switzerland and always described himself as being Genevan.

Rousseau lived in the 18th century during the Age of Enlightenment. His political ideology influenced the French Revolution and aided the development of nationalism and socialist theories.

Rousseau was also a composer, writing numerous books about music theory. Rousseau authored Confessions, an autobiography, one of the first of its kind. Many later philosophers were influenced by him. He wrote a novel Julie, ou la nouvelle Héloïse, which was a best-seller and influenced 19th century writers of romanticism.

Rousseau believed that men were born good and innocent, and that corruption and sadness happened because of life experiences and experiences in society.  He believed that if society were gone, man would be happy and pure once again.

Rousseau is most famous for his social contract ideology, which is often compared to the social contract of John Locke. This ideology is stated in Rousseau's book, The Social Contract.

Jean-Paul Charles Aymard Sartre (21 June 1905 – 15 April 1980) was a French existentialist philosopher, novelist, playwright, screenwriter,  and critic. He won the Nobel Prize in Literature for 1964, but refused it, saying "a writer should not allow himself to be turned into an institution". He was a Marxist and an atheist.

Sartre was born in Paris, France. He studied philosophy at the École Normale Supérieure, an élite (high quality) education establishment. In 1929, Sartre graduated with a doctorate in philosophy. Sartre served in the French Army from 1929 to 1931.

In 1929 at the École Normale, he met Simone de Beauvoir, who studied at the Sorbonne. She went on to become a noted philosopher, writer, and feminist. The two became inseparable and lifelong companions. In 1938, Sartre wrote the novel called La Nausée (Nausea). This story explains the way of thinking of existentialism. Existentialism is a way of thinking about human freedom.

In 1939 Sartre was drafted into the French army. France was at war with Germany, because Germany had invaded France (World War II) Sartre was captured by German troops in 1940, and Sartre spent nine months as a prisoner of war in a camp. Sartre was released from the prison camp (jail) in 1941. He then began working as a teacher again. He made friends with other writers and thinkers such as Merleau-Ponty, Jean-Toussaint and Dominique Desanti, and Jean Kanapa.

In 1943, Sartre wrote a book about philosophy (ways of thinking) called L'Être et le Néant, which means Being and Nothingness. In this book, Sartre said that when people tried too hard to conform to the rules of society (or of their country), then people did not really make their own decisions. And he concluded that life is useless disaster.

In 1945, Sartre started a newspaper called Les Temps Modernes (Modern Times), which had articles about politics, art and literature. He also began writing a group of novels (stories) called Les Chemins de la Liberté (The Roads to Freedom). In 1946 Sartre wrote a book about philosophy (ways of thinking) called Existentialism is a Humanism, which explains existentialism.

In the 1950s and 1960s, Sartre became involved in politics. Sartre said that France should leave Algeria, a country where France had many soldiers. In the 1960s, Sartre said that the Vietnam War was bad. In 1960, he wrote the Critique de la raison dialectique (Critique of Dialectical Reason). In the 1960s, Sartre had many arguments with Louis Althusser, a man who also believed in communism.

Sartre died of oedema of the lung in 1980 in Paris. His body is buried in Cimetière du Montparnasse in Paris. His funeral was attended by 50,000 people.

An ideology is a collection of ideas or beliefs shared by a group of people. It may be a connected set of  ideas, or a style of thought, or a world-view. It was coined by a French philosopher, Destutt de Tracy in 1801/5.

There are two main types of ideologies: political ideologies, and epistemological ideologies. Political ideologies are sets of ethical ideas about how a country should be run in matters of economic, social, internal, foreign and fiscal policies. Epistemological ideologies are sets of ideas about the philosophy, the Universe, and how people should make decisions.

There are many different types of ideologies. Communism, socialism, and capitalism are political/economical ideologies.

Many political parties base their political action and program on an ideology. In social studies, a political ideology is a certain ethical set of values, principles, doctrines, myths, or symbols of a social movement, institution, or class which explains how society should work. It offers a political and cultural blueprint for a certain social order. A political ideology largely concerns itself with how to allocate power and to what ends it should be used. Some parties follow a certain ideology very closely, while others may take broad inspiration from a group of related ideologies without specifically embracing any one of them.

An ideology is a collection of ideas. Typically, each ideology contains certain ideas on what it considers to be the best form of government (e.g. democracy, theocracy, etc.), and the best economic system (e.g. capitalism, socialism, etc.). Sometimes the same word is used to identify both an ideology and one of its main ideas. For instance, "socialism" may refer to an economic system, or it may refer to an ideology which supports that economic system.

Ideologies also identify themselves by their position on the political spectrum (such as the left, the center or the right), though this is very often controversial. Finally, ideologies can be distinguished from political strategies (e.g. populism) and from single issues that a party may be built around (e.g. legalization of marijuana).

Today, many commentators claim that we are living in a post-ideological age, in which redemptive, all-encompassing ideologies have failed. This is often associated with Francis Fukuyama's writings on "the end of history".

Israel (), officially the State of Israel (), is a country in southwestern Asia on the eastern side of the Mediterranean Sea. Its capital city is Jerusalem.

Israel's population is around 9.8 million people. This includes around 7 million Jews. Most of Israel's other citizens (1.2 million) are Arabs and include Muslims, Christians, and Druze. Israel is approximately 470 kilometers (290 miles) long and 135 kilometers (85 miles) wide at its widest point, making it a relatively small country in terms of land area.

There is a long history of conflict between Israel and Palestine. Many human rights organizations classify Israel as an apartheid state due to its actions against Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.

Israel has a relatively high standard of living and life expectancy. Almost all of its people can read and write.

According to the The Economist's Democracy Index, Israel is the only democratic republic in the Middle East.

Israel's history begins thousands of years ago, in ancient times. Two major world religions, Judaism and Christianity, began here. The Jewish nation and religion first grew in this region.

Jews and Christians call Palestine the Holy Land because many   in the Bible happened there, and because some commandments of Jewish law can be accomplished only on its soil.

Canaanites and other Semitic peoples first populated the area around four thousand years ago. According to the Bible, the first Jewish patriarch, Abraham, lived at this time.

Around 1400 BCE, another Semitic people called the Hebrews settled in Canaan under the leadership of Moses and Joshua. They were named the “Children of Israel” or “Israelites”, and were divided into 12 tribes.

A few centuries later, the Hebrews made Saul their leader. The next king, David, began the Kingdom of Israel in about 1000 BCE and made Jerusalem its capital city.  His son, Solomon, built the first Temple for the worship of their God.

Solomon died around 928 BCE, and his kingdom broke into two countries. The northern country kept the name Israel.  The southern country, called Judah, kept Jerusalem as its capital.

The Assyrians conquered the Kingdom of Israel in 732 BCE. Then, in 586 BCE, the Babylonians conquered the Kingdom of Judah and destroyed Solomon's Temple. In response, many Jews returned from Babylonia to rebuild their country and their temple.

First the Persians, then the Greeks, and then the Romans ruled the Land of Israel.

Early in the first century,  Roman soldiers defeated the Jews in modern-day Israel. In 70 CE, they destroyed Jerusalem and the Second Jewish Temple there.  Again in 135 CE, the Romans defeated the Jews and killed or took many of them to other places.

The number of Jews living in Israel became much smaller. Many were forced to live in other countries. This  of Jewish communities outside of Israel is called the Diaspora.

Many of the Jews who  moved to the Galilee. Jewish teachers wrote important Jewish books, called the Mishnah and part of the Talmud there, in the 2nd to 4th centuries CE.

The Roman and then the Byzantine Empires ruled until 635 CE, when Arabs conquered the region. Different Arab rulers, and for a while Crusaders, ruled the land. In 1516, the Ottoman Empire conquered the land and ruled the region until the 20th century.

The name "Palestine" is the English version of the Romans' name for the area, which was Syria Palaestina. This name in turn was derived from that of the Philistines, one of ancient Israel's historical enemies.

Since the Diaspora, there have been many attempts to make a new homeland for the Jewish people. Starting in 1860, the Zionist movement advocated for the creation of a Jewish nation in Israel. Jews from all over the world began to come to the area and settled in desert zones. These zones were first governed by the Ottoman Empire, and later by the British Empire.

On 14 May 1948, British control over Palestine ended. Jews living in Palestine (under the leadership of David Ben-Gurion) declared independence for a new Jewish state. On the next day, the armies of four Arab countries—Egypt, Syria, Transjordan, and Iraq—invaded the territory of Israel and the former Mandatory Palestine, starting the 1948 Arab–Israeli War. Military units from Yemen, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, and Sudan would also join the war. The purpose of the invasion was to prevent the establishment of the Jewish state. The Arab League stated the invasion was to restore order and prevent further . After a year of fighting, a ceasefire was declared and temporary borders, known as the Green Line, were established. Jordan annexed what became known as the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and Egypt occupied the Gaza Strip.

The UN estimated that more than 700,000 Palestinians had left during the war, with many of them forced to leave. This became known as the Nakba ("catastrophe"). At the same time, over 900,000 Jews left the Arab states, with many of them also being forced to leave.

In 1956, Israel, Britain, and France invaded the Sinai Peninsula, in an attempt to overthrow Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser, and to retake the Suez Canal (for Britain and France). However, strong diplomatic pressure from the United States and the Soviet Union forced them to withdraw.

In May 1967, Egypt sent its army near the border with Israel,  UN peacekeepers that had been in the Sinai Peninsula since 1957, and blocked Israel's access to the Red Sea. Other Arab states also prepared their armies. Israel  that these actions were a casus belli, and fearing another all-out invasion by their Arab neighbors, launched a pre-emptive strike against Egypt on 5 June. Shortly after, Jordan, Syria, and Iraq attacked Israel. In the following Six-Day War, Israel captured the West Bank from Jordan, the Gaza Strip and Sinai Peninsula from Egypt, and the Golan Heights from Syria. Israeli forces expelled ~300,000 Palestinians from the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Jerusalem's boundaries were increased, incorporating East Jerusalem. The 1949 Green Line became the administrative boundary between Israel and the occupied territories.

Following the 1967 war and the "Three Nos" resolution of the Arab League, Israel faced attacks from the Egyptians in the Sinai Peninsula during the 1967–1970 War of Attrition, and from Palestinian groups targeting Israelis in their occupied territories, globally, and in Israel itself. The most prominent among the Palestinian and Arab militant groups was the Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO), established in 1964, which initially committed itself to "armed struggle as the only way to liberate the homeland". In the late 1960s and early 1970s, Palestinian groups launched attacks against Israeli and Jewish targets around the world, including a massacre of Israeli athletes at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich. The Israeli government responded with an assassination campaign against the organisers of the massacre, a bombing and a raid on the PLO headquarters in Lebanon.

On 6 October 1973, the Egyptian and Syrian armies launched a surprise attack against Israeli forces in the Sinai Peninsula and Golan Heights, opening the Yom Kippur War. The war ended on 25 October, with Israel repelling Egyptian and Syrian forces but suffering great losses.

In 1978, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin signed the Camp David Accords. The next year, in 1979, they signed the Egypt–Israel peace treaty. In return, Israel withdrew from the Sinai Peninsula and agreed to enter negotiations over autonomy for Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. This was the first peace treaty between Israel and an Arab state. 15 years later, in 1994, the Israel–Jordan peace treaty was signed, making Jordan the second Arab country to normalize relations with Israel.

In early 1979, the Iranian Revolution saw the overthrow of Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, the Shah of Iran, and the replacement of Iran's government with a hostile, extremist Islamism regime, which became an enemy of both Israel and the the West, beginning the Iran–Israel proxy conflict.

Since the 1980s, Israel has waged several wars in Lebanon to fight against the PLO and later, Hezbollah, beginning with the 1982 Lebanon War, and mostly recently, the Israel–Hezbollah conflict (2023–present). However, there a number of atrocities committed against the civilian population, with the most notable incident of this being the Sabra and Shatila massacre. In 2000, Israel withdrew from Lebanon. Subsequently, Israel fought two more wars against Hezbollah, one in in 2006, and another one since 2023.

In 2005, Israel withdrew from the Gaza Strip. However, 2 years later, in 2007, the Hamas militant organization seized control of the territory from the Palestinian Fatah party, in a violent coup. Beginning in 2008, Hamas and Israel fought five separate wars, in 2008, 2012, 2014, 2021, and mostly recently, in 2023.

By the 2010s, increasing regional cooperation between Israel and Arab League countries had been established, with the countries drawn increasingly closer by shared security interests, and their concerns with Iran. In September 2020, this culminated in the signing of the Abraham Accords, with the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, and Morocco all normalizing ties with Israel, marking the first peace agreement between Israel and an Arab state since 1994. Sudan also signed onto the Accords, but had not yet ratified it by 2025. The Israeli security situation shifted from the traditional Arab–Israeli conflict towards the Iran–Israel proxy conflict, and direct confrontation with Iran during the Syrian Civil War.

On 7 October 2023, over 6,800 Hamas terrorists invaded Israel and launched the October 7 attacks, massacring 1,915 Israelis (including 815 civilians), and taking 251 hostages, which started the 2023 Gaza War. This war quickly expanded into a regional conflict, including a war with Hezbollah in Lebanon, a conflict involving attacks by the Houthis on Israel and on international shipping in the Red Sea, attacks by Iranian militia groups on US military bases in Iraq, Syria, and Jordan, and two rounds of attacks between Iran and Israel in April 2024 and October 2024. Hezbollah's defeat in Lebanon led to a massive offensive led by Hay'at Tahrir al-Sham (HTS) in Syria, restarting the Syrian Civil War after a 4-year pause, and leading to the Fall of the Assad regime on 8 December 2024. In June 2025, the regional conflict culminated in a full-scale war between Israel and Iran, with Israel opening the war with large-scale surprise attacks on Iran's military leadership, top nuclear scientists, and nuclear program. which later became known as the Twelve-Day War. The war saw the entry of the United States on 22 June 2025, with a fleet of 14 B-2 bombers destroying 3 fortified nuclear sites in central Iran, in a massive airstrike.

Israel is a small country,  but it has mountains, deserts, shores, valleys and plains.

The countries of Lebanon and Syria are to the north of Israel; Jordan is on the east; and Egypt is to the southwest. Israel also occupies 60% of the Palestinian West Bank.

Jerusalem is the biggest city in Israel. It is also Israel's official capital city. However, most countries do not recognize this, because they believe Jerusalem should be split up or be under international control. Tel Aviv, Haifa, Beersheba and Rishon LeZion are also large cities.

In the west, Israel's long coastline meets the Mediterranean Sea. A coastal plain runs alongside this coastline.

To the north, Israel has a mountainous region called the Galilee. On the eastern side of the Galilee, there is a low area called a depression that includes the Hula Valley and the Sea of Galilee.

To the south, there is the Negev Desert: a barren area of flat plains, mountains, and craters. Israel's southern-most city is Eilat, which is located on the Gulf of Aqaba (a part of the Red Sea).

In the center of the country, there is a range of mountains that runs from north to south. The Jordan River also runs north to south, starting in the Sea of Galilee in the north and emptying into the Dead Sea in the south. The land next to the Dead Sea -426 meters below sea level: the lowest in the world.

The climate is hot and dry in the summers, with high humidity in lower places like the coastal plain. It is cool and rainy in the winters, rarely going below freezing temperatures. Rain falls mostly in the north, and mostly in the winter (between the months of November and April). Snow falls at higher elevations. While much of Israel has a Mediterranean climate, certain regions, such as the Golan Heights and Jerusalem, experience snowfall during the winter months.

To make it possible for crops to grow in the south, Israel built a very big irrigation system to bring water to the area from the north.

Israel is a parliamentary democracy. All Israeli citizens who are 18 years or older have the right to vote.  The Israeli parliament is called the Knesset.

The Knesset has 120 . Each member is elected for no more than four years at a time. The Knesset makes laws, helps decide national policy, and approves budgets and taxes. The current Knesset is the country's 25th, sworn in on November 15, 2022.

Israel has no  constitution. Instead, the " Laws" made by the Knesset say how the government must work and give civil rights to the citizens.

s do not vote for individual s in Knesset elections. Instead, they vote for a party. Before the election, each party prepares a list of its candidates. The list might include a single candidate or over a hundred. Voters can see each party's list and decide which party they want to vote for.

In an election, each party wins a certain percentage of the votes. This percentage decides how many representatives, or seats, the party gets in the Knesset. For example, if a party list gets 33 percent of the vote, it gets 40 Knesset seats.

The head of Israel's government is the Prime Minister. They are usually the  of the party that has the most seats in the Knesset. The prime minister must keep the support of a majority of Knesset members in order to stay in office.

The prime minister  ministers to the cabinet, which The Knesset approves. The ministers are  for subjects such as education, defense, and social welfare. The Prime Minister is the head of the cabinet; they decide what will be discussed at meetings, and they make the final decisions.

Benjamin Netanyahu has been the Israeli Prime Minister since December 29, 2022. The current government is called the Sixth Netanyahu Government because it was the sixth time Netanyahu has been elected.

The President is the head of state. The Knesset elects the president for seven years.

Most of the president's duties are ceremonial: they can sign laws and treaties approved by the Knesset, appoint judges, and choose members of some public organizations. They also accept the documents from ambassadors and foreign diplomats bring when they are .

Isaac Herzog has been the President of Israel since July 2021.

Israel has many political parties, with a large  of . In the elections of 2020, 20 different parties won seats in the Knesset.

The parties belong to several main groups. The biggest groups are the Zionist parties. These include the conservative liberals (such as HaLikud); social democrats (like HaAvoda, the Labor Party); and religious Zionists. There are also smaller religious Orthodox Jewish parties; special-interest parties; and Israeli Arab parties.

Usually, a single political party does not win enough seats in the Knesset by itself to have a . If this happens, one of the bigger parties asks for support from the other parties (including the religious ones) to form a coalition government. This gives these small parties a lot of power despite their size.

The Likud supports free market  and does not think government should be involved much with the economy. It also believes strongly in protecting Israel's security. It wants Israel to make fewer concessions (to give less away) while  with the Palestinians and the Arab states.

The Labor Party supports government  of the economy, but also believes in a limited amount of free enterprise. It is willing to make more concessions (to give more away) in order to reach an agreement in the peace process.

When it gained its independence in 1948, Israel was a poor country that produced very little agriculture or industry. But Israel's economy has grown tremendously since 1948.  The nation now enjoys a very high standard of living, despite having few natural resources and a limited fresh water supply.

Many immigrants came to Israel in the years immediately after independence.  Many of these immigrants were skilled laborers and professionals who greatly aided the nation's economic development.

Many of Israel's service industry workers are employed by the government or by businesses owned by the government. Government workers provide many of the services needed by Israel's large immigrant population, such as housing, education, and job training.

Tourism is one of the country's important sources of income. Tourists visit many archaeological, historical, and religious sites; museums; nature reserves; and beach resorts in Israel.

Tourists support many of Israel's service industries, especially trade, restaurants, and hotels. Approximately 4 million tourists visited Israel in 2018.

Tel Aviv and Haifa are Israel's major manufacturing centers. Government-owned plants make equipment for Israel's large armed forces.

The cutting of imported diamonds is a major industry. Israel is also the world's largest exporter of drones.

Israel produces most of the food it needs to feed its people, except for grain. Exporting agricultural products provides enough income to import needed foods. Israel's agricultural products include citrus and other fruits; eggs; grain; poultry; and vegetables.

The government develops, helps finance, and controls agricultural activity, including fishing and forestry.

Most Israeli farmers use modern agricultural methods. Machines now do much of the work that people used to do. Water drawn from the Sea of Galilee irrigates much of the land in Israel.

Most Israeli farms are organized as moshavim or kibbutzim.  Israel also has some private farms.

Israel's biggest source of minerals is the Dead Sea, the world's saltiest body of water. Bromine, magnesium, potash and table salt are all extracted from the sea. The most important of these is potash, used mainly in fertilizers.

In the Negev Desert, there are mines for phosphates, copper, clay, and gypsum.

Israel has few energy sources. It has no coal deposits or hydroelectric power resources, and only small amounts of crude oil and natural gas. As a result, Israel depends on imported crude oil for gasoline and diesel for transportation, and coal producing electricity for its energy needs.

Solar energy – energy from the sun – is used widely to heat water for houses. Israel is developing other ways to use solar energy to power houses and factories.

In 2008, Israel began investing in building electric cars and stations to charge them. There may also be large natural gas fields in the Mediterranean Sea that Israel could develop.

In 2006, Israeli exports grew by 11% to just over $29 billion. The hi-tech sector accounted for $14 billion of this: a 20% increase from the previous year.

Because it has few natural resources, Israel imports more goods than it exports.  The country's main imports include chemicals, computer equipment, grain, iron and steel, military equipment, petroleum products, rough diamonds, and textiles.

Israel's main exports are chemical products, citrus fruits, clothing, electronic equipment, fertilizers, polished diamonds, military equipment, and processed foods.  The nation's main trading partners include the Benelux countries (Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg); Germany; Italy; Switzerland; the United Kingdom; and the United States.

Israel has a well-developed transportation system. Most middle-class Israeli families either own a car or have one that an employer provides. Paved roads reach almost all parts of the country.  Public transportation, both in cities and between them, is provided primarily by bus.

Ben-Gurion Airport is Israel's main international airport. It is near Tel Aviv. Smaller airports are located at Haifa and at Eilat. El Al, Israel's international airline, flies regularly to the United States, Europe, and parts of Asia.

Israel has three major deepwater ports: Haifa, Ashdod, and Eilat.

Israel's communication system is one of the best in the Middle East. Israel has about 30 daily newspapers, about half of which are in Hebrew. The rest are in Arabic, Russian, Yiddish, or one of several foreign languages. The Israel Broadcasting Authority, a public corporation set up by the government, runs the television and nonmilitary radio stations.

Ernst  ( in Swedish, but usually  in English) (14 July 1918 – 30 July 2007) was a Swedish stage and movie director. Ingmar Bergman found bleakness and despair as well as comedy and hope in his indelible explorations of the human condition. He is regarded as one of the great masters of modern cinema.

Many filmmakers worldwide, including Americans Woody Allen  and Robert Altman,  the Russian director Andrei Tarkovsky  and the Taiwanese director Ang Lee,  have cited the work of Bergman as a major influence on their work.

Ernst Ingmar Bergman was born in Uppsala, Sweden to a Lutheran minister of Danish descent, Erik Bergman (later chaplain to the King of Sweden), and his wife, Karin (née Åkerblom). He grew up surrounded by religious imagery and discussion. His father was a rather conservative parish minister and strict family father: Ingmar was locked up in dark closets for infractions such as wetting the bed. "While father preached away in the pulpit and the congregation prayed, sang or listened," Ingmar writes in his biography Laterna Magica,

He performed two five-month stretches of mandatory military service and studied Art and Literature at Stockholm University College (the later Stockholm University), but without graduating. Instead, he developed an interest in theatre and later in cinema (though he had become a "genuine movie addict" by the early 1930s).

Although he grew up in a devout Lutheran household, Bergman stated that he lost his faith at age eight but came to terms with this fact only when making Winter Light.

From the early sixties, Bergman lived much of his life on the island of Fårö, Gotland, Sweden, where he made a number of his movies. Bergman moved to Munich for a while following a protracted battle with the Swedish government over alleged tax evasion, and did not return to make another movie in Sweden until 1982, when he directed Fanny and Alexander. Bergman said this would be his last movie, and that he would go on to direct theater. Since that time he did make a number of movies for television, but later retired to Fårö, stating in 2004 that he would never again leave the island.

Ingmar Bergman died at his home on Fårö, in the early morning of 30 July 2007, aged 89, the same day that another great movie director, Michelangelo Antonioni, died.

The first four marriages ended in divorce. The last ended when his wife Ingrid died of stomach cancer in 1995, aged 65. Aside from his marriages, Bergman had romantic relationships with actresses Harriet Andersson (1952–55), Bibi Andersson (1955–59), and Liv Ullmann (1965–70). He was the father of writer Linn Ullmann with Liv Ullmann. In all, Bergman had nine children, one of whom died before him.

In 1971, Bergman received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award at the Academy Awards ceremony. Three of his films won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. The list of his nominations and awards:

An inductor is an electrical device used in electrical circuits because it acts like inertia in the electrical circuit. Just like inertia opposes the change in state of motion, inductor opposes the change in electric current.

An inductor is usually made from a coil of conducting material, like copper wire, that is then wrapped around a core made from either air or a magnetic metal.  If you use a more magnetic material as the core, you can get the magnetic field around the inductor to be pushed in towards the inductor, giving it better inductance.  Small inductors can also be put onto integrated circuits using the same ways that are used to make transistors.  Aluminum is usually used as the conducting material in this case.

While a capacitor reacts against changes in voltage, an inductor reacts against changes in current. The inductor affects the current like inertia.

In general, the relationship between the time-varying voltage v(t) across an inductor with inductance L and the time-varying current i(t) passing through it is described by the differential equation:

Inductors are used often in analog circuits. Two or more inductors that have coupled magnetic flux make a transformer. Transformers are used in every power grid around the world.

Inductors are also used in electrical transmission systems, where they are used to lower the amount of voltage an electrical device gives off or lower the fault current.

Because inductors are heavier than other electrical components, people have been using them in electrical equipment less often.

Inductors with an iron core are used for audio equipment, power conditioning, inverter systems, rapid transit and industrial power supplies.

Electrical engineers like to reduce diagrams of electrical circuits, no matter how complicated, to an equivalent circuit consisting of a network of just four different types of component.  These four basic components are emfs, resistors, capacitors, and inductors.  An inductor is usually represented by a little solenoid in circuit diagrams. In practice, inductors generally consist of short air-cored solenoids wound from enameled copper wire.

An internal combustion engine is an engine in which combustion, or the burning of fuel, occurs on the inside. This differs from external combustion engines where the fire is outside the engine, such as a steam engine.

There are many kinds of internal combustion engine but the term often means the machine that Niklaus Otto invented.  In this kind, fire makes pressure increase inside a cylinder. The pressure pushes a piston which is attached to a wheel by a crank. The rod pushes the wheel and makes it spin around. The spinning wheel is attached to other wheels. The engine is very strong and can make all the wheels move.

There can be many kinds of internal combustion engines such as the single piston engine, the inline engine, the flat engine, the V engine, the VR engine, the W engine, the X engine, the U engine, the H engine, the horizontal K engine, the opposed piston engine, the delta engine, the Wankel or rotary engine and the radial engine which is commonly used in planes.

The most common layouts among these engines are the V layout, and the inline layout. In the V engine, the pistons are aligned in a V shape. There can be V twin engines, with 2 pistons, V3 engines, V4 engines, V6 engines, V8 engines, up to V24 engines. The VR layout is the same as a V layout except the angle between the V shape is smaller making the overall drive smoother. In inline engines, the pistons are aligned in a straight line. There can be inline 1 engines, also called a singular piston engine, all the way up to a straight 14 which was mainly used in older models of cars. Flat engines are the same as inline engines but are aligned horizontally.

W, X, U, H, Horizontal K, Delta and opposed piston engines all have different layouts. In the W engine, the pistons are aligned in a W shape if looked at from the front. The Bugatti Chiron, one of the fastest cars in the world, features a W engine. The pistons in a X are aligned to look like an X from the front. In the U engine, there a 2 inline engine with separate crankshafts and a shared output shaft. When looked at from the front of the engine block, it resembles a U shape. H engines are U engines except there are 2 more inline engines attached to the bottom of the existing inline engines from the U engine. The H and the U layout can be configured vertically or horizontally. In delta engines, the pistons are aligned in a triangle shape. There are 2 pistons per cylinder/combustion chamber, and therefore the minimum amount of pistons in a delta engine is 6. Horizontal K engines have 2 flat pistons facing opposite each other at the bottom and a V engine above them, making them look like a horizontal K. The Opposed piston engines also have 2 pistons per cylinder. They can be aligned vertically or horizontally. When there are only 2 pistons in the engine, they can be called boxer engine.

Radial engines are commonly used in planes but are rarely used in cars. An example of this is the Porsche 356 and the 1939 Plymouth Pickup. The pistons in a radial engine are aligned in a star shape. When having multiple sets of pistons, the engines can be stacked beside each other.

Rotary/Wankel engines work the same as a piston engine except they don't have a piston but instead have a rotor that also cycles through the 4 main stages of engines (intake, compression, combustion and exhaust).

There are many different parts to an engine. They include pistons, camshafts, crankshafts, timing belts, and valves. All parts of an engine need to be fully functional for it to work and all parts have a separate role. An engine is usually started by first sending power from the car battery to the ignition coil which then causes an engine spark. The spark then ignites combustion in the cylinders and the combustion starts the engine.

There can be petrol or diesel engines in a vehicle. In petrol or gasoline engines, it is required to have an ignition system to burn the fuel and air mixture. In diesel engines, the  ignition system is not required to burn the fuel.  Diesel is similar to heating oil. It is burnt through extreme compression.

The car is started using a powerful electric motor, called a starter motor. The starter solenoid converts electrical energy into mechanical energy or movement) and when it starts the ignition switch  connects a circuit, sending power to the starter relay. It then sends 2 jolts of electricity into the solenoid, the larger burst directly from the battery pack and the other from the ignition. The magnetic field created from the solenoid connects two metal contact points, one being the solenoid plunger, together which then relays the electricity into the starter motor. The plunger also engages a fork which pushes the pinion gear (connected to the starter motor) to engage the flywheel automatically, starting the engine.

For extra power, more air is needed to increase the energy evolved per unit of fuel. This is where forced induction must take place. There are some ways of creating forced induction such as turbochargers and superchargers. Turbochargers rely on the volume and velocity of the exhaust to spin the turbine wheel in the middle of the turbocharger. Turbochargers should consume less power from the engine than superchargers and therefore suffer bad throttle response. This delay can also be referred to as turbo lag. Smaller turbochargers spool quickly and deliver more boost pressure at lower engine speeds but suffers at higher RPMs. Bigger turbochargers can deliver more power at higher revs but suffer low throttle response. There can be many turbochargers in a car, but the most common amount being 1 or 2. Superchargers have close to no lag time as the compressor is constantly spinning proportionally to the engine speed. They require torque from the engine to operate. Some common types of superchargers are the Roots-type supercharger, a Screw-type supercharger, and a Centrifugal-type supercharger. In a Roots-type supercharger there are paddles on two drums that are continuously rotating, that force air into the intake. The Roots-type supercharger is a positive displacement device and therefore has the advantage of producing the same pressure ratio at any engine speed. A Screw-type supercharger, like the Roots-type supercharger, is a positive displacement device. They have 2 screws that compress the air and are more efficient than roots type as they create a cooler air output than a roots supercharger but are more difficult to manufacture. A centrifugal-type supercharger, is not a positive displacement device. Although it looks like a turbocharger, they are very different as the power source of the centrifugal supercharger is the engines crankshaft. A turbocharger uses the exhaust gas to spin the compressor.

When using forced induction, the air temperature rises dramatically. To cool the air at higher temperatures, an intercooler is needed. An intercooler cools the air before it enters the cylinder (combustion chamber) using air or water. When hot air enters the combustion chamber, it decreases the fuel efficiency as warm air holds less oxygen than cool air. An air to air intercooler uses the cool air from outside to cool the hot air as it enters the intercooler. The more surface area the intercooler has the cooler the air can get. There are 2 types of air to air intercooler, the bar and plate intercooler and the tube and fin intercooler. Bar and plate intercoolers can cool the air to lower temperature but a tube and fin intercooler cost less and weigh less. In air to water intercoolers, instead of air from outside, it uses a cool liquid to cool the air as it passes though and then uses a radiator to cool the cooling liquid. Air to water intercooler are more complex, heavier and more expensive than air to water intercoolers but can be more efficient.

Cars can also have gears. The gears are controlled by the transmission. They can either be manual, automatic or Continuously Variable Transmission. Gear ratios

The intake manifold is where the car gets the oxygen to burn the fuel

Exhaust in a car is the fumes that come out of the pipe or pipes (normally in back of a car but can be on the sides)

Engines need oil to make them slippery or the moving parts would grind together and stick. Parts of a car engine are measured to 0.01 of a millimetre and some engine parts fit together very tightly.

Most road vehicles use the internal combustion engine, and most of those use the four-stroke engine.

Gas turbines are internal combustion engines that work continuously, not by strokes. Rocket engines and guns are internal combustion engines but they do not turn wheels.

Information technology (or IT) is a word referring to all forms of technology used to create, store, exchange and use information in its various forms, such as data, voice, photos, business, conversations, still images, motion pictures, multimedia presentations.

The modern word Information Technology was coined by Leavitt and Whisle. In 1958 a Harvard Business Review included, “The new technology does not yet have a single established name. We shall call it information technology.”

Information technology is the concept that includes every process of information flow, such as data collection, processing, storage, search, transmission, and reception. In the information society, information technology is one of the most necessary industries. As technology advances day by day, IT has developed into an essential part. It is also attracting future industries.

In the future, the use of information technology will be more important in the overall industry. The development of the internet made it possible for the world to be connected. IT will be a power that makes an increasing number of promising occupations and science and technology.

Now, people have been using it to refer to other aspects of technology.  It now covers many more fields of study than it has covered in the past.

Characterized by a principal technology used to solve the input, processing, output and communication problems of the time:

Early 1600s, William Oughtred, an English clergyman, invented the slide rule.

The discovery of ways to harness electricity was the key advance made during this period. Knowledge and information could now be converted into electrical impulses.

A degree in computer science can be expected to concentrate on the scientific aspects of computing, while a degree in information technology can be expected to concentrate on the business and communication applications of computing. There is more emphasis on these two areas in the electronic commerce, e-business and business information technology undergraduate courses. Specific names for the degrees vary across countries, and even universities within countries.

This is in contrast to a Bachelor of Science in Information Technology which is a bachelor's degree typically conferred after a period of three to four years of an undergraduate course of study in Information Technology (IT). The degree itself is a Bachelor of Science with institutions conferring degrees in the fields of information technology and related fields.

Many employers require software developers or programmers to have a Bachelor of Science in Computer Science degree; however, those seeking to hire for positions such as network administrators or database managers would require a Bachelors of Science in Information Technology or an equivalent degree.

Graduates with an information technology background are able to perform technology tasks relating to the processing, storing, and communication of information between computers, mobile phones, and other electronic devices. Information technology as a field emphasizes the secure management of large amounts of diverse information and its accessibility via a wide variety of systems both local and world-wide.

In economics, different kinds of manufacturing and services are broken down into groups called industries. The word comes from a Latin word meaning "working diligently at a task". There are many different industries, like mining, farming and logging. The industrial revolution made new industries.

An industry produces goods or services which are of a common set of qualities and which are indistinguishable (called homogeneous, in economics). It uses standardised processes for production, mass production and division of labor.

Slavery, which is forcing people to make goods and services, has happened since ancient times throughout the world as a way to have low-cost production. It usually produces goods for which profit depends on economies of scale.  International law has declared slavery illegal.

The industrial revolution (from the mid-18th century to the mid-19th century) saw the development and popularization of using machines to make goods instead of using hands. The industrial revolution played a role in the abolition of slavery in Europe and in North America.

Ibn Battuta (1304 – 1368 or 1369) was a Moroccan explorer. He is known for the account of his journeys called the Rihla ("Voyage"). He travelled for nearly 30 years and covered most of the Islamic world. He also explored West Africa, Southern and Eastern Europe, South Asia, Central Asia, Southeast Asia and China. This distance was more than Marco Polo travelled; about . Ibn Battuta was considered the greatest traveller of the medieval period.

Battuta also made  maps that were used by cartographers. He also met Mohammad Bin Tughlaq and wrote a book called "The Travels Of Ibn Battutta".

Ibn Battuta was born on February 24, 1304 in Tangier. His family consisted of judges and scholars of Islamic law. At age 21, Ibn Battuta started his long exploration when he went on the Hajj. This is a year-long pilgrimage that brings Muslims closer to God. Ibn Battuta first went across North Africa (Maghreb), to the great port Alexandria in 1326. Ibn Battuta spent 30 years visiting every Muslim country of his day. He recorded details about the social and political life he saw on his journeys. He gave information all about Muhammad Bin Tuglaq.

Ibn Battuta met a Syrian Arab Damascene girl who was a slave of a black African governor in Mali. Ibn Battuta engaged in a conversation with her in Arabic.

The black man was a scholar of Islam and his name was Farba Sulayman. He was openly violating the rule in Islam against enslaving Arabs.

Christians became part of harems as slaves in the Balkans and Asia Minor when the Turks invaded. Muslim qadis owned Christian slave girls. Greek girls who were pretty were forced into prostitution after being enslaved to Turks who took all their earnings in the 14th century according to Ibn Battuta.

Jawaharlal Nehru (also referred to as Pandit Nehru) (November 14, 1889 - May 27, 1964) was the first prime minister of India for 17 years. He became prime minister after India became independent in 1947.  He was born in Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh, India. He died of a heart attack in New Delhi.

Nehru was the first prime minister of India after it became independent from the British rule.

Under British rule, Nehru was jailed many times. During these periods, he used to write long letters to his daughter, Indira, on Indian and World history. These letters were remarkably well written and became very successful books when published later as Glimpses of World History and The Discovery of India.

Jawahar Lal Nehru was born on November 14, 1889, in Allahabad to Pandit Motilal Nehru and Swarup Rani. His father Motilal Nehru, a lawyer, served twice as the president of Indian National Congress and was an important figure in the Indian freedom struggle. His sister, Vijayalakshmi Pandit was the first woman president of United Nations General Assembly. His daughter Indira Gandhi and grandson Rajiv Gandhi became prime ministers of India.

Nehru received his early education at home and later went to Trinity College, Cambridge and graduated with the honors degree in natural science. He studied Law at Inns of Court school. Nehru returned to India in 1912.

Islam is an Abrahamic religion. It believes in one God. Followers of Islam are called Muslims. The central holy book of Islam is the Qur'an. There are an estimated 2 billion people who identify as Muslim. The word Islam means submitting to the will of God.

Muslims believe the Qur'an is the word of Allah. Alongside the Qur'an, Muslims also believe in the previous revelations of God, such as the Tawrat, the Injil, and the Zabur. Muslims believe Muhammad is the final prophet, and that the Qur'an was given to him by Gabriel. Other teachings and rules may come from hadith.

Most people who identify as Muslim belong to one of two groups. The most common is Sunni Islam, which has the largest number of followers in Indonesia. The second is Shia Islam, which has the largest number of followers in Iran. There are also non-denominational Muslims who do not follow any sect and school of thought (madhab). Albania has the largest share of non-denominational Muslims in the world, based on self-identification. Other notable groups or sects include the historical Kharijites and Mu'tazila, as well as movements such as the Ibadis, Muslim Hebraists, Hadith rejectors, and Neo-Mu'tazilites.

Based on self-identification, about 1.75 billion people (around 24% of the world’s population) say they are Muslim. By this estimate, Islam is usually considered the second-largest religion in the world and one of the fastest-growing religions.

Muslims believe the Qur'an was first revealed to Muhammad by Gabriel until his death. The Qur'an was written in the Arabic language.

After Muhammad died, the Arab Muslim leadership was assumed by Abu Bakr, beginning the Rashidun Caliphate. He was followed by Umar ibn al-Khattab, Uthman ibn Affan, and Ali ibn Abi Talib. They were followed by Mu'awiya I, who established the Umayyad Caliphate. Under these caliphs, Islam became one of the most important religions in the world. Under Umar, more than two thirds of the Eastern Roman Empire was conquered by the Arab Muslims. The Arab Islamic empire reached its largest geographical extent under the Umayyad Caliphate.

According to the Qur’an, Muslims believe in God, his angels, his books, his messengers, the Last Day, and Fate. In accordance with a Qur’anic verse: “We have created everything with predestination As much is good and bad". And in hadith the Messenger Muhammad when he said that faith is: “to believe in God, his angels, his books, his messengers, and the Last Day, and believe in the destiny of good and bad.” Muslims believe that God is the one God who created the universe with everything in it. The Qur’an was revealed to the Prophet Muhammad through Gabriel. They believe that he is the final messenger of all messengers that are sent before him. The Prophets are human beings, whom God chose to be his messengers. Muslims believe that the prophets are not gods, but merely human beings with some miracles to prove their prophethood. They are the ones who receive divine revelation.

The Quran mentions the names of many prophets, including Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and others. According to the Qur’an, all of the prophets were Muslims who preached Islam, but with different laws. Islam is defined in the Qur’an as “the instinct of God upon which people have broken in.” "Therefore set your face to the religion purely, the upright creation upon which He originated people. There is no change in the creation of Allah. This is the valuable religion, although most people do not know} (The Romans -Ar-Rum Surah, versus 30). Muslims also believe that Hanifism is the basis of Abraham's religion. And they see that the difference between the Abrahamic religions is in the Sharia (Law) only and not in the creed and that the Sharia of Islam abrogates what preceded it from the Sharia. this means that Islamic religion consists of Belief and Sharia.

As for belief, it is the set of principles that a Muslim must believe in, and it is fixed and does not differ according to the different prophets. As for Sharia (Law), it is the name for practical rulings that differ according to the different messengers.

According to Islamic tradition, there are five basic things that Muslims should do. They are called "The Five Pillars of Islam":

Note: The Five Pillars of Islam is a term in the view of Sunni Islam that gathered out of the hadith. There is another term Usool ul-Din (Religion Principles in English) in Shia Islam. That contains five beliefs: Tawheed, Adl, Nabuwwah, Imamah, Maad.

In Islamic belief, the Quran is the holy book of Islam and contains what Muslims claim Allah (God) conveyed to the Prophet Muhammad through the archangel Jibraeel (Gabriel), who had been tasked since the times of Adam to convey the words of God as guidance to mankind. The Quran is the central point of reference and is a link which connects humanity with God.

The Qur'an contains many passages and chapters which cover the entire aspect of humanity, down to the most minute detail. From the creation and conception of human children, to the details of the Earth, and beyond. In the aspect of human life, it contains stories and tales of old civilizations, past prophets, and their life chronicles. The Quran contains the Sharia law or hudud, and emphasizes the equal rights of man and women alike, with mothers given special status, where it is sinful to even glare at them.

The Qur'an has a total of 30 Juzuks. In each Juz, there are many Surahs or verses, with 114 Surahatun which begin with Surah al-Fatiha (The Beginning) and ended with Surah an-Naas (Humanity). A Hafiz is a Muslim who has memorised the Quran and can accurately say every word in the Quran without flipping a single page and apply them to daily life.

Other important teachings in Islam are previous revelations of God, such as the Tawrat (Torah), the Zabur (Psalms), the Injeel (Gospel), the Scrolls of Abraham, and the Scrolls of Moses, as well as the Sunnah (which tell about Muhammad's life) and the Hadith (which are collections of dialogues of conversation that Muslims believe Muhammad said).

The Qur'an is considered in Islam as a manual for all of humanity and its teachings are to be implemented and shared by its readers.

Muslims pray in a place of worship called the mosque. A mosque is called a masjid in Arabic. Most mosques were mostly seen having at least a single dome, and some have one or more towers called Minarat, where the Muezzin gives the Adhan, the Call for Muslim Prayer which is 13 or 15 sentences. But many mosques were built without either domes or towers.

Muslims take their shoes off before entering the masjid to pray.  Prayer is one of the most important things that a Muslim does.

The Muslim is called to prayer or salah 5 times a day. This call to prayer is called Adhan. The muezzin, a man chosen to make the call to prayer, uses a loudspeaker, which carries his voice to the people nearby.  The call to prayer is often done out loud, in public, in Muslim countries.  Being called to solah is a normal part of daily life for most people in Muslim countries.

Muslims pray on a mat, which is called a prayer mat or prayer rug in English. Common Arabic names for the prayer mat include sajjāda and namaz.

When it is time to pray, Muslims made Wudu, then face the direction of Qibla - the direction they are supposed to pray in, towards the Kabah.  They then roll out their prayer mat, and perform their prayers to God.

According to Islamic teachings, Muslims must say "صَلَّى اللّٰهُ عَلَيْهِ وَسَلَّمَ" shortened as "ﷺ" whenever they hear or say the Prophet's ﷺ name or ﷺ being a common noun.

In 2009, a study was done in 193+1+=(195)+37 countries and territories. This study found that 23% of the global population or 1.57 billion people are Muslims. Of those, between 75% and 90% are Sunni and between ten and twenty five percent are Shi'a.  A small part belong to other Islamic sects. In about fifty countries, more than half of the people are Muslim.  Arabs account for around twenty  percent of all Muslims worldwide. Islam has three holy sites:Jerusalem, Mecca and Medina.

Most Muslims live in Asia and Africa. Around 62% of the world's Muslims live in Asia, with over 683 million followers in Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh.

In the Middle East: The non-Arab countries such as: Turkey, and Iran are the largest Muslim-majority countries. In Africa: Egypt and Nigeria have the biggest Muslim communities.

Most estimates indicate that the People's Republic of China has about 20 to 30 million Muslims (1.5% to 2% of the population). However, data provided by the San Diego State University's International Population Center to U.S. News & World Report suggests that China has 65.3 million Muslims. Islam is the second largest religion after Christianity in many European countries,

European Islam is the term used for Muslims from the Balkans, former Yugoslavia and Crimea, it including People like Xoraxane Roma, Albanians, Bosniaks, Pomak, Gorani, Torbesh, Turks from Bulgaria, North Cyprus, Greece, Romania, North Macedonia like the Yörüks and East Thrace, the European side in Turkey like the Amuca tribe and Crimean Tatars, the majority belong to the Bektashi Sufism Dervish Tarika.

Like with other religions, over time different movements have developed in Islam. These movements are based on different interpretations of the scriptures. The following sections list the most common movements.

Inorganic chemistry is the branch of chemistry which studies the elements, and inorganic compounds.

Inorganic chemistry can be defined simply as all chemistry which is not organic chemistry. Organic chemistry is basically the study of carbon compounds. Inorganic chemistry studies the elements (including carbon), and all compounds other than carbon compounds. There are a few exceptions to this rule, but this definition covers most cases.

The immune system is the set of tissues which work together to resist infections. The immune mechanisms help an organism identify a pathogen, and neutralize its threat.

The immune system can detect and identify many different kinds of disease agents. Examples are viruses, bacteria and parasites. The immune system can detect a difference between the body's own healthy cells or tissues, and 'foreign' cells. Detecting an unhealthy intruder is complicated, because intruders can evolve and adapt so that the immune system will no longer detect them.

Once a foreign cell or protein is detected, the immune system creates antibodies to fight the intruders, and sends special cells ('phagocytes') to eat them up.

Even simple unicellular organisms such as bacteria possess enzyme systems that protect against viral infections. Basic immune mechanisms appeared in ancient life forms and remain in their modern descendants, such as plants and insects. These mechanisms include antimicrobial peptides (called defensins), phagocytosis, and the complement system. These make up the innate immune system, which defends the host from infections in a non-specific way. The simplest innate system is the cell wall or barrier on the outside to stop intruders getting in. For example, skin stops most outside bacteria getting in.

The innate immune system responds very quickly to anything foreign that enters the body. When something gets past the skin, as through a cut, the immune cells work to find the intruder and to alert each other of the foreign object. Small immune cells bring other cells from all over the body to the site where the foreign object was found. Other immune cells can send out messengers to cells nearby to have them help attack the foreign object. This process can make the skin look red and feel hot (inflammation). Phagocyte cells eat anything foreign that enters the body. This response is called non-specific because it responds the same way to anything foreign that enters the body from germs to a piece of dust.

Vertebrates, including humans, have much more sophisticated defense mechanisms.  The innate immune system is found in all metazoa, but the adaptive immune system is only found in vertebrates.

The adaptive immune response gives the vertebrate immune system the ability to recognize and remember specific pathogens. The system mounts stronger attacks each time the pathogen is encountered.  It is adaptive, because the body's immune system prepares itself for future challenges.

The typical vertebrate immune system consists of many types of proteins, cells, organs, and tissues that interact in a complex and ever-changing network. This acquired immunity creates a kind of "immunological memory".

The process of acquired immunity is the basis of vaccination. Primary response can take 2 days to 2 weeks to develop. After the body gains immunity towards a certain pathogen, if infection by that pathogen occurs again, the immune response is called the secondary response.

In some organisms, the immune system has its own problems within itself, called disorders. These result in other diseases, including autoimmune diseases, inflammatory diseases and possibly even cancer. Immunodeficiency diseases occur when the immune system is less active than normal. Immunodeficiency can either be the result of a genetic (inherited) disease, or an infection, such as the acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), that is caused by the retrovirus HIV, or other causes.

In contrast, autoimmune diseases result from an immune system that attacks normal tissues as if they were foreign organisms. Common autoimmune diseases include Hashimoto's thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, Type 1 diabetes, and Lupus erythematosus.

Immunology is the study of all aspects of the immune system. It is very important to health and diseases.

Immunology is  scientific part of medicine that studies the causes of immunity to disease.  For many centuries people have noticed that those who recover from some infectious  diseases do not get that illness a second time.

In the 18th century, Pierre Louis Maupertuis made experiments with scorpion venom and saw that certain dogs and mice were immune to this venom. This and other observations of acquired immunity led to Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) developing vaccination and the germ theory of disease. Pasteur's theory was in direct opposition to contemporary theories of disease, such as the miasma theory. It was not until the proofs Robert Koch (1843–1910) published in 1891 (for which he was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1905) that microorganisms were confirmed as the cause of infectious disease. Viruses were confirmed as human pathogens in 1901, when the yellow fever virus was discovered by Walter Reed (1851–1902).

Immunology made a great advance towards the end of the 19th century, through rapid developments, in the study of humoral immunity and cellular immunity. Particularly important was the work of Paul Ehrlich (1854–1915), who proposed the side-chain theory to explain the specificity of the antigen-antibody reaction. The Nobel Prize for 1908 was jointly awarded to Ehrlich and the founder of cellular immunology, Ilya Mechnikov (1845–1916).

The immune system is extremely ancient. It may go back to single-celled eukaryotes which needed to distinguish between what was food and what was part of themselves.

Jupiter is the largest planet in the Solar System. It is the fifth planet from the Sun. Jupiter is a gas giant because it is large and made mostly of gas. Gas giants are a type of giant planets. The other gas giant planets in the Solar System are Saturn, Uranus and Neptune.

Jupiter was discovered by Galileo Galilei in 1610 with a small telescope. The planet has a Great Red Spot which is located at 22 degrees south of Jupiter's equator. The great red spot has wind-speeds up to 432 km/h (268 mph).

By mass, Jupiter's atmosphere is around 76% hydrogen and 24% helium. However, since helium atoms are larger than hydrogen molecules, Jupiter's upper atmosphere is about 90% hydrogen and 10% helium by volume. The atmosphere also contains small amounts of methane, water vapour, ammonia, and silicon-based compounds as well as trace amounts of carbon, ethane, hydrogen sulfide, neon, oxygen, phosphine, and sulfur. The outermost layer of the atmosphere contains crystals of frozen ammonia. Through infrared and ultraviolet measurements, small amounts of benzene and other hydrocarbons have also been found. The interior of Jupiter contains denser materials—by mass it is roughly 71% hydrogen, 24% helium, and 5% other elements.

Jupiter was the first planet to form. It moved towards the center during the early times of the Solar System. This affected how other planets were formed. Hydrogen makes up most of Jupiter (90% by volume). Helium is the second and makes up a quarter of the mass and a tenth of the volume. Jupiter's interior is getting smaller. This process makes more heat than the planet receives from the Sun. It is believed that there is an outer mantle and a diffuse inner core of denser material inside Jupiter. Liquid metallic hydrogen would make up the outer mantle. Jupiter rotates very fast at 1 rotation per 10 hours. This creates a slight but noticeable bulge around the equator, therefore Jupiter's shape is an oblate spheroid. The outer atmosphere has many bands across the latitude. Interactions between the bands create turbulence and storms. The Great Red Spot is the most obvious example. It is a giant storm which has been seen since 1831,  and possibly earlier.

Jupiter was named for the king of the gods. The Greeks called him Zeus. The Romans called him Jupiter. The symbol for Jupiter, ♃, is from the Greek zeta. It has a horizontal stroke . This stands as an abbreviation for Zeus.

Jupiter is the biggest planet in the Solar System. Its  is 142,984 km (88846 mi), eleven times larger than the diameter of  Earth. Jupiter is twice as massive as all the other planets in the Solar System combined. Jupiter is 318 times as massive as Earth. The volume of Jupiter is 1,317 times the volume of Earth. In other words, 1,317 Earth-sized objects could fit inside it. The planet gives off more heat than it gets from the Sun.

The atmosphere near the  of Jupiter is about 90% hydrogen, 10% helium, and less than 1% other gases.

The lower atmosphere is so heated and the pressure so high that helium changes to liquid, which then rains down onto the planet. Based on spectroscopy, Jupiter seems to be made up of the same gases as Saturn. It is different from Neptune or Uranus. Those two planets have much less hydrogen and helium gas.

It is not possible to say exactly what metals are in the core of Jupiter. However, by measuring the gravity around Jupiter, one can estimate its size. The inner core is dense. It has a lot of heavy elements, likely in the form of rock and ice. The heavy elements in the core have a total mass of 7–25 times that of Earth.

Round the unknown inner core is an outer core. The outer core of Jupiter is thick, liquid hydrogen.

Jupiter is mainly made of the same elements (hydrogen and helium) as the Sun, but it is not large enough to have the internal pressure and temperature necessary to cause hydrogen to fuse to helium, the energy source that powers the Sun and most other stars. If Jupiter had 75 times its mass, it could fuse hydrogen to helium.

Jupiter has many bands of clouds going  across its surface. The lighter areas are zones and the darker ones are belts. The zones and belts often  with each other. This causes huge storms. Wind speeds of 360 kilometres per hour (km/h) are common on Jupiter. To show the difference, the strongest tropical storms on Earth are about 100 km/h.

Most of the clouds on Jupiter are made of ammonia. There may also be clouds of water vapor, like the clouds on Earth. Multiple spacecraft such as Voyager 1 have seen lightning on the surface of the planet. Scientists think it was water vapor because lightning needs water vapor. These lightning bolts have been measured as up to 1,000 times as powerful as those on Earth.

One of the biggest features in Jupiter's atmosphere is the Great Red Spot. It is a huge storm that is bigger than the entire Earth. It is on record since at least 1831, and as early as 1665. Images by the Hubble Space Telescope have shown as many as two smaller "red spots" next to the Great Red Spot. Storms can last for hours or as long as hundreds of years, as in the case of the Great Red Spot.

Jupiter has a magnetic field like Earth's but 10 times stronger. It also has a magnetosphere much bigger and stronger than Earth's. The field traps radiation belts much stronger than Earth's Van Allen radiation belts, strong enough to endanger any spacecraft travelling near. The magnetic field is probably caused by the large amounts of liquid metallic hydrogen in the core of Jupiter. The four largest moons of Jupiter and many of the smaller ones orbit or go around the planet within the magnetic field. This protects them from the solar wind. Jupiter's magnetic field is so large, it reaches the orbit of Saturn 7.7 million miles (12 million km) away. The Earth's magnetosphere does not even cover its moon, less than a quarter of a million miles (400,000 km) away. Jupiter also experiences large aurorae, which happen when charged particles from the volcanic moon Io land in its atmosphere.

Jupiter also has a thin planetary ring system. These rings are difficult to see and were not discovered until 1979 by NASA's Voyager 1 probe. There are four parts to Jupiter's rings. The closest ring to Jupiter is called the Halo Ring. The next ring is called the Main Ring. It is about  wide and only  thick. The Main and Halo rings of Jupiter are made of small, dark particles. The third and fourth rings, called the Gossamer rings, are transparent and are made from microscopic debris and dust. This dust probably comes from small meteors striking the surface of Jupiter's moons. The third ring is called the Amalthea Gossamer Ring, named after the moon Amalthea. The outer ring, the Thebe Gossamer Ring, is named after the moon Thebe. The outer edge of this ring is about  from Jupiter.

Jupiter and other gas giants probably started as rocky planets, similar to Earth. This theory is called the core accretion model. The rocky core would have formed in the early Solar System, within a disk of gases around the Sun. When the planet reached a critical mass, its gravity started to quickly capture lots of gas. In this way, Jupiter became a giant planet. In order for Jupiter to reach this critical mass before the gas disk disappeared, there must have been lots of ice in the area. Jupiter must have formed outside the snow line, the area that is cold enough for water to freeze.

The disk instability model is another theory. It says that Jupiter was formed by gas clumping together in the disk around the Sun. In this case, a rocky core would not need to form. However, this process would probably create planets that are bigger than Jupiter, so most scientists think Jupiter was formed by core accretion.

The orbit of a planet is the time and path it takes to go around the Sun. In the time it takes for Jupiter to orbit the Sun once, the Earth orbits the Sun 11.86 times. One year on Jupiter is equal to 11.86 years on Earth.

The  distance between Jupiter and the Sun is 778 million kilometres. This is five times the distance between Earth and the Sun. Jupiter is not tilted on its axis as much as Earth or Mars. This causes it to have no seasons, for example summer or winter. Jupiter rotates, or spins around very quickly. This causes the planet to  in the middle. Jupiter is the fastest spinning planet in the Solar System. It completes one rotation or spin in 10 hours. Because of the bulge, the length of the equator of Jupiter is longer than the length from pole to pole.

The orbit of Jupiter is unusual compared to planets in other star systems. It is usual for giant planets to be much nearer to their stars. Because Jupiter is not, this suggests an unusual explanation is needed for the arrangement of the planets in the Solar System. Astronomers have an idea on why this happened. It is called the grand tack hypothesis.

It is suggested that Jupiter formed about 3.5 astronomical units from the Sun. It started migrating inward and scattered the rocky planet-forming materials out beyond its orbit. Saturn formed later than Jupiter and started its own inward migration. When Jupiter reached 1.5 astronomical units, it became locked into an orbital resonance with Saturn. Both planets turned around and moved outward until Jupiter arrived at its current position, 5.2 astronomical units from the Sun. Saturn arrived at about 7 astronomical units.

The grand tack hypothesis explains another mystery of the Solar System. Mars should have been larger than Earth but is instead only  of this size. On Jupiter's grand tack, it cleared the area where Mars orbits today. After it left, the material remaining was only enough to form a small planet and a low-mass asteroid belt. Although the hypothesis has not been absolutely proven, there is no other competing explanation why the Solar System's giant should be so far from its star, and Mars so small.

Jupiter's large gravity has had an effect on the Solar System. Jupiter protects the inner planets from comets by pulling them towards itself. Because of this, Jupiter has the most comet impacts in the Solar System. Jupiter has 95 known natural satellites.

Two groups of asteroids, called Trojan asteroids, have settled into Jupiter's orbit around the Sun. One group is called the Trojans and the other group is called the Greeks. They go around the Sun at the same time as Jupiter.

Jupiter is the third brightest object in the night sky, after the Moon and Venus. The first person known to really study the planet was Galileo Galilei in 1610. He was the first person to see Jupiter's moons Io, Europa, Ganymede and Callisto. This was because he used a telescope, unlike anyone before him.

No new moons were discovered for more than two hundred years. In 1892, astronomer E.E. Barnard found a new moon using his observatory in California. He called the moon Amalthea. It was the last of Jupiter's 67 moons to be discovered by human observation through a telescope.

In 1994, bits of the comet Shoemaker Levy-9 hit Jupiter. It was the first time a collision between two Solar System objects was seen.

Seven spacecrafts have flown past Jupiter since 1973. These were Pioneer 10 (1973), Pioneer 11 (1974), Voyagers 1 and 2 (1979), Ulysses (1992 and 2004), Cassini (2000) and New Horizons (2007). Two spacecraft have been brought into orbit around Jupiter. These were Galileo (1995) and Juno (2011).

The Pioneer missions were the first spacecraft to take close-up pictures of Jupiter and its moons. Five years later, the two Voyager spacecraft discovered three new moons. They captured photo evidence of lightning on the night side of Jupiter.

The Ulysses probe was sent to study the Sun. It only went to Jupiter after it had finished its main mission. Ulysses had no cameras so it took no photographs.

In 2006, the Cassini spacecraft, on its way to Saturn, took some very good, very clear pictures of the planet. Cassini also found a moon and took a picture of it but it was too far away to show the details.

The Galileo mission in 1995 was the first spacecraft to go into orbit around Jupiter. It flew around the planet for seven years and studied the four biggest moons. It launched a probe into the planet to get information about Jupiter's atmosphere. The probe travelled to a depth of about 150 km before it was crushed by the pressure of all the gas above it. The Galileo spacecraft was also crushed in 2003 when NASA steered the craft into the planet. They did this so that the craft could not crash into Europa, a moon that scientists think might have life.

NASA has sent another spacecraft to Jupiter called Juno. It was launched on August 5, 2011 and arrived at Jupiter on July 4, 2016. NASA published some results from the Juno mission in March 2018.

Several other missions have been planned to send spacecraft to Jupiter's moons, Europa, Callisto, and Ganymede. One called JIMO (Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter) was cancelled in 2006 because it cost too much money. The European Space Agency launched JUICE (Jupiter Icy Moons Explorer) on April 14, 2023. It will enter orbit around Jupiter in July 2031.

Jupiter has 115 known moons, as of April 9, 2026. The four largest were seen by Galileo with his primitive telescope, and thus are known as the Galilean moons, and nine more can be seen with modern telescopes. Three moons were identified by the Voyager spacecraft. All other moons were first seen on Earth, using modern telescopes and advanced photography methods. The smallest moon (S/2003 J 12) is only one kilometre across. The largest, Ganymede, has a diameter of 5,262 kilometres. It is bigger than the planet Mercury. The other three Galilean moons are Io, Europa and Callisto. Due to the way they orbit Jupiter, gravity affects three of these moons greatly. The friction caused by the gravity of Europa and Ganymede pulling on Io makes it the most volcanic object in the Solar System. It has over 400 volcanoes, more than three times as many as Earth.

Knowledge is the collection of facts, skills, and understanding that people gain through learning, experience, thinking, or discovery. It can come from things we are taught, things we figure out ourselves, or things we observe in the world. Some knowledge is easy to explain, like facts in textbooks or math formulas, this is called explicit knowledge. Other knowledge is harder to put into words, like how to ride a bike or perform surgery, this is called tacit knowledge. It lives in our actions, habits, and personal experiences. In philosophy, knowledge has often been defined as “justified true belief.” This means that for someone to know something, they must believe it, have good reasons for believing it, and it must actually be true. However, some problems, like the “Gettier cases”, show that this definition might not always work. These cases suggest someone can have a belief that is true and has reasons behind it, but still not really have knowledge. Because of this, other ideas like reliabilism (trusting reliable ways of knowing) and virtue epistemology (focusing on intellectual character) were developed to better explain what knowledge really is.

There are different kinds of knowledge. Propositional knowledge is “knowing that” something is true, like knowing that water boils at 100°C. Procedural knowledge is “knowing how” to do something, like solving a puzzle or coding. Experiential knowledge is “knowing by experience,” like recognizing a friend’s voice or knowing how a certain food tastes. Each of these kinds uses different parts of the brain and different types of thinking. The study of knowledge is called epistemology. It looks at questions like “Where does knowledge come from?” and “What can we really know?” Different thinkers have different ideas. Empiricists believe knowledge comes from what we see, hear, and touch. Rationalists believe we are born with some ideas and use reason to gain knowledge. Constructivists think we build knowledge ourselves through experience, culture, and learning from others.

Knowledge grows and improves through careful research methods like the scientific method. This includes testing ideas, sharing results with other scientists (peer review), and checking if experiments can be repeated. These steps help make sure knowledge is reliable. But in areas like art or ethics, people may have different opinions or values, so knowledge can be more personal or open to interpretation. Societies keep and share knowledge in many ways. Universities, libraries, and the internet store a huge amount of information. Other ways, like storytelling, traditions, or learning from elders, are especially important in cultures that do not rely as much on writing. These methods help pass down useful knowledge from one generation to the next.

In information science, there’s a difference between data, information, and knowledge. Data is raw facts with no meaning, like numbers on a screen. Information is when that data is organized to make sense. Knowledge is when the information is put into context so that it can help someone make a decision or take action. For example, knowing it’s 35°C outside is information; understanding that it is too hot to play outside for long without water is knowledge. Neuroscience has found that knowledge is stored in networks of neurons. The cortex and hippocampus are two key areas that help us remember things. Sleep, emotions, and how we learn something can all affect how well we remember and use knowledge later. For example, if something is exciting or emotional, you are more likely to remember it. In artificial intelligence (AI), teaching computers to “know” things is a big challenge. Old systems used strict rules to solve problems, like expert systems. Newer models, like neural networks, try to imitate how human brains work by learning patterns and relationships in data. However, even the best AI today does not really understand things like people do. It cannot think about its own thoughts or reflect on what it knows.

Knowledge can belong to individuals or groups. In companies or teams, knowledge management is used to organize what people know and help everyone share and use that knowledge well. Techniques like knowledge audits and communities of practice help keep useful skills from being lost when people leave or retire. Knowledge is not always neutral or free. In history, powerful groups have tried to control what others are allowed to know. For example, the Catholic Church once banned books that said the Earth moves around the Sun. Today, algorithms on social media can create “echo chambers” where people only see information they agree with. This shows that knowledge can be used for power, control, or influence.

Knowledge in religion is different in that it depends on faith, belief and the authority of religious leaders, not on evidence of a scientific or legal kind. There are differing views on whether religious statements should be regarded as knowledge.

In many expressions of Christianity, such as Catholicism and Anglicanism, knowledge is one of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit.

In the Garden of Eden knowledge is the factor that made humans greedy and treacherous. But in the Book of Proverbs it states: 'to be wise you must first obey the LORD' (9:10).

In Islam, knowledge has great significance. "The All-Knowing" (al-ʿAlīm) is one of the Names of God, reflecting distinct properties of God in Islam. The Qur'an asserts that knowledge comes from God  and various hadith encourage getting knowledge. Muhammad is reported to have said "Seek knowledge from the cradle to the grave" and "Verily the men of knowledge are the inheritors of the prophets". Islamic scholars, theologians and jurists are often given the title alim, meaning 'knowledgeable'.

Life is matter that can make more of itself. It is separated by non-living matter.

Most life on Earth is powered by solar energy: the only known exceptions are the chemo-synthetic bacteria living around the hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor. All life on Earth is based on the chemistry of carbon compounds, involving long-chain molecules such as proteins and nucleic acid. With water, which all life needs, the long molecules are wrapped inside membranes as cells. This may or may not be true of all possible forms of life in the Universe: it is true of all life on Earth today.

Living things, or organisms, can be explained as open systems. They are always changing, because they exchange materials and information with their environment. They undergo metabolism, maintain homeostasis, possess a capacity to grow, respond to stimuli and reproduce.

Through natural selection, they adapt to their environment in successive generations. More complex living organisms can communicate by various means. Many life forms can be found on Earth. The properties common to these organisms—plants, animals, fungi, protists, archaea, and bacteria—are a carbon and water-based cellular form with complex organization and heritable genetic information.

The systems that make up life have many levels of organization. From smallest to biggest, they are: molecule, cell, tissue (group of cells with a common purpose), organ (part of the body with a purpose), organ system (group of organs that work together), organism, population (group of organisms of the same species), community (all of the organisms that  in an area), ecosystem (all of the organisms in an area and the non-living surroundings), and biosphere (all parts of the Earth that have life).

At present, the Earth is the only planet humans have detailed information about. The question of whether life exists elsewhere in the Universe is open. There have been a number of claims of life elsewhere in the Universe. None of these have been confirmed so far. The best evidence of life outside of Earth is are nucleic acids that have been found in certain types of meteorites.

One explanation of life is called the cell theory. The cell theory has three basic points: all living things are made up of cells. The cell is the smallest living thing that can do all the things needed for life. All cells must come from pre-existing cells.

They do, however, fit the biochemical definitions: they are made of the same kind of chemicals.

The thermodynamic definition of life is any system which can keep its entropy levels below maximum (usually through adaptation and mutations).

A modern definition was given by Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela in 1980, to which they gave the name autopoiesis:

Roth commented that "In short, organisms are self-reproducing and self-maintaining, or 'autopoietic', systems". This approach makes use of molecular biology ideas and systems science ideas.

Life on Earth is made from organic compounds—molecules that contain carbon. Four types of long-chain molecules (macromolecules) are important: carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids.

Almost all living things need the chemical elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus, to build these macromolecules. Living things also need small amounts of other elements, called trace elements. Water is a very important part of all living things. For example, humans are about two-thirds water. Water is a solvent that lets molecules mix and react with other molecules.

All living things need energy to survive, move, grow, and reproduce. Some can get energy from the environment without help from other living things: these are called producers, or autotrophs. Plants, algae, and some bacteria, a group of producers called photoautotrophs, use the sun's light for energy. When producers use light to make and store organic compounds, this is called photosynthesis. Some other producers, called chemoautotrophs, get energy from chemicals that come out of the ocean floor in hydrothermal vents. Other living things get their energy from organic compounds: these are called consumers, or heterotrophs. Animals, fungi, most bacteria, and most protists are consumers. Consumers can eat other living things or dead material.

Both producers and consumers need to break down organic compounds to free energy. The best way to do this is aerobic respiration, which frees the most energy, but living things can only do aerobic respiration if they have oxygen (O2). They can also break down these compounds without oxygen, using anaerobic respiration or fermentation.

All living things have cells. Every cell has a cell membrane on the outside, and a jelly-like material that fills the inside, called cytoplasm. The membrane is important because it separates the chemicals inside and outside. Some molecules can pass through the membrane, but others cannot. Living cells have genes, made of DNA. Genes say to the cell what to do, like a language. One DNA molecule, with many genes, is called a chromosome. Cells can copy themselves to make two new cells.

There are two main kinds of cells: prokaryotic and eukaryotic. Prokaryotic cells have only a few parts. Their DNA is the shape of a circle, inside the cytoplasm, and they have no membranes inside the cell. Eukaryotic cells are more complex, and they have a cell nucleus. The DNA is inside the nucleus, and a membrane is around the nucleus. Eukaryotic cells also have other parts, called organelles. Some of these other organelles also have membranes.

Taxonomy is how lifeforms are put into groups. The smaller groups are more closely related, but the larger classes are more distantly related. The levels, or ranks, of taxonomy are domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, and species. There are many ideas for the meaning of species. One idea, called the biological species concept, is as follows. A species is a group of living things that can mate with each other, and whose children can make their own children.

Taxonomy aims to group together living things with a common ancestor. This can now be done by comparing their DNA. Originally, it was done by comparing their anatomy.

The three domains of life are Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya. Bacteria and archaea are prokaryotic and have only one cell. Bacteria range in size from 0.15 cubic micrometres (Mycoplasma) to 200,000,000 cubic micrometres (Thiomargarita namibiensis). Bacteria have shapes which are useful in classification, such as round, long and thin, and spiral. Some bacteria cause diseases. Bacteria in our intestines are part of our gut flora. They break down some of our food. Both bacteria and archaea may live where larger forms of life cannot. Bacteria have a molecule called peptidoglycan in their cell wall, but archaea do not. Archaea have a molecule called isoprene in their cell membrane, but bacteria do not.

Eukarya are living things with eukaryotic cells, and they can have one cell or many cells. Most eukaryotes use sexual reproduction to make new copies of themselves. In sexual reproduction, two sex cells, one from each parent, join to make a new living thing.

Plants are eukaryotes that use the Sun's light for energy. They include algae, which live in water, and land plants. All land plants have two forms during their life cycle, called alternation of generations. One form is diploid, where the cells have two copies of their chromosomes, and the other form is haploid, where the cells have one copy of their chromosomes. In land plants, both diploid and haploid forms have many cells. Two kinds of land plants are vascular plants and bryophytes. Vascular plants have long tissues that stretch from end to end of the plant. These tissues carry water and food. Most plants have roots and leaves.

Animals are eukaryotes with many cells, which have no rigid cell walls. All animals are consumers: they survive by eating other organic material. Almost all animals have neurons, a signalling system. They usually have muscles, which make the body move. Many animals have a head and legs. Most animals are either male or female. They need a mate of the opposite sex to make offspring. Sex cells from the male and female can meet inside or outside the body.

Fungi are eukaryotes which may have one cell, like yeasts, or many cells, like mushrooms. They are saprophytes. Fungi break down living or dead material, so they are decomposers. Only fungi, and a few bacteria, can break down lignin and cellulose, two parts of wood. Some fungi are mycorrhiza. They live under ground and give nutrients to plants, like nitrogen and phosphorus. Eukaryotes that are not plants, animals, or fungi are called protists. Most protists live in water.

Over thousands or millions of years, living things can change, through the process of evolution. One kind of evolution is when a species changes over time, such as giraffes growing longer necks. Most of the time, the species becomes better suited to its environment, a process called adaptation. Evolution can also cause one group of living things to split into two groups. This is called speciation if it makes a new species. An example is mockingbirds on the Galapagos Islands—one species of mockingbird lives on each island, but all the species split from a shared ancestor species. Groups that are bigger than species can also split from a shared ancestor—for example, reptiles and mammals. A group of living things and their shared ancestor is called a clade.

Living things can evolve to be quite different from their ancestors. As a result, parts of the body can also change. The same bone structure became the hands of humans, the hooves of horses, and the wings of birds. Different body parts that evolved from the same thing are called homologous.

Extinction is when all members of a species die. About 99.9% of all species that have ever lived are extinct. Extinction can happen at any time, but it is more common in certain time periods called extinction events. The most recent was 65 million years ago, when the dinosaurs went extinct.

By comparing fossils and DNA, we know that all life on Earth today had a shared ancestor, called the last universal common ancestor (LUCA). Other living things may have been alive at the same time as the LUCA, but they died out. A study from 2018 suggests that the LUCA is about 4.5 billion (4,500,000,000) years old, nearly as old as the Earth. The oldest fossil evidence of life is about 3.5 billion years old.

How did non-living material become alive? This is a difficult question. The first step must have been the creation of organic compounds. In 1953, the Miller–Urey experiment made inorganic compounds into organic compounds, such as amino acids, using heat and energy.

Life needs a source of energy for chemical reactions. On the early Earth, the atmosphere did not have oxygen. Oxidation using the Krebs cycle, which is common today, was not possible. The Krebs cycle may have acted backwards, doing reduction instead of oxidation, and the cycle may have made larger molecules. To make life, molecules needed to make copies of themselves. DNA and RNA make copies of themselves, but only if there is a catalyst—a compound which speeds up the chemical reaction. One guess is that RNA itself served as a catalyst. At some time, the molecules were surrounded by membranes, which made cells.

Linear algebra is a branch of mathematics. It came from mathematicians trying to solve systems of linear equations. Vectors and matrices are used to solve these systems. The main objects of study currently are vector spaces and linear mappings between vector spaces. Linear algebra is useful in other branches of mathematics (e.g. differential equations and analytic geometry). It can also be applied to the real world in areas such as engineering, physics and economics.

Linear algebra describes ways to  and manipulate (rearrange) systems of linear equations.

It is linear because none of the variables are raised to a power.

The graph of a linear equation in two variables is a straight line.

This is because it makes all of the original equations valid, that is, the value on the left side of the equals sign is exactly the same as the value on the right side for both equations.

Linear algebra uses a system of notation for describing system behavior, called a matrix. For the previous example, the coefficients of the equations can be stored in a coefficient matrix.

The kilogram is the base unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI). It is widely used in science, engineering, and commerce worldwide. The kilogram is close to  the mass of one litre of water.

As of May 20, 2019, the definition of the kilogram is based on the Planck constant as . There are attempts to define the kilogram in other ways. One example specifies a number of atoms of a certain substance (at a certain temperature). One kilogram is a little more than 2.2 pounds. One tonne is one thousand kilograms. One litre of water weighs almost exactly one kilogram, at , at sea level. This was the basis of the definition of the gram in 1795.

In 1879, the piece of metal was made. It was officially chosen to be the kilogram in 1889. It was made of 90% platinum and 10% iridium. Those metals were chosen because they do not rust or corrode like most metals. It is stored in a vault at the BIPM in Sèvres, France. From 1795 to 1799, the unit of mass was not called "kilogram" but was called "grave".

The original kilogram is kept inside bell jars. Over time, dust can collect on it. Before it is measured, it is cleaned to get the original size.

The kilogram is a unit of mass. In normal language, measuring mass defines how heavy is something. This is not scientifically correct. Mass is an inertial property. It measures the tendency of an object to stay at a given speed when no force acts on it.

Sir Isaac Newton's laws of motion contain an important formula: F = ma. F is force. m is mass. a is acceleration. An object with a mass (m) of one kilogram will accelerate (a) at one meter per second per second when acted upon by a force (F) of one newton. This about one-tenth the acceleration due to earth’s gravity.

The weight of matter depends on the strength of gravity. The mass of matter does not. The mass of an object is the same everywhere. Matter has invariant mass assuming it is not traveling at a relativistic speed with respect to an observer. According to Einstein’s theory of special relativity, the relativistic mass (apparent mass with respect to an observer) of an object or particle with rest mass m0 increases with its speed as M=γm0 (where γ is the Lorentz factor). This effect is vanishingly small at everyday speeds, which are by orders of magnitude less than the speed of light, but becomes noticeable at very high speeds. For example, traveling at just 10% the speed of light with respect to an observer—exceedingly fast compared to everyday speeds (about )—increases an object’s relativistic mass just over 0.5%.

As regards the kilogram, relativity’s effect upon the constancy of matter’s mass is simply an interesting scientific phenomenon that has zero effect on the definition of the kilogram and its practical realizations. Objects are "weightless" for astronauts in microgravity. However, the objects still have their mass and inertia. Astronaut must use ten times as much force to accelerate a ten-kilogram object at the same rate as a one-kilogram object.

A common swing, as shown in the picture, can show the relationship of force, mass and acceleration. Someone could push an adult on the swing. The adult would accelerate slowly. They would only swing a short distance forward before the swing would change direction. If a child is sitting on the swing, then the child would swing forward faster and further.

Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation. It is natural agent that stimulates sight and makes things easier to see. Light is the opposite of darkness.

Light has a wavelength. Some wavelengths can be seen by the human eye. Others cannot. Many animals can see light. They need it to find food, water, and other things.

Light makes up a part of both the electromagnetic spectrum and radiation given  by stars, like the sun. The light that comes from the sun reaches the Earth and makes it bright. This is called daytime.

Rainbows are a type of light and stars are a type of light too.

The study of light is known as optics. When light hits an opaque object, it makes a shadow. When light hits a transparent object, it passes through it almost completely without making a significant shadow.

Light is a form of electromagnetic radiation that shows properties of both waves and particles. It is a form of energy. Light also keeps the Earth warm. Light exists in tiny energy packets called photons.  Each wave has a wavelength or frequency. The human eye sees each wavelength as a different color. Rainbows show the entire spectrum of visible light. The separate colors, moving in from the outer edges, are  red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet. Other colors can be seen only with special cameras or instruments: Wavelengths up the frequency of red are called infrared, and higher than of violet are called ultraviolet.

The  main properties of light are intensity, polarization, phase and orbital angular momentum.

In physics, the term light sometimes means electromagnetic radiation of any wavelength, whether it can be seen or not.

In a vacuum, the speed of light is 299,792,458 meters per second, or about 186,282 miles per second. This means it takes about 8 minutes for light to reach Earth from the Sun.

Light moves in a straight line. The straight line path is often drawn as a ray that moves in one direction. Ray diagrams are used to illustrate light traveling from one place to another. A beam of light can be thought of as a set of light rays.

Objects that block rays of light can create shadows. Opaque objects block all light rays and create a darker shadow. Translucent objects block some rays and scatter others. They create a lighter shadow. Transparent things will allow all light rays to pass straight through them. They have no or very little shadow. Light can easily move through transparent things. When light is not in a vacuum, it travels slower than the speed of light. The slowest speed of light ever recorded was 39 miles per hour.Opaque objects make shadows.

Our eyes react to light. When we see something, we see the light it reflects, or the light it gives off. For example, a lamp gives off light. Everything else in the room the lamp is in reflects the lamp's light. As the viewer, one cannot directly determine where the ray of light came from prior to reflecting off an object. Humans can only see rays of light traveling directly into the eyes.

Every "color" of light has a different wavelength. The shorter the wavelength, the more energy the light has.Red has the longest and purple has the shortest wavelength. The speed of light does not depend on its energy. Going through translucent objects can slow light down by a very small amount.

White light is made up of all the many colors of light added together. When white light shines through a prism, it splits up into different colors, becoming a spectrum. The spectrum contains all of the wavelengths of light that we can see. Red light has the longest wavelength, and violet (purple) light has the shortest.

Light with a wavelength shorter than violet is called ultraviolet light. X-rays and gamma rays are forms of light with even shorter wavelengths than ultraviolet. Light with a wavelength longer than red is called infrared light. Radio waves are a form of electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength longer than infrared light. The microwaves that are used to heat food in a microwave oven are also a form of electromagnetic radiation. Our eyes cannot see those kinds of energy, but there are some cameras that can see them. The various forms of light, both visible and invisible are the electromagnetic spectrum.

When light is refracted in raindrops, a rainbow is made. The raindrop acts like a prism and refracts the light until we can see the colors of the spectrum.

Light and colour are forms of analogue information. However, electronic cameras and computer displays work with digital information. Electronic cameras or document scanners make a digital version of a colour image by separating out the full colour image into separate red, green, and blue images. Later, a digital display uses pixels of just those three colours. Computer screens use only these three colours in different  levels. The brain puts them together to see all of the other colours in the image.

People think objects "have" a colour. The colour of objects is because the molecules that make up the object absorb certain light waves, leaving the other light waves to bounce off. The human eye sees the wavelengths of all of the light that was not absorbed. This gives the brain the impression that there is a colour.

Light is very hot if it is centred in one direction (usually on focus). That is why if you point a magnifying glass at an ant, it burns that ant. Centred light can also burn metal due to it being so much overwhelmingly concentrated.

In 2025, media said that researchers had created a "supersolid ... out of light". Supersolids can (sometimes) flow under certain conditions.

Kolkata (spelled Calcutta before 1 January 2001) is the capital city of the Indian state of West Bengal. It is the second largest city in India after Mumbai . It is on the eastern bank of the River Hooghly. When it is called Calcutta, it includes the suburbs. This makes it the third largest city of India. It is also known as city of joy It has 4,500,000 (4.5 million) people living in it. This also makes it the world's 8th largest metropolitan area as defined by the United Nations. Kolkata served as the capital of India during the British Raj until 1911. Kolkata was once the center of industry and education. However, it has witnessed political violence and economic problems since 1954. Since 2000, Kolkata has grown due to economic growth. Like other metropolitan cities in India, Kolkata struggles with poverty, pollution and traffic congestion.

The discovery of the nearby Chandraketugarh, an archaeological site has proved that people have lived there for over two millennia  The history of Kolkata begins when the English East India Company arrived in 1690. Job Charnock, an administrator with the company is traditionally known as the founder of this city. However some academics say that Charnock is not the city's founder.

At that time Kolkata, ruled by the Nawab of Bengal Siraj-Ud-Daulah, had three villages. They were Kalikata, Govindapur and Sutanuti. The British in the late 17th century wanted to build a fort near Govindapur. This was to become more powerful than Dutch, the Portuguese, and the French. In 1702, the British completed the construction of old Fort William, which was used to station its troops and as a regional base. Calcutta was declared a Presidency City, and later became the headquarters of the Bengal Presidency. When regular fights with French forces started, in 1756 the British began to upgrade their fortifications. When this was protested, the Nawab of Bengal Siraj-Ud-Daulah attacked and captured Fort William. This led to the infamous Black Hole incident which angered britain. A force of Company sepoys and British troops led by Robert Clive recaptured the city the next year. Calcutta became the capital of British India in 1772,. However, the capital shifted to the hilly town of Shimla during the summer months every year, starting from the year 1864.  Richard Wellesley, the Governor General between 1797 and 1805, helped in the growth of the city and its public architecture. This led to the description of Calcutta as "The City of Palaces". The city was a centre of the British East India Company's opium trade during the 18th and 19th century; locally produced opium was sold at auction in Kolkata, to be shipped to China.

Laozi (Lao Tsu, Lao-Tze) was a Chinese philosopher best known for Taoism, the Tao Te Ching, and becoming a deity of Taoism and Chinese folk religions. A legendary figure of Chinese culture, Laozi may have lived during the Warring States period. Laozi's work influenced anti-authoritarian and Legalist philosophers.

Laozi's personal name is supposedly Li Er (李尔). His courtesy name is Boyang (伯阳). A popular posthumous name is Li Dan  Lǐ Dān). During the Tang dynasty, he was called the "Supremely Mysterious and Primordial Emperor"  Tàishàng Xuānyuán Huángdì).

Many people of the Li family say they descended from Laozi. For example, the emperors of the Tang dynasty claimed this. This family was known as the Longxi Li lineage (隴西李氏). Although these are questionable, they show Laozi's impact on Chinese culture.

Some philosophers don't think he was real. Some think the Daodejing was "a compilation of Taoist sayings by many hands".

The first mention to Laozi is in the "Records of the Grand Historian" by Sima Qian. In one account, he was an official who lived around the time of Confucius. His name was "Er Li" or "Dan Li", and he wrote some a book with two parts before leaving west. In another, he has the name "Lao Laizi", and the book has 15 parts. In a third, he appears as a royal astrologer named "Lao Dan" living at the time of Duke Xian during the Qin Dynasty. The oldest Daodejing writing comes from around 375 BCE.

According to traditional accounts, Laozi worked as the Keeper of the Archives (librarian) during the Zhou. He was able to study the works of the Yellow Emperor and other classics. Laozi never opened a school but still had many students. There is a story of his meeting with Confucius (most famously in the Zhuangzi ).

Taoist myths state that Laozi was born when his mother looked at a falling star. He remained in her womb for 62 years while his mother was leaning against a plum tree. The Chinese name Li 李 is the Chinese character for "plum". Laozi was said to have been born as a grown man with a full grey beard and long ears, symbols of wisdom and long life. Other myths state that he was reborn 13 times after his first life during the days of Fuxi. In his last birth as Laozi, he lived 999 years and spent his life traveling to reveal the Tao.

In accounts where Laozi married, he was said to have had a son named Zong. They are separated when Zong is a child. Zong became a famous soldier and defeated many enemies. Laozi was teaching the Dao, and Zong learns Laozi is his father. Laozi says it is better to treat a beaten enemy with respect and that disrespect to the dead would cause his enemies to seek revenge. So Zong orders his soldiers to bury the enemy dead and hold funeral mournings. Lasting peace is then made.

Sima Qian says Laozi was tired of the moral decay in Chengzhou. The kingdom was declining. He traveled west and lived on the frontier until 80. He was recognized by the guard Yinxi at a western gate. Yinxi asked Laozi to write his wisdom. This became the Daodejing. But the present version of the text includes additions from later periods. In some versions of the tale, Yinxi liked the work so much that he became a student and left with Laozi, never to be seen again. In others, the "Old Master" traveled all the way to India and was the teacher of Siddhartha Gautama, the Buddha. Others say Laozi was the Buddha himself.

A seventh-century work, the Sandong Zhunang ("Pearly Bag of the Three Caverns"), said Laozi pretended to be a farmer when reaching the western gate, but was recognized by Yinxi, who asked to be taught by the great master. Yinxi wanted to find the Tao and said his long study of astrology allowed him to recognize Laozi. Yinxi was accepted by Laozi as a student. This shows the testing a seeker must undergo before being accepted as a student of a master.

Yinxi then trains. After completing the training, the two go to the western lands of the barbarians. They reached the highest religious rank in medieval Taoism called "Preceptor of the Three Caverns". Laozi is the perfect Taoist master and Yinxi is the ideal Taoist student. Laozi is the livingTao personified, teaching others for salvation.

The story of Laozi became religious since the Han dynasty. As Taoism became more popular, Laozi was worshipped as a god. The Way of the Celestial Masters became the first Taoist sect. Later Taoists view Laozi as the Dao in human form. Religious Taoism says that Laozi did not disappear after writing the Daodejing but spent his whole life traveling and revealing the Dao to others.

Laozi is traditionally regarded as the founder of Taoism. Popular Taoism typically presents the Jade Emperor as the main deity. Intellectual Taoists, such as the Celestial Masters sect, usually present Laozi (Laojun, 老君, "Lord Lao") and the Three Pure Ones at the main gods.

Laozi is traditionally regarded as the author of the Daodejing, but this is disputed. It is one of the most significant books in Chinese cosmogony. Like other ancient Chinese philosophers, Laozi often explains his ideas using paradox, analogy, ancient sayings, repetition, rhyme, and rhythm. In fact, the whole book can be read as an analogy: the ruler is the self, and the others and empire are the body, senses, and desires.

The Daodejing says the Dao is the source and ideal of all existence: it is unseen, very powerful but also very humble, being the root of all things. People have desires and free will. Many act "unnaturally", breaking the natural balance of the Dao. The Daodejing intends to lead students to "return" to their natural state, in harmony with Tao. Taoism views them language as biased and artificial and shows this through paradoxes.

Another example: technology may give a false sense of progress. Laozi says not to reject technology, but instead seek the calm state of wu wei (無爲), without desires. Laozi says rulers should keep their people ignorant or simple-minded. This may be political advice, but it could also be religious. The text uses terms like "valley spirit" (gushen) and "soul" (po).

Wu wei literally "non-action" or "not acting", is an important concept. The concept is multifaceted, and this is shown by how it can mean many different things and be translated in multiple ways; it can mean "not doing anything", "not forcing", "not acting" (as in movies or drama), "creating nothingness", "acting spontaneously", and "flowing with the moment".

It is used to explain ziran (自然), or harmony with the Tao. It says all ambition originates from the same source. Laozi used the term to mean simplicity and humility as key virtues, in contrast to selfishness. Politically, it means avoiding war, harsh laws and heavy taxes. Some Taoists see a connection between wu wei and esoteric practices, such as zuowang (坐忘, "sitting in oblivion", emptying the mind of thought) found in the Zhuangzi.

Laozi and Zhuangzi influenced many people throughout Chinese history. Zhuangzi was Laozi's most famous follower. Zhuangzi had a great deal of influence on Chinese scholars, bureaucrats, and culture. Politicians have used Laozi's philosophies to deny serving their ruler. They valued humility in leadership and limited government. This was either out of morality or for their own political means. Some anti-authoritarian movements used Laozi teachings to represent the power of the weak.

Laozi supported limited government. Left-libertarians have been influenced by Laozi. In his 1937 book Nationalism and Culture, the anarcho-syndicalist writer Rudolf Rocker praised Laozi's "gentle wisdom" and understanding that sometimes political power opposed culture and the community. In his 1910 article for the Encyclopædia Britannica, Peter Kropotkin said Laozi was one of the earliest supporters for anarchism. Many anarchists like Ursula K. Le Guin have used Laozi to justify their beliefs. Le Guin writes that Laozi "does not see political power as magic. He sees rightful power as earned and wrongful power as usurped... He sees sacrifice of self or others as a corruption of power, and power as available to anyone who follows the Way. No wonder anarchists and Taoists make good friends."

Economist Murray Rothbard suggested that Laozi was the first libertarian, comparing Laozi's ideas to Friedrich Hayek's theory of spontaneous order. James A. Dorn agreed, arguing that Laozi like many liberals "argued that minimizing the role of government and letting individuals develop spontaneously would best achieve social and economic harmony." David Boaz quotes the Daodejing in his 1997 book The Libertarian Reader. Philosopher Roderick Long argues that libertarianism in Taoism actually borrowed from earlier Confucian writers.

Johann Sebastian Bach (31 March 1685 in Eisenach – 28 July 1750 in Leipzig; pronounced BAHK) was a German composer, who was more known as an organist in his time. He lived in the last part of the Baroque period. He is most famous for his work Toccata and Fugue in D Minor, St. Matthew Passion, St. John Passion, Mass in B minor, and the Brandenburg Concertos. He spent several years working at courts of noblemen. Here he wrote most of his chamber music and orchestral music. Most of his life, however, he worked in a church where he was expected to write church music. Bach wrote almost every kind of music except opera. During the last part of his life most composers were writing in a new style called the Classical style, but Bach always wrote in the Baroque style. That made some people at the time think he was old-fashioned, but today we know that his work is the very best of Baroque music. Along with Mozart and Beethoven, Bach is regarded as one of the greatest composers who has ever lived.

Bach came from a highly musical family. His father, Johann Ambrosius Bach, was a trumpeter at the court of Saxe-Eisenach. Many of his relatives were professional musicians of some sort: violinists and town musicians, organists, Cantors (Directors of Music in a church), court musicians and Kapellmeisters (Directors of Music at a royal court). Most of them played several instruments. Of his twenty children, several became quite famous composers, especially Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach (1714–1788), Johann Christian Bach (1735–1782), Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach and Wilhelm Friedemann Bach (1710–1784).

When he was fifteen, he went to the small town of Lüneburg. At first he sang treble in the choir and was said to have a very fine treble voice, but his voice very soon got lower, so he made himself useful playing instruments. He learned by listening to famous organists like Reincken (1623–1722) and Dietrich Buxtehude (1637–1707). Bach got his first job in 1703 in Arnstadt. It was a well-paid job for a young boy who was 18 years old. There was a new organ in the church, and Bach already knew a lot about organ building as well as being a brilliant organist. They asked him to examine the new organ, and then they offered him a job. Bach spent four years as organist there. He composed some organ works. Unfortunately, the congregation were not musical enough to like it. They did not understand the ornamental notes he added to the hymn tunes. Bach got rather fed up with the priests who were always complaining about it, so he resigned and took another job in Mühlhausen, not far away. After a year there, he gave up that job and went to a big town called Weimar.

Johann Sebastian was made organist to the Duke of Saxe-Weimar. At the Duke’s court there was a chapel with an organ. Bach composed many of his great organ works at this time. He became very famous as an organist and was invited to play in other big churches and to give advice on organ building. He was extremely good at improvisation. On one occasion he was in Dresden at the same time as a French organist named Louis Marchant. There was going to be a competition between the two men to see who was better at improvisation. Bach was practicing the day before and Marchant heard him. He realized that Bach would win, so he left.

In 1714 the Duke made Bach Konzertmeister (Concertmaster, a job that paid more money). He had to write cantatas for church services. In 1717 he was offered a job in the town of Cöthen, where he would earn an even better salary. The Duke was angry and did not want him to go, but Bach insisted. So the Duke put Bach in prison for a month. In the end, he had to let him go.

At Cöthen, Bach worked for Prince Leopold. The Prince was very musical and a wonderful man to work for. Bach was Kapellmeister (Director of Music) and was treated well. The organ was not very good, and it was not used much, so Bach did not write any organ music during this period. The Duke had an orchestra, and Bach was in charge. Nearly all Bach’s orchestral works were written in Cöthen: the Brandenburg Concertos, the violin concertos, the orchestral suites, the solo music for violin and for cello, and a lot of keyboard music for harpsichord or clavichord.

During 1719, the great composer George Frideric Handel, who had moved to England, came to Germany to visit his mother. Bach wanted to meet Handel, who was only 30 km away, but these two famous musicians never met. Handel wanted to spend his limited time in Germany with his mother who was old and frail, knowing that it would be the last time he would see her.

Bach’s first wife, Maria Barbara Bach, died in 1720. The couple had seven children. Soon afterwards, he married Anna Magdalena with whom he had another thirteen children. However, several of his children died young.

In 1723 Bach moved to Leipzig to take the job of Cantor at the St Thomas Church, a very large church in the town. As Cantor he was in charge of all the music, both at St Thomas and at another church nearby. He also had to compose music for the town. It was an excellent job, and more secure than being at a court. The schools were good for his sons. Bach stayed in Leipzig until his death. He loved his job most of the time and worked very hard. He composed many cantatas for the church services. These services were very long, lasting about three hours. Many of the cantatas he wrote last about 30 minutes. He had assistants to play the organ. Bach himself directed the choir and the orchestra. There were probably 16 singers in the choir and 18 players in the orchestra. He wrote the St Matthew Passion and the St John Passion. Both these works, which are very long, tell the story of Jesus dying on the cross. They are among the most famous pieces of music ever written. He also wrote cantatas for special occasions such as weddings or funerals.

Life was not always easy, and sometimes there were arguments with the people who ruled the church. The sub-deacon wanted to choose some of the hymns, but this was the Cantor’s job. Bach was a sensible man, and he managed to get his way without making enemies. On another occasion he argued with the headmaster of the school (Bach had to do some teaching at the church school) about who was allowed to choose the choir section leaders. This actually went to court, and Bach won the case.

Bach often made journeys to other towns. In 1747 he visited the court of Prussian King Frederick the Great near Berlin. The king, a music lover, gave Bach a theme to improvise from on the harpsichord. Bach sat down and improvised a fugue using this theme. Later Bach wrote a very long composition for flute, violin and harpsichord with cello accompaniment, in many movements, all based on this theme. At the end, the theme is heard in 5 of the 6 voices. Bach called it The Musical Offering and he sent it to the king.

Bach wrote many fugues, eventually he decided to write a collection called The Art of Fugue. His plan was to publish it, but he died before he could finish it (his son later published it in his honor, as Bach's last published piece). In the last year or two of his life, he became blind in spite of two eye operations. In the 19th century more people became interested in Bach, and many of his works were published after he had been dead more than a hundred years.

Karl Marx (5 May 1818 in Trier, Prussia – 14 March 1883 in London, England) was a German political thinker who wrote about economics and politics. Marx thought that human societies develop through class struggle. Marx believed that no economic class—wage workers, land owners, etc. should have power over another. He believed that everyone should contribute what they can, and everyone should get what they need. His most famous book was the Communist Manifesto. He wrote it with Friedrich Engels in 1848. The book is about the ideas and aims of communism. His ideas are called Marxism.

Karl Marx was born on 5 May 1818, in Trier, Prussia (now Germany). He came from a middle-class family, and his father was a lawyer. Marx studied law, history, and philosophy at the University of Bonn and later at the University of Berlin. During his education, he became involved with radical thinkers and developed his interest in philosophy and economics. After completing his education, Marx began his career as a journalist in the early 1840s, writing for various German publications. He explored political and economic issues, laying the groundwork for his later theories.

In 1844, Marx met Friedrich Engels in Paris, France, and became close friends by working together on the Communist Manifesto and Das Kapital, sharing a passion for critiquing the socio-economic order. Their intellectual camaraderie helped shape Marxist theory. In his later years, Karl Marx faced financial struggles and health issues. He continued his political activities, writing, and research, contributing to the development of Marxist theory. Marx died in London on 14 March 1883, but his ideas have had a lasting impact on political and economic thought.

Karl Marx lived in various European cities during his life. Some notable ones include Trier and Cologne in Germany, Brussels in Belgium, and London in the United Kingdom, where he spent a significant portion of his later life. Marx married Jenny von Westphalen, his childhood sweetheart, in 1843. Despite his revolutionary ideas, he struggled with poverty and relied on his friend Friedrich Engels for support. Marx had six children, and his family faced hardship due to their economic circumstances. Marx's wife died in 1881, just two years before his own death in 1883. His personal life reflected the complexities of the era he lived in.

His most important work is Das Kapital, or The Capital. It is commonly known in English as simply 'Capital.' He spent many years working on the three parts of the book.  Das Kapital describes how capitalism works and the problems it creates, such as division of labour, alienation and exploitation. The book has led to many arguments between those who agree with the book and those who do not. Marx's ideas have been thought of as responsible for socialist revolutions (like the Russian Revolution).

The Communist Manifesto, written by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in 1848, advocates for the overthrow of capitalist societies by the working class. It emphasizes historical class struggles, predicts the inevitable rise of the proletariat, and calls for the abolition of private property. The manifesto outlines the principles of communism, aiming for a classless society where the means of production are collectively owned. Marx's Communist Manifesto, co-written with Engels, outlines the idea of a classless society, emphasizing the struggle between the bourgeoisie (owners) and proletariat (workers). It advocates for the overthrow of the capitalist system to establish a communist society where the means of production are collectively owned.

Marx's most popular theory was 'historical materialism', arguing that history is the result of material conditions, rather than ideas.  He believed that religion, morality, Social structures and other things are all rooted in economics.

Marx also wrote the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, a critique of political economy in which he discusses topics such as labor wages, labor rent, and capital profit, and his ideas of how to change the economy, including proletarian socialist revolution and an eventual communist society.

Karl Marx's legacy is marked by his influential contributions to political theory and economics, particularly with his ideas on communism and class struggle. While his ideas have shaped various political movements, their interpretation and application have varied widely, sometimes leading to both positive and negative outcomes. However, there's ongoing debate about Karl Marx's legacy by historians. Some see him as a revolutionary thinker who highlighted class struggles, while others criticize his ideas for various reasons, including their implementation in certain historical contexts. Some historians argue that Karl Marx's ideas, as interpreted and implemented by various leaders, contributed to the development of totalitarian regimes, citing instances like the Soviet Union and Maoist China as examples. Many people continue to follow and develop Marx's ideas.

Leonardo Da Vinci (15 April 1452 – 2 May 1519) was an Italian polymath who lived during the Renaissance.  He is famous for his paintings. He was also a scientist, mathematician, engineer, inventor, anatomist, sculptor, architect, botanist, musician, and writer. Leonardo wanted to know everything about nature, and wanted to know how everything worked. He was very good at studying, as well as designing and making all sorts of inventions.

The art historian Helen Gardner said that no one has ever been quite like him because he was interested in so many things that he seems to have had the mind of a giant, and yet what he was like as a person is still a mystery.

Leonardo was born in Vinci, a small town near Florence, Italy. He was trained to be an artist by the sculptor and painter Verrocchio. He spent most of his life working for rich Italian noblemen. In his last years, he lived in an expensive home given to him by the King of France.

Two of his paintings are among the best-known in the world: the Mona Lisa and The Last Supper. He did many drawings. His best-known drawing is Vitruvian Man. Leonardo often thought of new inventions. He kept notebooks with notes and drawings of these ideas. Most of his inventions were never made. Some of his ideas were a helicopter, a tank, a calculator, a parachute, a robot, a telephone, evolution, and solar power.

Leonardo was born on the 15th of April, 1452, in the Tuscan hill town of Vinci, in the valley of the Arno River. His grandfather, Antonio da Vinci, wrote down the details of the birth. Leonardo's parents were not married. His father was a Notary, Ser Piero da Vinci. His mother, Caterina, was a servant. She may have been a slave from the Middle East, or from China. His father later took custody of Leonardo, and his mother remarried and had 5 more children. Leonardo's full name was "Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci", which means "Leonardo, the son of Messer (Mister) Piero da Vinci".

Leonardo spent his first five years living in a farmhouse with his mother. After that, he lived in Vinci with his father, his father's new wife Albiera, his grandparents, and uncle Francesco.  When Leonardo grew up, he only wrote down two memories from his childhood. He remembered that when he was lying outside in his cradle, a large bird flew from the sky and hovered over him. Its tail feathers brushed his face. Leonardo's other important memory was when he found a cave while exploring in the mountains. He was terrified that some great monster might be hiding there, but he was also very excited and wanted to find out what was inside.

Leonardo started painting major works when he was about 29 or 30 years old. His first major painting was the Adoration of the Magi, and his last major painting was The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne, painted when he was about 66 or 67 years old. Giorgio Vasari wrote about Leonardo's life shortly after his death. He tells many interesting stories about how clever Leonardo was. He says that Leonardo painted a round wooden shield with a picture of snakes spitting fire. Messer Piero took his son's painting to Florence and sold it to an art dealer.

In 1466, when Leonardo was fourteen, his father took him to Florence, to be an apprentice to the artist Verrocchio.

Florence was an exciting place for a young person who wanted to be an artist. Many famous artists had lived in Florence, starting with Cimabue and Giotto in the 1200s. Everywhere a person looked, there were famous and beautiful artworks. The huge cathedral had an enormous new dome. The church of St John had doors that gleamed with gold and were said to be the most beautiful doors in the world. Another church had statues all around it by the most famous sculptors, including one by Leonardo's teacher Verrocchio.

If an artist was lucky, they would find a rich patron who would buy lots of their paintings. The richest family in Florence were the Medici. They had built themselves the finest palace in Florence, and liked buying paintings, statues and other beautiful things. They were also interested in the study of literature and philosophy. Many young artists hoped to get work from the Medici and their friends.

Verrocchio had a big workshop that was one of the busiest in Florence. Leonardo was learning to be an artist, so he had to learn drawing, painting, sculpting and model-making. While he was at the workshop, he learned many other useful skills: chemistry, metallurgy, metal working, plaster casting, leather working, mechanics and carpentry.

Leonardo was not the only young painter at Verrocchio's workshop. Many other painters trained there, or often visited. Some of them later became famous: Ghirlandaio, Perugino and Botticelli. These artists were all a few years older than Leonardo.

Giorgio Vasari tells an interesting story from this time in Leonardo's life. Verrocchio was painting a large picture of the Baptism of Christ. He gave Leonardo the job of painting one of the angels holding Jesus' robe on the left side of the picture. Vasari said that Leonardo painted the angel so beautifully that Verrocchio put down his brush and never painted again. When the painting is examined closely, it is possible to see that many other parts of the picture, such as the rocks, the brown stream and the background may have been painted by Leonardo as well. Verrocchio made a bronze statue of David at this time. It is believed that he used Leonardo as his model.

In about 1472, when he was twenty, Leonardo joined the Guild of St Luke, an organization of artists and doctors of medicine. Even after his father set him up in his own workshop, Leonardo still enjoyed working at Verrocchio's workshop. Leonardo's earliest known work is a drawing in pen and ink of the Arno River valley. It has the date 5 August, 1473. It is now in the Uffizi Gallery.

When Vasari writes about Leonardo, he uses words like "noble", "generous", "graceful," and "beautiful". Vasari tells us that as an adult, Leonardo was a tall handsome man. He was so strong that he could bend horseshoes with his bare hands. His voice was so beautiful that it charmed everyone that heard it. Almost everyone wanted to be his friend. He loved animals, was a vegetarian and would buy birds at the market to set free.

Very little is known about Leonardo's life and work between 1472 and 1481. People think he was busy in Florence. In 1478, he had an important commission to paint an altarpiece for the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto. The painting was to be the Adoration of the Magi (The Three Wise Men). The painting was never finished because Leonardo was sent away to Milan.

Leonardo was a very talented musician. In 1482, he made a silver lyre (a musical instrument) in the shape of a horse's head. At that time there was a new ruler in the city of Milan, in the north of Italy. Duke Ludovico il Moro was making other rulers nervous. Lorenzo Medici sent Leonardo to Milan as an ambassador. Lorenzo de' Medici wanted Leonardo to give Ludovico the lyre as a present from him. Leonardo wrote a letter to the Duke of Milan, telling him about all the clever and useful things that he could do, like making war machines. He wrote in the letter that he could "also paint". Leonardo did not know at the time that it was for painting that he would be mostly remembered. Leonardo stayed in Milan and worked for the Duke between 1482 and 1499. Part of his work was to design festivals and carnival processions. In Leonardo's notebooks are drawings of theatre costumes, amazing helmets and scenes that might be for the theatre.

Leonardo, like most other well-known artists of his time, had servants, young students and older assistants in his workshop. One of his young students was a boy whose name was Gian Giacomo Caprotti da Oreno. He was a handsome boy with beautiful long golden curls. He looked perfect as an artist's model for an angel. But he was such a difficult and dishonest boy that Leonardo called him "Salai" or "Salaino" which means "the little devil". Leonardo wrote in his notebook that Salai was very greedy, that he was a liar and that he had stolen things from the house at least five times. Salai stayed in Leonardo's household for thirty years as a pupil and a servant.

Leonardo's most important work for Duke Ludovico was to make a huge statue of the previous ruler, Francesco Sforza, on horseback. He started with the horse. After studying horses and drawing designs, he made a huge horse of clay. It was called the "Gran Cavallo". It was going to be cast in bronze, and it was going to be the biggest bronze horse made in more than a thousand years. Unfortunately, the bronze horse was never made. In 1494, Ludovico had the bronze made into cannons because the French army was invading Milan. The huge clay horse was still standing when the French army invaded again in 1499. It was used for target practice and completely destroyed.

While Leonardo was working for Duke Ludovico, he had two important painting commissions. One was an oil painting to go in a big altarpiece for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception. Leonardo did the painting twice. He left one with the monks in Milan, and took the other painting to France. It is now displayed in the Louvre Museum. Both paintings are called the Virgin of the Rocks. They show a scene of the Virgin Mary and the child Jesus in a rocky mysterious landscape. Mary and Jesus are meeting with John the Baptist. There is a story (which is not in the Bible but is part of Christian tradition) about how the baby John and the baby Jesus met on the road to Egypt. In this scene John is praying and the baby Jesus raises his hand to bless John. The paintings have a strange eerie light with soft deep shadows. In the background is a lake and mountains in the mist. No paintings like this had ever been done before.

Leonardo's other important painting in Milan is even more famous: The Last Supper. The painting shows the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples, before his capture and death. Leonardo chose to paint the moment when Jesus said "one of you will betray me". Leonardo tells the story of the surprise and upset that this caused to the twelve followers of Jesus. He shows this through the actions and faces of the people in the painting. Some are talking, some have stood up, and some are raising their hands in horror.

The novelist Matteo Bandello saw Leonardo at work. Bandello wrote that on some days he would paint from morning till night without stopping to eat. Then for three or four days he would not paint at all. He would often just stand and look at the painting. Vasari said that the prior of the convent was very annoyed. He asked Ludovico to tell Leonardo to work faster. Vasari said that Leonardo was worried because he did not think that he could paint the face of Jesus well enough. Leonardo told the Duke that he might use the face of the prior as his model for Judas, the traitor.

When it was finished, everyone that saw it said that the painting was a masterpiece. But Leonardo had not used proper fresco for the painting. He had used tempera over gesso, which is not usually used for wall painting. Soon the painting started to grow mold and flake off the wall. In a hundred years it was "completely ruined".

Even though in some places the paint has fallen right off the wall, the painting is so popular that it is printed and copied more that any other religious painting in the world.

In 1499, Ludovico il Moro was overthrown. Leonardo left Milan with his servant Salai and a friend, Luca Pacioli, a mathematician. They went to Venice, where Leonardo worked as a military architect and engineer. Because Venice is a city on many islands, Leonardo tried to think of ways to defend the city from a naval attack.

In 1500, Leonardo went back to Florence, taking his "household" of servants and apprentices with him. The monks from the monastery of The Holy Annunciation gave Leonardo a home and a large workshop. In 2005 when some buildings which were used by the Department of Military Geography were being restored, the restorers discovered that part of the building used to be Leonardo's studio.

Leonardo started work on a new painting. He drew a large "cartoon" (a drawing that is a plan for the painting).  The cartoon showed the Virgin Mary sitting on the knee of her mother, St Anne. Mary holds the baby Jesus in her arms. Jesus stretches out his hands to his young cousin John the Baptist. Vasari says that everyone was so amazed by the beautiful drawing that "men and women, young and old" came in large groups to see it "as if they were attending a great festival". The drawing is now in the National Gallery, London. Even though it is old, faded, and kept in a dark room, people go to the gallery to sit in front of it every day.

In 1502 and 1503, Leonardo worked for Cesare Borgia, a powerful noble who was the son of Pope Alexander VI. Leonardo travelled around Italy with Borgia as a military architect and engineer. Late in 1503, Leonardo returned to Florence. He rejoined the Guild of St Luke.

He was given a very important commission. The Signoria (Town Council) of the City of Florence wanted two large frescos painted on the walls of the most important room of the Signoria Palace. Michelangelo was to paint The Battle of Cascina and Leonardo was to paint The Battle of Anghiari.  Leonardo began the project by studying and drawing the faces of angry men and fighting horses. These drawings can still be seen in his notebooks. But unfortunately, this was to be another failure for Leonardo. When he painted the picture on the wall, instead of using fresco, he mixed the paints with oil. The paint would not dry. Leonardo lit some fires to dry it, and the painting melted. Peter Paul Rubens drew a copy of the middle part. After a time, the town council covered it up and got somebody else to paint the wall. Michelangelo did not finish his painting either, because the Pope called him to Rome.

In about 1503 Leonardo began painting the portrait of a woman known as Mona Lisa, the most famous portrait that has ever been painted. He continued working on it for many years. It is a small picture, painted in oil on a wooden panel. It shows the face, upper body and hands of a woman. She is very plainly dressed. For a portrait, a woman would usually put on her best clothes and jewellery. Mona Lisa has a dark dress and a fine black veil over her head. Leonardo often left symbols in his paintings that give clues about the person. The unusual thing about this picture is the smile. The smile is the clue to her name: Mona Lisa Giacondo. Giacondo means "the joking one". (Mona is short for Madonna which means "My Lady".)

The reason why the painting is so famous is that it seems to be full of mystery. Mona Lisa's eyes look out at the viewer. But no-one can guess what she is thinking. Her eyes and her mouth seem to be smiling. This is very unusual in a portrait painting. Most people in portraits look very serious. It is hard to tell what Mona Lisa's exact expression is. When a person wants to read another person's feelings, they look at the corners of their mouth and eyes. But Leonardo has painted soft shadows in the corners of Mona Lisa's mouth and eyes, to disguise her expression. The soft shadows are also found on the sides of her face, her neck and hands. The way that Leonardo uses shadow is called "sfumato" (which is an Italian word for "smoke"). Vasari said that the picture was so beautifully painted that every other artist who looked at it thought that they could never paint so well.

In 1506, Leonardo went back to Milan with his pupils, and lived in his own house in Porta Orientale. D'Oggione made several copies of the Last Supper. Luini made a copy of the Virgin of the Rocks. Boltraffio (and the others) painted many Madonna and Child pictures which can still be seen in art galleries and churches. One of pupils was a young nobleman called Count Francesco Melzi. Melzi never became a very good painter, but he loved Leonardo and stayed with him until the day he died.

In September 1513 Leonardo went to Rome and lived there until 1516. He lived in the Vatican. The three greatest painters of the High Renaissance, Leonardo, Michelangelo and Raphael were all working in Rome at the same time. Even though their names are often said together as if they were friends, they were not. Leonardo at this time was in his sixties, Michelangelo was middle-aged. He was not friendly to either Leonardo or Raphael. Raphael was a very clever young painter who learnt a lot by looking at the pictures painted by Leonardo and Michelangelo. But neither of them was ever his teacher.

In October 1515, King Francis I of France captured Milan. On December 19, there was a meeting of Francis I and Pope Leo X, in Bologna. Leonardo went to the meeting with Pope Leo. Leonardo made an amazing toy to entertain King Francis. It was a life-sized mechanical lion that could walk. It had doors in its chest which opened, and a bunch of lilies came out. Lilies were the royal symbol of the French Kings.

In 1516, Francis I invited Leonardo to go to France with him. He gave Leonardo a beautiful house called Clos Lucé (sometimes called "Cloux"). It is near the king's palace, Chateau Amboise. Leonardo spent the last three years of his life at Clos Lucé, with his faithful friend and apprentice, Count Melzi. The king gave Leonardo a pension of 10,000 scudi. One of the last paintings that Leonardo did was a picture of John the Baptist. His model was Salai, with his beautiful long curling hair.

When Leonardo was dying, he asked for a priest to come, so that he could make his confession and receive Holy Communion. Leonardo died at Clos Lucé, on May 2, 1519. King Francis had become a close friend. Vasari says that the King held Leonardo's head in his arms as he died. In his will, he asked that sixty beggars should follow his casket in procession. He was buried in the Chapel of the Chateau Amboise.

Leonardo had never married and had no children of his own. In his will, he left his money, his books and most of his paintings to Count Melzi. Leonardo also remembered his other pupil Salai and his servant Battista di Vilussis, who each received half of Leonardo's vineyards near Milan. Leonardo left to his serving woman a black cloak with a fur edge. Salai was the owner of Leonardo's most famous oil painting, the Mona Lisa. He still owned it a few years later when he died, after fighting in a duel.

King Francis said: "There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo, not so much about painting, sculpture and architecture, as that he was a very great philosopher."

Leonardo did not paint very many pictures. But he drew hundreds of quick sketches, plans, maps and detailed drawings. This is how he recorded all the interesting things that he saw, studied and thought about. Some of Leonardo's drawings are "studies" for paintings. In these drawings Leonardo planned the things he was going to paint. Some studies are plans for whole paintings. One of these paintings is the large beautiful drawing of the Madonna and Child with St Anne and St John the Baptist that is now in the National Gallery, London. Many of the studies show "details" that Leonardo wanted to get just right. One study shows a very detailed perspective drawing of the ruined buildings in the background of the painting of the Magi. Other studies show hands, faces, drapery, plants, horses and babies. The earliest drawing by Leonardo that has a date on it, is a Landscape of the Arno Valley, 1473, which shows the river, the mountains, Montelupo Castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail.

Leonardo studied things throughout his life. He did not go to university to study. He studied by observing things in the world around him, to see how they were made and how they worked. He drew things that he saw and discoveries he made into his notebooks. Many of his notebooks are now in museums. There are about 13,000 pages of notes and drawings in his notebooks, which are mostly scientific studies.

Leonardo's notebooks are hard to read because he wrote backwards in "mirror writing". Some people think that perhaps he was trying to keep his work secret. This is not true. Leonardo wrote (and sometimes drew) with his left hand. In those days pens were made from a quill (a large feather) that was cut with a pen-knife on the end. It is hard for a left-handed person to write with a quill in the ordinary way, but quite easy to write backwards.

It is likely that Leonardo planned to publish the studies in his notebooks. He organized many pages carefully, with one study taking up the front and back of each page. There is a page with drawings and writing about the human heart and a page about the womb and the fetus. One page shows drawings of the muscles of a  and another page shows how an arm works.

The notebooks were not published in Leonardo's lifetime. After he died, they were divided between different people who had known him. They are nearly all in museums or libraries such as Windsor Castle, the Louvre, and the British Library. The Biblioteca Ambrosiana (a library) in Milan has the twelve-volume Codex Atlanticus.

Many of the drawings and notes in Leonardo's notebooks are designs, plans and inventions.

Liberalism is a type of political thinking about politics and government. It emphasizes the idea of freedom, and believes that the greatest countries are the ones that contain unconfined liberties. Classical liberals all believe that everyone equally deserves to be free to decide for themselves how to think, act, speak and conduct their lives with a minimum of governance or control by others including control by a formal government. This is similar to modern day libertarian beliefs. However, modern liberals have disagreed about what gives people freedom and what removes freedom.

Liberals can be broadly divided into two groups. Classical liberals believe that the main threat to freedom is the government. They believe that politicians are often keen to increase their own power, and that they can easily become tyrants. Classical liberals point to examples such as Nazi Germany, Taliban Afghanistan and North Korea as examples of countries led by tyrants or dictators. In these countries, human rights are recklessly disregarded, countless individuals are imprisoned and enslaved until their demise, and there is no way to vote out an official during an election or political event.

Classical liberals therefore emphasize the importance of democracy and individual human rights. They believe that countries need clear, strict and equally applied laws that stop the government from infringing on the rights of individuals. Often, these rights are protected by a constitution. In some countries, such as the United States, the right to own a gun is protected so that people are always able to physically oppose their government if it becomes a tyranny or dictatorship.

Classical liberals often also tend to believe that the government is bound to create few rules regarding the economy. They often believe economic problems are caused by poor decisions created by corrupt individuals operating the government. Furthermore, Classical Liberals believe that individuals must control the right to own and outrageously high taxes can infringe on this human right.

In contrast, modern liberals believe that the main threat to freedom comes from poverty. They suggest that poverty removes choices from individuals, and that this prevents them from being able to enjoy being a human. They believe that the Industrial Revolution and economic crises such as the Great Depression significantly reduced freedom. Therefore, they believe that the government must use government control and taxes to provide for poorer individuals or organizations such as schools, hospitals, and even monetary payments while using laws to force people to cooperate. Their goal is to influence society to create equality of outcomes which they believe allows everyone to have an equal chance for pursuit of happiness. This disagrees with the classical liberal view that the government must refrain from not control or tax people too much or be in control of the economy.

Classical liberals are often members of conservative organizations and so are sometimes considered right-wing. Modern liberals share many similar views with social democrats and are seen as left-wing.

Before the Age of Enlightenment, Monarchies wielded unrestricted sovereignty over their nations, while peasants or common individuals often expressed little freedom or autonomy over themselves. During the Age of Enlightenment, philosophers such as John Locke, Simón Bolívar, John Stuart Mill and Jeremy Bentham began to write about freedom. Earlier writers, such as Marcus Aurelius, had written about freedom, but this time the idea became more popular. The United States of America was the first country to have a constitution which was based on the ideas of John Locke which were similar to those of Mill and Bentham, and which guaranteed certain rights to all citizens, including freedom of speech, freedom of the press, freedom of religion, the right to assemble (get together in groups), the right to bear arms (weapons), and the right to ask their government to take action (right of petition) or to remove from office rulers they did not like (right of referendum).

Another idea that became popular around this time was the idea of free trade. A leading philosopher who promoted free trade was Adam Smith.

Most of the wealthy countries in the world today are democracies with more or less free trade. Some modern liberal democracies have relatively higher taxes (such as Nordic countries). An exception to this rule are the oil-rich countries, not all of which are liberal or democratic.

All liberal governments support free elections, and this idea is defended in the legal systems of many countries. However, many countries have elections, but they are not free. This is because opposition candidates cannot use the mass media to publicize their ideas. This situation leads to long-term stability, and to rule by elite groups or dictators. That situation exists in Russia and almost all the former states of the Soviet Union to the east.

The government of the United States was created based on a belief in democracy and personal freedom. However the term "liberalism" has taken on multiple different meaning in modern times. Liberals in the United States still believe in supporting democracy and freedom, but many liberals also support other ideas. While not all liberals agree on everything, most liberals in the United States agree:

Liberals in the United States are also sometimes called "Progressives". The biggest liberal political party in the modern United States is the Democratic Party. However, the Green Party is seen to be more 'left', or liberal than the Democrats.

Liberals in Australia have many different ideas about government than liberals in the United States. Most liberals in Australia believe that government should not increase taxes, and would like a government that has lower taxes and less power over the economy. The main liberal political party in Australia is the Liberal Party of Australia. The Liberal Party also believes that government should support traditional values and morals, something which many conservatives believe as well.

Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (August 28, 1749 – March 22, 1832) was a German writer, poet, novelist, and playwright. He also worked as an actor, administrator, scientist, geologist, botanist, and philosopher.

Goethe (pronounced something like "Ger-tuh") influenced many 19th century writers and thinkers. His contributions to science include his work in botany and his Theory of Colours. Famous lines from Goethe's books are often quoted, and some of his phrasings have become part of the German language. Many of Goethe's poems were set to music by composers such as Schubert, Schumann, Brahms, Wolf, and Strauss.

Goethe was born in Frankfurt, Germany. His father was well-educated and very strict. His mother was only eighteen when he was born. When Goethe was a young boy, he began to write stories and plays for his friends.

In his youth, Goethe learned Greek, Latin and French. He studied law in Leipzig from 1765 to 1768. He continued his studies in Strasbourg from 1770 to 1771.

Goethe wanted to change the way that Germans were writing. He thought that people like Johann Christoph Gottsched were too strict about writing poetry; opposed to rules encouraged during the Enlightenment, he wanted poets to be creative and make their own rules.

One man who had many new ideas was a poet named Johann Gottfried von Herder. Herder liked the plays of Shakespeare (which he had learned in German) as well as folk poetry. These ideas were exciting for Goethe, and he helped Herder to collect folk poetry. Both men believed that poetry should always come from the heart, and that it should be based on the poet’s experiences instead of on an old-fashioned idea of what a good poem should be. Some of Goethe's best known poems were written during this time, like Heidenröslein, Der König in Thule, and Erlkönig.

Goethe fell in love with several women during his lifetime. During the early period of his life, he was in love with a girl named Friederike Brion, the daughter of a pastor. Several of his poems are inspired by her. He felt extremely sad when they split up.  The feeling of desertion by a lover is found in a lot of Goethe’s works. They are all based on his own experience. His disappointment in love inspired him when writing about Werther in Die Leiden des jungen Werthers and Gretchen in his great play Faust. His poems also show his ideas about science and philosophy.

Die Leiden des jungen Werthers (The Sufferings of Young Werther) is a book written in the form of letters. Werther is a young man who falls passionately in love with a girl called Lotte who is married to someone else. Werther kills himself in the end. The book was very successful all over Europe. People talked about “Werther fever.”  Many young men who were disappointed in love copied Werther, killing themselves.

Goethe’s most famous work is a very long play called Faust. He spent most of his life working at it. He was writing the first version of Faust at this time. Based on a legendary character, it tells of a man called Faust who is tired of studying and wants to have the greatest possible happiness. The devil (called Mephistopheles in the play) tells Faust he can help him to do this, but that in the end Faust must give him his soul and go with him to hell. Faust uses magic in the hope that it will tell him everything about life.

Along with writing, Goethe was developing a career in law. In 1772, he spent four months in Wetzlar at the Imperial Law Courts. Here he made new friends, including a young girl who was already engaged to someone else.

Goethe had been well-educated and was good at organizing and getting on with important people. For eleven years he worked at the court of Weimar for a young Duke called Karl August. He became a member and later the president of the Duke’s cabinet. He had to organize road-building projects, and look after parks and buildings. He studied geology, mineralogy, botany and anatomy. He fell in love with a woman called Charlotte von Stein who was married and had several children. He wrote love letters to her, and she inspired him to write many poems. At this time he felt that a man’s task in life was to be useful. The heroes of his books at this time were often ordinary people instead of geniuses.

After a time he realized that all his work on governmental duties were not giving him time for his writing. So he went to Italy for 18 months. He loved the landscape and made lots of sketches, and he read the ancient poets and books on the history of art. He wrote a play in rhyme called Iphigenie auf Tauris which combines the beauty of Classicism with great poetry.

When he returned from Italy he settled once more in Weimar. He visited Italy a second time. He became great friends with the famous poet and playwright Friedrich Schiller. The two men talked about many of their ideas and helped one another by offering criticism of their works. He wrote short works such as Hermann und Dorothea which is about life in a small German town at the time of the French Revolution.

Two works of the greatest importance works occupied him at this time. One is the novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. This is an example of what is called in German a “Bildungsroman” which means something like “Education novel”. It means a novel which shows a person growing up and developing his character and learning about the world. This book was a very important influence on the 19th century Romantic novel and on all German autobiographical novels ever since. Goethe spent many years working on this book.

The second work of enormous importance was his play Faust. He made changes to the original version, putting all the small bits together into one great play. Schiller gave him advice while he was writing it. Faust enters into a pact with the devil, Mephistopheles who promises him all his soul can wish for: fine living, gold, women and honour. He signs the pact with his blood.

Napoleon was fighting wars all over Europe at this time. Germany, which was still made up of lots of small countries, was an enemy of France. Goethe always thought of Napoleon as a hero. His ideas about politics were still based on 18th century ideas. He hated war and so he did not take part in politics but concentrated on science and literature. He wrote a book called Die Wahlverwandtschaften (Elective Affinities) which is about a divorce problem. Some of his scientific ideas are used in the story as he talks about the way that two chemical compounds can break up and form new unions. He compares this to the people in his story. His poems in Westöstlicher Divan are some of his greatest. He uses ideas from Persia and other Eastern countries together with ideas from the West. It has a lot of parables about human life.

Many interesting things that Goethe said were written down in a book by his friend Eckermann, who published them in a book called Conversations with Goethe. Goethe also wrote about his own life in his autobiography which he called Dichtung und Wahrheit (Poetry and Truth). The book tells us about his youth up to the time of his arrival in Weimar. It is in four parts. The fourth part was published after his death. He chose the title to show that he was telling us the truth about his life, but that he had changed the order of some events to make it into a poetic book.

Goethe wrote a sequel (a part which follows on) to Wilhelm Meister called Wilhelm Meisters Wanderjahre (The Years of Wilhelm Meister’s Wanderings). It consists of several sections which are like separate stories. They tell us about Wilhelm Meister’s relationship with society and how he has to change his ways to fit in with other people.

Goethe’s Faust had made him the greatest person in European literature. At the end of his life he finished a second part of Faust. It is quite hard to read, and is more of a long poem than a dramatic play. It talks of his ideas about allegory, science and philosophy.

Goethe died in Weimar on March 22, 1832. He had started as a great Classical writer of the 18th century and finished as a young Romantic of the 19th century. No one else had such a big influence on art and literature of that time.

Johannes Gensfleisch zur Laden zum Gutenberg (more commonly known as Johannes Gutenberg) (1390s – 3 February 1468), was a German metal-worker and inventor. He is famous for his work in printing in the 1450s, and is specifically known for inventing typography.

Gutenberg was born in Mainz, Germany, as the son of a merchant, Friele Gensfleisch zur Laden. Gutenberg's father took the surname "zum Gutenberg" after the name of the place they now lived.

Gutenberg invented a sort of metal alloy for printing; inks; a way to fix type (metal letters) very accurately; and a new sort of printing press. He took the idea tung tung for his printing press from the presses wine-makers used. Many people say Gutenberg invented printing with moveable type, but it was already invented in China before that: see printing.

Before movable type, people used block printing, where the printer prints a whole page from one piece of metal or wood. With movable type, the printer makes a letter (A, B, C ...) from a piece of metal or wood, and can use it again and again in different words. Together, all Gutenberg's inventions made printing fast. In Renaissance Europe, the improved information technology made an information explosion – in a short time, people printed many new books about many topics.

The high number of new books was partly because of the popular Bible Gutenberg printed – the Gutenberg Bible. This was the first Bible people made in large numbers; Gutenberg started on 23 February 1455. Gutenberg was not a clever businessman, and did not get much money from his system. He had legal problems, and lost his machines to his partner, Johann Fust. The Archbishop at the time sympathized with Gutenberg because of his contributions to society, so told him that he would receive a pension each year with clothes, wine, and grain.  Gutenberg died in Mainz, Germany, in 1468.

In his lifetime Gutenberg was not successful, but his invention was very important. In a short time, news and books were traveling around Europe very fast. Scientists could communicate better, which helped bring the scientific revolution and new technology. More Europeans, not just priests, scribes and scholars, learned to read.

Today, there are still 60 Gutenberg Bibles. They are most likely the oldest books that printers made with moveable type.

The Gutenberg Galaxy and Project Gutenberg use Gutenberg's name. The city of Guttenberg, Iowa in the United States is named after him.

Gaius Julius Caesar (12 July 100 BC – 15 March 44 BC) was a military commander, politician and author at the end of the Roman Republic.

Caesar became a member of the First Triumvirate. When that broke up, he fought a civil war against Pompey the Great.  Winning the war, Caesar became Roman dictator until his death.

On March 15, 44 BC, he was stabbed to death by a group of senators on the Ides of March before a meeting of the Senate at the Curia of Pompey (the Theatre of Pompey) in Rome.

Caesar is considered by many historians to be one of the greatest military commanders.  His surname is a synonym for "Emperor"; the title "Caesar" was used throughout the Roman Empire, giving rise to modern descendants such as "Kaiser" in German, "Tsar" in the Slavonic languages, and "Qayṣar" in the languages of the Islamic world.

At sixteen he was the head of his family, and came under threat when Lucius Cornelius Sulla became Roman dictator.

Sulla set about purging Rome of his enemies. Hundreds were killed or exiled, and Caesar was on the list. His mother's family pleaded for his life; Sulla reluctantly gave in and removed Caesar from his inheritance. From then on, lack of money was one of the main problems in his life. Caesar joined the army and left Rome.

On the way across the Aegean Sea, Caesar was kidnapped by pirates and held prisoner. When the pirates thought to demand a ransom of twenty talents of silver, he insisted they ask for fifty.p39 After the ransom was paid, Caesar raised a fleet, pursued and captured the pirates, and imprisoned them. He had them crucified on his own authority, as he had promised while in captivity—a promise the pirates had taken as a joke. As a sign of leniency, he first had their throats cut. He was soon called back into military action.

On his return to Rome, he was elected as military tribune, a first step in a political career. He was elected quaestor for 69 BC. His wife Cornelia died that year. After her funeral, Caesar went to serve his quaestorship in Spain.p100 On his return in 67 BC, he married Pompeia (a granddaughter of Sulla), whom he later divorced. In 63 BC he ran for election to the post of Pontifex Maximus, as high priest of the Roman state religion. He ran against two powerful senators; there were accusations of bribery by all sides. Caesar won comfortably, despite his opponents' greater experience and standing.

After his praetorship, Caesar was appointed to govern Roman Spain, but he was still in considerable debt and needed to pay his creditors. He turned to Marcus Licinius Crassus, one of Rome's richest men. In return for political support, Crassus paid some of Caesar's debts and acted as guarantor for others. Caesar left for his province before his praetorship had ended. In Spain he conquered two local tribes, was hailed as imperator by his troops, and completed his governorship in high esteem. Though he was due a 'triumph' in Rome, he also wanted to stand for Consul, the most senior magistracy in the Republic. Faced with the choice between a triumph and the consulship, Caesar chose the consulship. After election, he was a consul in 59 BC.

Caesar took power with Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (Pompey the Great) and Marcus Licinius Crassus. These three men ruled Rome and were called the Triumvirate.

Caesar was the go-between for Crassus and Pompey. They had been at odds for years, but Caesar tried to reconcile them. Between the three of them, they had enough money and political influence to control public business. This informal alliance, known as the First Triumvirate (rule of three men), was cemented by the marriage of Pompey to Caesar's daughter Julia. Caesar also married again, this time to Calpurnia, who was the daughter of another powerful senator.

Caesar proposed a law for the redistribution of public lands to the poor, a proposal supported by Pompey, by force of arms if need be, and by Crassus, making the triumvirate public. Pompey filled the city with soldiers, and the triumvirate's opponents were frightened.

With the agreement of his partners, Caesar became the governor of Gallia (Gaul). Gaul is the area which is today's Northern Italy, Switzerland, and France.

Caesar was the commander of the Roman legions during the Gallic War. The war was fought on the side of Rome's Gallic clients against the Germans, who wanted to invade Gaul. It was also to extend Rome's control of Gaul. Caesar's conquest of Gaul extended Rome's territory to the North Sea. In 55 BC he conducted the first Roman invasion of Britain. Caesar wrote about this eight-year war in his book De Bello Gallico ('About the Gallic Wars'). This book is an important historical account.

These achievements got him great military power, and threatened to overshadow Pompey. The balance of power was further upset by the death of Crassus in 53 BC.

In 50 BC, the Senate, led by Pompey, ordered Caesar to disband his army and return to Rome because his term as governor had finished. Caesar thought he would be prosecuted if he entered Rome without the immunity enjoyed by a magistrate. Pompey accused Caesar of  and treason.

Caesar and his army approached Rome and crossed the Rubicon, a shallow river in north-east Italy, in 49 BC. It was the point beyond which no army was supposed to go. The river marked the boundary between Cisalpine Gaul to the north, and Italy proper to the south. Crossing the Rubicon caused a civil war. Pompey, the lawful Consul, and his friends, fled from Rome as Caesar's army approached.

Pompey managed to escape before Caesar could capture him. Caesar decided to head for Spain, while leaving Italy under the control of Mark Antony. Caesar made an astonishing 27-day route-march to Spain, where he defeated Pompey's lieutenants. He then returned east, to challenge Pompey in Greece. There, in July 48 BC, at Dyrrhachium Caesar barely avoided a catastrophic defeat. He then decisively defeated Pompey, at the Battle of Pharsalus later that year.

In Rome, Caesar was appointed Dictator, with Mark Antony as his Master of the Horse (second in command). Caesar presided over his own election to a second consulship and then, after eleven days, resigned this dictatorship.

Late in 48 BC, he was appointed dictator again, with a term of one year. Caesar then pursued Pompey to Egypt, where Pompey was soon murdered. Caesar then became involved in an Egyptian civil war between the child pharaoh and his sister, wife, and co-regent queen, Cleopatra. Perhaps as a result of the pharaoh's role in Pompey's murder, Caesar sided with Cleopatra. He is reported to have wept at the sight of Pompey's head, which was offered to him by the pharaoh as a gift. In any event, Caesar defeated the pharaoh's forces in 47 BC and installed Cleopatra as ruler.

Caesar and Cleopatra celebrated their victory with a triumphant procession on the Nile in the spring of 47 B.C. The royal barge was accompanied by 400 additional ships, introducing Caesar to the luxurious lifestyle of the Egyptian pharaohs. Caesar and Cleopatra never married; Roman Law only recognized marriages between two Roman citizens. Caesar continued his relationship with Cleopatra throughout his last marriage, which lasted 14 years – in Roman eyes, this did not constitute adultery – and may have fathered a son called Caesarion. Cleopatra visited Rome on more than one occasion, staying in Caesar's villa, outside Rome across the River Tiber.

In 46 BC, Caesar defeated Cato and the remnants of Pompey's supporters in Africa. He was then appointed dictator for ten years. In two years he made numerous changes in Roman administration to improve the Republic. Many of these changes were meant to improve the lives of ordinary people. One example, which has lasted, was his reform of the calendar into the present format, with a leap day every four years. In February of 44 BC, one month before his assassination, he was appointed Dictator for life.

On the Ides of March (15 March; see Roman calendar) of 44 BC, Caesar was due to appear at a session of the Senate. Mark Antony, fearing the worst, went to head Caesar off. The plotters expected this, and arranged for someone to intercept him.

According to Eutropius, around sixty or more men participated in the assassination. He was stabbed 23 times. According to Suetonius, a physician later established that only one wound, the second one to his chest, had been lethal.

The dictator's last words are not known with certainty, and are a contested subject among scholars and historians alike. The version best known in the English-speaking world is the Latin phrase Et tu, Brute? ('You too, Brutus?'). In Shakespeare's Julius Caesar, this is the first half of the line: "Et tu, Brute? Then fall, Caesar".

According to Plutarch, after the assassination, Brutus stepped forward as if to say something to his fellow senators; they, however, fled the building. Brutus and his companions then marched to the Capitol while crying out to their beloved city: "People of Rome, we are once again free!". They were met with silence, as the citizens of Rome had locked themselves inside their houses as soon as the rumour of what had taken place had begun to spread.

A wax statue of Caesar was erected in the forum displaying the 23 stab wounds. A crowd who had gathered there started a fire, which badly damaged the forum and the neighbouring buildings. In the ensuing chaos, Mark Antony, Octavian (later Augustus Caesar), and others fought a series of five civil wars, which would end in the formation of the Roman Empire.

The Roman Empire and its emperors were so important in history that the word Caesar was used as a title in some European countries  long after the Roman empire was gone. For example, Germany's emperor was called a  Kaiser up to the year 1919 AD and Russia's emperor was called a Tsar until 1917 AD.

Other works historically attributed to Caesar, but whose authorship is doubted, are:

These narratives were written and published on a yearly basis during or just after the actual campaigns, as a sort of "dispatches from the front". Apparently simple and direct in style—to the point that Caesar's Commentarii are commonly studied by first and second year Latin students—they are in fact quite sophisticated, aimed at the middle-brow readership of minor aristocrats in Rome, Italy, and the provinces.

Based on remarks by Plutarch, Caesar is sometimes thought to have suffered from epilepsy. Modern scholarship is divided on the subject. It is more certain that he was plagued by malaria, particularly during the Sullan proscriptions of the 80s.

Caesar had four documented episodes of what may have been complex partial seizures. He may additionally have had absence seizures (petit mal) in his youth. The earliest accounts of these seizures were made by the biographer Suetonius who was born after Caesar died. The claim of epilepsy is countered among some medical historians by a claim of hypoglycemia. This can cause seizures which are a bit like epilepsy.

In 2003, psychiatrist Harbour F. Hodder published what he termed as the "Caesar Complex" theory, arguing that Caesar was a sufferer of temporal lobe epilepsy, and that the symptoms were a factor in Caesar's decision to forgo personal safety in the days leading up to his assassination.

Joseph Vissarionovich Stalin (born Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili); (18 December 1878 – 5 March 1953) was a communist revolutionary and politician who led the Soviet Union from 1924 to his death.

In the Soviet Union, Stalin created a totalitarian political system now called Stalinism. He also used Marxism–Leninism and made it the Soviet Union's official political ideology.

After World War II, Stalin gained control over all of Eastern Europe, including part of Germany. There he set up a series of loyal Marxist-Leninist single-party states. This made the Soviet Union a superpower. Stalin's policies turned the Soviet Union into a powerful, relatively modern country that was the largest on Earth.

Stalin was known as a brutal leader who was responsible for the deaths of around 7 million people in what was called the Holodomor.

Stalin was born as Ioseb Besarionis dze Jughashvili or Iosif Dzhugashvili. He began calling himself "Stalin" in 1912.

On 18 December 1878, Stalin was born in a small one-room house in Gori, Georgia, which was then a region in the Russian Empire that is now in Georgia. His parents had two other children, but both died.

Stalin was born with two fused toes on his left foot. During childhood, he had smallpox, which left permanent scars. (Later, in the Soviet Union, photos of Stalin were often changed to hide those scars.)

As a child, Stalin also had measles and scarlet fever. Three times, he was in traffic accidents.

Stalin's left arm was around 5.5 cm shorter than his right arm for unclear reasons. According to Stephen Kotkin, it was shortened in a January 1890 injury, when Stalin was hit by a sports carriage. It is also possible that he had a birth injury or Erb's Palsy.

Stalin was educated at the Gori church school. Then, he studied to be a priest at a seminary in Tbilisi. He was an active student who read many books. He especially liked books that were not allowed by the seminary, including Karl Marx's writings.

In 1898, Stalin joined a Marxist group called the Mesame Dasi, or Group Three. The next year, he left school and got a job at the Tbilisi Physical Institute. He joined groups that were trying to start a revolution to remove the tsar and change the government.

The police raided Stalin's house in 1901 while they were hunting for people who opposed the government. Stalin escaped and went into hiding so that the police could not find him. He continued to organize anti-government activities such as May Day marches and protests.

Stalin became a Bolshevik. He supported a violent revolution and opposed the Mensheviks.

The secret police arrested Stalin in April 1902 and exiled him to Siberia without any trial. There, Stalin lived in the village of Novaya Uda.

Soon, he escaped from Siberia, which led to many later claims that he was a police spy. Those beliefs increased after the arrest of Stephan Shaumyan, a Bolshevik rival of Stalin.

At the end of 1905, Stalin went to a meeting in Finland and met Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. Lenin was not what Stalin had expected.

In the next ten years, the government arrested and exiled Stalin several times. This increased his power in the Bolsheviks. In 1912, he was elected to its Central Committee and promoted to a position in St. Petersburg.

Stalin was a member of the Bolshevik Party, but he did not do much in the Russian Revolution of 1917. At the time, he was writing and editing Pravda, the party's newspaper.

Stalin held a number of organizational jobs in the Communist Party. In 1922, he became General Secretary, which allowed him to give jobs to people he liked in the Communist Party. Those supporters helped him become the leader of the Soviet Union after Lenin died in 1924.

After Lenin's death, Stalin fought for power of the Soviet Union, notably against Leo Trotsky, who had been preferred by Lenin. In 1929, Stalin declared himself dictator and became the second leader of the Soviet Union.

To eliminate "enemies of the working class", Stalin instituted the "Great Terror" (also called the "Great Purge"). His government executed at least 700,000 people and sent over a million others to gulags between 1934 and 1939.

Stalin executed most of the generals in the Red Army because he saw them as a threat to his rule. That caused his army to be greatly weakened when Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union in 1941.

Germany began its invasion on 22 June 1941. This offensive, called Operation Barbarossa, was the largest military invasion in human history.

Two years before, the Soviets and the Germans had signed a mutual non-aggression pact, promising not to fight with each other. However, Hitler hated communism. After taking over France, he sent the Wehrmacht to invade the Soviet Union.

After the Nazis invaded, the Soviet Union began working with the Western Allies to defeat Germany. Germany eventually lost the war, but the USSR had more casualties than any other country during the war.

Under Stalin, the Soviet Union became the largest country in the world. After Germany had been defeated, Stalin gained control over East Germany and most of the rest of Eastern Europe.

The Soviet Union grew to include today's countries of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.

Stalin's government forced those countries to obey him even though the American and British governments protested. Other countries (like Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary) became satellite states of the Soviets and adopted communism.

In 1947, the Cold War had begun, and Stalin militarized the Soviet Union by focusing its time and energy on weapons, military vehicles, and the armed forces.

Stalin collectivized farms in the Soviet Union, which meant cancelling the private property rights of the people who owned them. Stalin's government took land away from individual farm owners and created large government-run farms. People were required to work on large farms and to turn their harvests over to the government.

Collectivization did not work well. Farmers were not paid much money, and whatever they grew went to the state. That made the workers not try their best. In 1932-1933, there was a famine, and millions of people starved notably in Ukraine, which is called the Holodomor.

Peasants were given very small bits of land to grow whatever they liked and keep what they grew. The best farming in the Soviet Union came from those small pieces of land. In 1938, they made up just 4% of Soviet farmland but grew 20% of its produce.

There was a second great famine in the Soviet Union in 19461947. It was caused by drought and made worse by the devastation caused by the war. In 1946, the Soviet Union produced 39.6 million tons of grain: barely 40% of what it had produced in 1940.

In his later years, Stalin's health declined. He had high blood pressure,  cardiovascular problems, and a series of strokes. According to official records, he died on 5 March 1953 after a stroke.

In 2003, a group of Russian and American historians claimed Stalin was poisoned, possibly by the men who took over the government after his death. They thought Stalin had a brain bleed because he was given warfarin, a powerful blood thinner that was used as a rat poison during Stalin's time.

However, Stalin was in his mid-seventies when he died. According to his autopsy, he had severe atherosclerosis. Modern medicines for high blood pressure did not exist at the time.

In a 2023 scientific paper, Dr. Matthew Turner concluded:After examining the evidence, [I think] Stalin’s disease course and the properties of warfarin make it highly unlikely that he was deliberately assassinated.

Nikita Krushchev, who led the Soviet Union from 1953-1964, began a process of "De-Stalinization" which meant taking apart much of the political system that Stalin made. Stalin was denounced as a tyrant. After outsmarting and defeating his rivals, Krushchev established a personal control over the government that was comparable to Stalin's own.

Stalin is a controversial figure in history. Many historians see him as a ruthless dictator, but some praise him as the Father of the Soviet State. Stalin has been criticized for his role in the Holodomor.

In 2006, a poll stated that almost half the adults in Russia thought that Stalin was a good person. Two years later, another poll listed him as the third most popular person in Russian history.

He ruled Russia for more than 29 years, longer than any other Russian leader in the 20th century.

Latin is an Italic language that was developed in Ancient Rome. Short Latin texts have been found from about the 5th century BC and longer texts from about the 3rd century BC.

Classical Latin was used in the 1st century BC and was the official language of the Roman Empire. It was widely used in the western part of the Mediterranean. The Romance languages developed from its spoken informal version, called Vulgar Latin.

Latin was important to Christianity for many centuries. It is still spoken today during some religious activities. It is an official language in the Vatican, where the Pope leads the Roman Catholic Church. People in the Vatican sometimes speak to one another in Latin if they have different first languages. The Mass of the Catholic Church is often done entirely in Latin. It is called is the Mass of the Roman Rite (Extraordinary Form).

Latin was once the most important language in most of Europe during the Middle Ages. It was taught in many European schools, and all universities used it as their teaching language. In the Renaissance it was an important part of the learning system Studia Humanitatis.

Latin began to lose its importance in the Reformation, but it was still often used by writers of scientific books and encyclopedias. Until around 1900, many universities accepted dissertations written in Latin.

Due to  not being spoken as a first language in modern times, Latin is termed a 'dead language'.

People still read Latin classics such as the poems of Virgil, the memoirs of Caesar and the speeches of Cicero.

Also, Latin is widely used as an international auxiliary language, notably in the Catholic Church and by biologists when they describe and name new species.

Some terms used in medicine to name parts of the body (such as bones), and names of some diseases, are also written in Latin.

There are three types of Latin: Classical Latin, Vulgar Latin and Ecclesiastical Latin. Classical Latin was used by the educated Romans and is still studied around the world. Vulgar Latin was the more common spoken variety used by the common Romans and was learned by the peoples conquered by them. Ecclesiastical Latin is common in Italian schools and still used by the Roman Catholic Church.

As people from other regions of Europe learned Vulgar Latin during Roman conquests, each region developed its own language, which was a simplified form of Latin. Those languages are called Romance languages and are still spoken today.

The five Romance languages with the largest number of speakers are Spanish, French, Portuguese, Italian and Romanian. The Romance languages are very similar to one another, and speakers of one Romance language can understand many words and sentences in both texts and spoken conversations from another Romance language. For example, speakers of Portuguese can often understand Spanish. It can be said that the Romance languages are modern dialects of Latin.

Latin has a similar inflection structure to Ancient Greek but a different alphabet.

Latin has seven different noun cases: nominative, vocative, accusative, genitive, dative, ablative and locative. The vocative case is almost always the same as the nominative case. The locative usually takes the form of the dative. Only place names and some nouns have the locative case. Latin nouns are declined, or changed, according to how they are used in the sentence. A noun can be declined five different ways. These ways are called declensions. The declensions are numbered 1 to 5 (first declension, second declension etc.), each having different endings that identify the noun's declension. When a noun is declined, twelve forms are made, two for each of the noun cases (the locative is omitted).

A similar thing is done to verbs, called conjugation. When a verb is conjugated, six forms are made. There are five factors that can change a verb: person, number, tense, voice and mood. In all, there are 120 possible forms Latin verbs.

Latin used to be written on plates of wax. There was little space and so words were run together, with no space between words. Sometimes papyrus was used, but that was expensive. Punctuation was an ancient idea but came to Latin later. Lowercase letters (small letters) are relatively-modern inventions. The Roman alphabet was derived from Etruscan . The following is the introduction to the Metamorphoses by Ovid (Book 1, lines 89–100) amd describes the Golden Age.

After the fall of the Roman Empire, many people still used Latin. Scholars such as Thomas Aquinas, Petrarch, Erasmus, Luther, Copernicus, Descartes and Newton wrote in Latin. For example, Hugo Grotius published his De jure belli ac pacis (On the Law of War and Peace) in Latin as late as 1625, which is one of the bases of international law.

A liquid is a form of matter. It is settled between solid and gas. Liquid has an almost-fixed volume, but no set shape.

Every small force makes a liquid change its shape by flowing. Because of that, gravity makes liquids always take the shape of the container. The molecules that make up the liquid can freely move among themselves.

Fluids that flow slowly have a high viscosity. Some fluids like tar have such a high viscosity that they may seem solid.

It is difficult (near impossible) to compress a liquid. If a liquid is cooled down until it is colder than a certain temperature, it will become a solid.  This temperature is called the melting point or freezing point and is different for every different type of liquid.  If a liquid is heated up it becomes a gas.  The temperature this happens at is called the boiling point.

In a liquid, the liquid on the top presses down on the liquid underneath, so at the bottom the pressure, p, is bigger than at the top. The equation for working this out is:

where z is the depth of the point below the surface and g is how strong gravity is pulling on the liquid. ρ is a number that tells us how heavy a set amount of the liquid is. We call this the density and it is different for all liquids.

Saint Joan of Arc or The Maid of Orléans (Jeanne d'Arc,  6 January 141230 May 1431) was a national heroine of France. She is also a Catholic saint. She was a peasant girl born in the east of France. Joan said that she had visions from God. In these visions, she said that God told her to take back her home, which was then under English rule late in the Hundred Years' War. Many quick military victories made her famous. In 1430, soldiers of Burgundy captured her and gave her to her English enemies.

Joan of Arc has remained an important figure in Western civilization. Famous writers like Shakespeare, Tchaikovsky, Mark Twain, and Voltaire wrote about her. She appears in video games, television, movies, songs, and dances.

Joan’s family were very religious and when Joan was about 12, she had a vision.  She said an angel told her to lead the French in a battle against the English, and to take back her homeland from English rule. She was also told to take Charles, the eldest child of France’s former king, to reclaim the throne at the city of Rheims.

Joan had more visions during her teenage years, which she believed were coming from God. When she was 16, she decided to take action.

Joan asked a town official to take her to Charles, to seek permission to lead an army. The official just laughed at her, but Joan didn’t give up.  She continued to hear voices and also made some extraordinary predictions, such as the French being defeated at the Battle of Rouvray near Orleans (when they were thought to be the stronger side). When these predictions came true, Joan gained the support of some local leaders. Before long, she was taken to the royal court in the city of Chinon.

Joan had to travel through some dangerous territory. She cut her hair short and dressed like a man so she wouldn’t be recognised. Charles was suspicious of such a young girl at first, and had her questioned by church representatives. But he eventually allowed her to lead an army to the city of Orleans, which was being held by the English. Meantime, Joan had been practicing her horse riding skills.  Although she didn’t fight in the battles, she encouraged the soldiers’ bravery.  She dressed as a knight and carried a flag instead of a sword.

Word got round about Joan and her visions. The people of Orleans greeted her with cheers and celebrations, thinking that God might save them from English rule. Joan’s army fought hard, and although Joan was wounded with an arrow, she didn’t give up.  After some fierce fighting, the English eventually retreated from Orleans and Joan’s army had won a great victory.

But her work was not done. Joan then persuaded her army to take the city of Rheims, where Charles was crowned as King Charles VII of France in 1429.  At the king’s coronation, Joan was given a place of honour.

The following year, when Joan heard the city of Compiegne was under attack from the Burgundians, she took a small army to help defend the city. But during the attack, Joan was captured.  She was later sold to the English as a prisoner, although she tried to escape several times. The English wanted to prove that Joan was a heretic (a person who goes against the word of the church) or that she had used witchcraft to defeat them.  They couldn’t find any evidence against her, but eventually claimed that because she had repeatedly dressed as a man, when asked not to, she was guilty and deserved to die.  Tragically, King Charles did nothing to help her.

Joan was burned alive at the stake in the marketplace of Rouen in 1431. She bravely forgave her accusers and asked for a cross before she died. She was just 19 years old.

Twenty-five years later, Pope Callixtus III said that Joan was not guilty of any wrongdoing.  Then nearly 500 years later, in 1920, Joan was made a Saint of the Catholic Church, and forever remains a national heroine of France.

When Joan of Arc was put on trial, she said no to the customary courtroom rules about a witness's oath. She said she would not answer every question about her visions. She complained that the normal witness oath would not be right because she had an oath that she had given to the king. It is not known how much the record which reports this has been changed by dishonest court officials or her possible lies to protect state secrets. Some historians simply say that her belief in her duty was more important than where the visions came from.

Most people say that she was healthy and that she was not crazy. Recently, people have tried to explain her visions through things like epilepsy, migraine, tuberculosis, and schizophrenia. None of these guesses have been greatly supported. This is because, even though seeing visions can be through different diseases, other facts of Joan's life do not agree with these ideas. Two experts who studied a teberculoma  in the medical journal Neuropsychobiology said: "It is difficult to draw final conclusions, but it would seem unlikely that widespread tuberculosis, a serious disease, was present in this 'patient' whose life-style and activities would surely have been impossible had such a serious disease been present." Ralph Hoffman, professor of psychology at Yale University, points out that visions, like "hearing voices" are not always signs of mental illness. He says that her religious inspiration was possibly a reason. However, he does not say any other reasons.

Nonetheless, the court of Charles VII was obsessed about her mental health.

Joan was tried by a French inquisitorial tribunal under English control. The Church said Joan should be killed for wearing men's clothes even after being warned not to. Joan agreed to wear women's clothes. She wore male clothes again. This might have been to protect herself from being attacked. It could also have been, as Jean Massieu said, because her dress had been stolen and she was left with nothing else to wear.

She was burned on a stake on 30 May 1431, at age 19. After she died, the English showed people her burnt body so no one could say she had escaped alive. Then they burned the body two times again to turn it into ashes. They put what was left of her in the Seine. The executioner, Geoffroy Therage, later said that he "...greatly feared to be damned."

The English painter William Etty painted a 28 ft (8.5 m) wide and 9 ft 9 in (3 m) high triptych of the life of Saint Joan of Arc. Etty sold the painting; The new owners were an engraver and a dealer who went bankrupt in 1852. The paintings were separated and sold by 1893. The first panel which showed Joan of Arc finding the sword in the church of St. Catherine de Fierbois ended up in the collection of Llantarnam Abbey, Cwmbran, South Wales, U.K. (The Painting was sold at Auction by Bonham in 2021) The Second panel is in the collection of the Musée des Beaux-Arts d'Orléans. The third panel has since been lost.

Lagos is the second largest city in Africa and the most populous city in Nigeria and in West Africa. There are about 12.5 million to 18 million people living in Lagos, which makes it one of the biggest cities in Africa. Lagos is surrounded by the Atlantic Ocean. The city of Lagos mainland is made of several local government areas. Some of these areas are Somolu Koshofe, Ifelodun, Surulere, Agege, Ikeja, Ikorodu, Ajegunle, Oshodi, and Maryland. The Lagos Island consists of Ikoyi (Eti Osa) , Victoria Island, Lekki, Ajah, Ibeju Lekki, and Sangotedo. Other Parts of Lagos city-state include : Epe, Ikorodu, and badagry.

Each Local government area has a presence of the central government with the establishment of general hospital, judiciary and police stations.

Lagos was the capital of Nigeria until 1992, when the capital became Abuja. Lagos is still the commercial capital of Nigeria and a gateway to West Africa. Lagos is made up of different islands like Victoria island, Banana island, Snake island, and the mainland.

John Locke (; 29 August 1632 – 28 October 1704), known as the Father of Liberalism, was an English philosopher and physician. His writings on the theory of social contract influenced Voltaire and Rousseau, many Scottish Enlightenment thinkers, and the American revolutionaries. His ideas are mentioned in the American Declaration of Independence.

Locke's theories were usually about identity and the self. Locke thought that we are born without thoughts, and that knowledge is instead determined only by experience.

Locke's father, who was also named John Locke, was a country lawyer. He had served as a captain in the early part of the English Civil War. His mother, Agnes Keene, was a tanner's daughter and was thought to be very beautiful. Both mother and father were Puritans.

Locke was born on 29 August 1632, in a cottage by the church in Wrington, Somerset, about twelve miles from Bristol. He was baptized when he was born. After that, his family soon moved to Pensford.

In 1647, Locke was sent to Westminster School in London. During this time he was being sponsored by Alexander Popham, a member of the Parliament. After finishing his studies there, he went into the Christ Church. Although Locke was a good student, he did not like the schedule of the time spent there. He did not like the classical subjects taught at the university, and wanted to learn more about modern philosophy. Through his friend Richard Lower, whom he had met at the school, Locke learned about medicine, because his friend Richard Lower taught it to him.

Locke was awarded a bachelor's degree in 1656 and a master's degree in 1658. In 1666, he met Lord Anthony Ashley Cooper, who had come to Oxford seeking treatment for his liver disease. Cooper was  with Locke and asked him to come.

Locke had been looking for a job and in 1667 moved into Shaftesbury's home at Exeter House in London, to serve as Lord Ashley's personal physician. In London, Locke continued his studies on medicine.

Locke's medical knowledge was put to the test when Shaftesbury's liver disease became worse until Shaftesbury was about to die. Locke used the advice of several physicians and persuaded Shaftesbury to go to an operation. Shaftesbury lived through the operation and thanked Locke for saving his life.

Shaftesbury, as a member of the Whig movement, was a big influence on Locke's political ideas. However, after Shaftesbury began to fall from favor in 1675, Locke decided to travel across France. He came back to England in 1679. At this time, due to Shaftesbury's insistence, Locke wrote the Two Treatises of Government. While it was once thought that Locke wrote the Treatises to  the Glorious Revolution of 1688, recent scholarship has shown that the work was composed before this even started.

However, Locke ran away to the Netherlands in 1683. This is because people became suspicious of him being  in the Rye House Plot to assassinate King Charles II of England.  In the Netherlands, Locke had time to return to his writing, spending a great deal of time re-working the essay. Locke did not return home until after the Glorious Revolution. Locke came with William of Orange's wife back to England in 1688.

Locke's close friend Lady Masham invited him to join her at the Mashams' country house in Essex. Although his time there was marked by variable health from asthma attacks, he nevertheless became an intellectual hero of the Whigs. During this period he discussed matters with such figures as John Dryden and Isaac Newton.

He died on 28 October 1704, and is buried in the churchyard of the village of High Laver, east of Harlow in Essex, where he had lived in the household of Sir Francis Masham since 1691. Locke never married nor had children.

Events that happened during Locke's lifetime include the English Restoration, the Great Plague of London and the Great Fire of London.  He did not quite see the Acts of Union 1707 though the thrones of England and Scotland were held in personal union throughout his lifetime.  Constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy were in their infancy during Locke's time.

Count Lev Nikolayevich Tolstoy (9 September 1828  20 November 1910) was a Russian novelist and anarchist, famous for writing the books War and Peace and Anna Karenina, and many other works. He was a Christian and believed in non-violence and practiced simple living. His work The Kingdom of God is within you has influenced people like Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King.

Tolstoy was born at Yasnaya Polyana, the family estate in the region of Tula, Russia and he married Sofia Andreevna Bers.

Tolstoy died in 1910, at the age of 82. He died of pneumonia.

When he was young his parents died, so he and his siblings were brought up by relatives. At the age of 16, he began studying law and oriental languages. Unfortunately, he left University in the middle of his studies and spent much of his time in Moscow and Saint Petersburg. Later on in his life, he joined the Army with his brother after running up some heavy gambling debts. It was at that time that he started writing.

His conversion from a wealthy society author to the non-violent and spiritual anarchist of his later days was notable. It was caused by his experience in the army as well as two trips around Europe in 1857 and 1860–61. Others who followed a similar path were Alexander Herzen, Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin. During his 1857 visit, Tolstoy saw a public execution in Paris, an experience which marked the rest of his life.

After Anna Karenina, Tolstoy concentrated on Christian themes, and his later novels such as The Death of Ivan Ilyich (1886) and What Is to Be Done? (1886) develop a radical Christian philosophy which led to his excommunication from the Russian Orthodox Church in 1901.

After shaping both his political and literary development in Europe, he returned to Russia and founded 13 schools for Russia's peasant children.

Lake Baikal is a huge lake in Siberia, Russia. It is the biggest fresh water reservoir in the world. The lake is near Irkutsk.

Baikal is about  long. It is  wide. At its deepest point, it is  deep. It is the deepest lake on Earth. The lake is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. It holds about 20% of the world's unfrozen surface fresh water.

The lake has unique fish. It is home to more than 1,700 species of plants and animals. Two-thirds of them can be found nowhere else.

Lake Baikal fills an ancient rift valley, just as Lake Tanganyika does in East Africa. At the Baikal Rift Zone, the Earth's crust pulls apart.

It is the deepest lake in the world at . The bottom of the lake is  below sea level, but below this lies some  of sediment. This means the rift floor is   below the surface: it is the deepest continental rift on Earth.

In geological terms, the rift is young and active  it widens about two cm per year. The fault zone is also seismically active; there are hot springs in the area and notable earthquakes every few years.

Baikal's age is 25–30 million years. It is unique among large, high-latitude lakes, because its sediments have not been scoured by overriding continental ice sheets. U.S. and Russian studies of core sediment in the 1990s gave a detailed record of climatic variation over the past 250,000 years. Longer and deeper sediment cores are expected soon. Lake Baikal is the only confined freshwater lake in which evidence of gas hydrates exists.

The lake is completely surrounded by mountains. The Baikal Mountains on the north shore and the taiga are protected as a national park. It has 27 islands; the largest, Olkhon, is  long and is the third-largest lake-bound island in the world. The lake is fed by as many as 330 inflowing rivers. It is drained through a single outlet, the Angara River.

Despite its great depth, the lake's waters are well-mixed and well-oxygenated throughout the water column, compared to the stratification that occurs in such bodies of water as Lake Tanganyika and the Black Sea.

Lake Baikal has over 1000 species of plants and 1550 species and varieties of animals. Over 60% of animals are endemic; of 52 species of fish 27 are endemic.

The omul fish (Coregonus autumnalis migratorius) is local to Lake Baikal. It is fished, smoked, and sold on all markets around the lake. For many travellers on the Trans-Siberian railway, purchasing smoked omul is one of the highlights of the long journey.

Baikal also has a species of seals, Baikal seal or nerpa. Bears and deer can be seen and hunted by the Baikal coast.

In 1986 Baikalskyi and Barguzinskyi became Biosphere Reserves. The ecosystems are part of UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme.

The Baykalsk Pulp and Paper Mill was constructed in 1966 on the shoreline of Lake Baikal. The plant bleached paper using chlorine and discharged waste directly into Lake Baikal. The decision to construct the plant at Lake Baikal resulted in strong protests. The objections of Soviet scientists had opposition from the industrial lobby. Only after decades of protest was the plant closed in 2008 (and only because it was unprofitable). On 4 January 2010, production was resumed. On 13 January 2010, Russian President Vladimir Putin legalised the operation of the plant. This brought a wave of protests from ecologists and local residents. In September 2013 the mill went bankrupt.

Linguistics is the study of language. People who study language are called linguists. Linguistics is not to be confused with language-learning.

There are five main parts of linguistics: the study of sounds (phonology), the study of parts of words, like "un-" and "-ing" (morphology), the study of word order and how sentences are made (syntax), the study of the meaning of words (semantics), and the study of the unspoken meaning of speech that is separate from the literal meaning of what is said (for example, saying "I'm cold" to get someone to turn off the fan (pragmatics).

Some linguists are theoretical linguists and study the theory and ideas behind language, such as historical linguistics (the study of the history of language, and how it has changed), or the study of how different groups of people may use language differently (sociolinguistics). Some linguists are applied linguists and use linguistics to do things. For example, forensic linguistics is used in crime investigations, and computational linguistics is used to help make computers understand languages, as in speech recognition.

There are many different specialties (subfields or sub-disciplines) within linguistics.

Linguistics can be theoretical or it can be applied. Theoretical linguists try to develop theories on how people think about language. Applied linguists try to find ways that linguistics theories can be used in the real world (technology, coding, speech and language therapy, artificial intelligence etc,). There are theoretical linguists and applied linguists in every specialty of linguistics.

Syntax is the study of grammars. A linguist who studies syntax is called a syntactician. A language's grammar is a set of rules that language users follow in order to form sentences. A language's grammar is created (often subconsciously) by native speakers of that language, and is always changing and evolving.

A language usually does not have just one grammar; different groups of people speaking the same language may have slightly different grammars because of differences in the specific dialect (or variety) of that language they speak. Only native speakers of a language or dialect can determine what the "correct" grammar of their language looks like. In other words, this means a native speaker can never use their own language incorrectly, which also means all syntax theories are based on the way native speakers speak and which utterances they consider to be correct. Linguists call this a "grammaticality judgment": sentences or phrases that sound unnatural or incorrect to native speakers are ungrammatical, and phrases that sound natural and correct are grammatical phrases.

The aim of syntax is to understand how languages' grammars work and to develop a theoretical structure, or framework, to represent them. Syntacticians observe native speakers and use their grammacticality judgments to understand how the rules of a language are structured in a language user's brain.

Phonetics is the study of the physical expression of language. In languages that are spoken, phonology is the study of the sounds that are produced by the mouth, throat, and nose. In languages that are signed, phonology is the study of the signs and gestures that are produced by the hands, arms, torso, and face.

Semantics is the study of how humans use language to communicate meaning. Linguists who study semantics are interested in what words mean, both literally and metaphorically. They are also interested in literary expressions or innuendo, which are words or phrases that have more than one meaning.

Semantics has a lot of overlap with the philosophical study of Logic.

Evolutionary linguistics explores the origins of language as a whole. Historical linguistics studies how languages change over time, and how languages were used in the past. This includes etymology, the study of the history of words. Comparative linguistics compares different languages to find similarities between them. That makes it possible to find things shared by all the languages of the world, and to learn the languages that are related in a language family.

Cognitive linguistics looks at how language and thoughts are organised in the human brain. This includes psycholinguistics, which explores the representation and function of language in the mind; and neurolinguistics, which looks at language processing in the brain. Linguistics additionally draws on and informs work from fields such as acoustics, anthropology, biology, computer science, human anatomy, informatics, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, sociology, and speech-language pathology.

Language acquisition looks at how humans recognize and understand language. First language acquisition explores how children acquire (learn) their first language; second language acquisition explores how adults learn languages.

Some sub-disciplines of linguistics focus on understanding how languages are used in society or in the world. Sociolinguistics studies how language is used in society; for example, how factors such as gender and social class can impact how language is used. Discourse analysis is the study of entire conversations or texts.

Semiotics is the general study of signs and symbols both within language and outside it. Literary theorists study the use of language in literature.

The study of language began in India with Pāṇini, the 5th-century BC grammarian who wrote about the 3,959 rules of Sanskrit grammar, which described the different kinds of vowels and consonants of Sanskrit as well as its verb and noun classes. In the Middle East, Sibawayh (سیبویه) wrote a book about Arabic in 760 AD, Al-kitab fi al-nahw (الكتاب في النحو, The Book on Grammar) and was the first known author to talk about the difference between sounds and phonemes.

Linguistics started in the West as early as it did in the East, but Western linguistics was then more like philosophy and less the study of language. Plato was the first western philosopher to write about semantics in his Cratylus in which he argues that words represent concepts that are eternal and exist in the world of ideas. The word etymology is first used to talk about the history behind a word's meaning.

Literacy means the ability to read and write. Being able to read and write is an important skill in modern societies. Usually, people learn how to read and write at school. People who can read and write are called literate; those who cannot are called illiterate.

According to UNESCO, illiteracy is not being able to write or read a simple sentence in any language. They estimated that, in 1998, about 16% of the world's population were illiterate.

Illiteracy is highest amongst the states of the Arabian Peninsula, and in Africa, around the Sahara. In those countries about 30% of men, and 40-50% of women are illiterate, by the UN definition. One of the causes of illiteracy is that someone who can manage to live without being able to read and write often does not have any reason to want to learn to read and write. Cultural factors also play a part, such as having a culture in which the oral tradition (communicating by speaking) is more important than writing. A tribe that mostly herds livestock, for example, may have no need to read or write.

In English the word literacy has traditionally meant to be well educated. It also meant to be familiar with literature (to know about books). In the late 19th century the word came to include the ability to read and write. It still kept its larger meaning. In modern usage, literacy also means being able to read print, visual, and sound texts. To continue learning, students must be literate in more than just reading and writing text.

Dr. Kwame Nkrumah (born Francis Nwia-Kofi Ngonloma, September 21, 1909 – April 27, 1972) was an African political leader. He was the first Prime Minister, then President, of Ghana. He imagined a united Africa.

On March 6, 1957, after ten years of campaigning for Ghanaian independence, Nkrumah was elected president and Ghana gained independence from the British Empire.

Nkrumah was born Francis Nwia-Kofi Ngonloma in Nkroful. This was a town in Gold Coast (the British colony that was to become Ghana). His parents were Kofi Ngonloma, a goldsmith, and Elizabeth Nyaniba, a salesperson; Nkrumah saw them as a great inspiration.

Nkrumah attended Elementary School at Half Assini, where his father worked as a goldsmith. A German priest called George Fischer influenced his education. Nkrumah went to a school for teachers in Accra, then became a teacher himself.

In 1935 he went to Lincoln University in the United States. He learned more about Communism. His education continued at the University of Pennsylvania, from 1939 to 1943.

In 1945 he went to London and organized an international conference for African freedom. At that time he changed his name to "Kwame".

Nkrumah returned to the Gold Coast and founded the Convention People's Party. He was elected Prime Minister. When Ghana became independent from England, Nkrumah was its first president. He created the flag of Ghana.

Nkrumah required all children to attend school. More women attended school and took jobs. For electricity, Nkrumah ordered the building of a hydroelectric dam known as the "Akosombo Dam" and a nuclear power plant.

The military and police forced Nkrumah from power on February 24, 1966.

In 1972, Kwame Nkrumah died in Bucharest, Romania. According to some sources, he died from cancer. However, his close relatives believed there was a chance he was being poisoned by Western agents. His health began rapidly worsening after the mysterious death of his chef while in exile in Guinea.

The Osagyefo, Dr. Kwame Nkrumah authored over 20 books and publications. He was a lead authority on the Political theory and Practical Pan-Africanism.

Kinshasa is the capital city of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (once called Zaire).  It is the third largest city in the continent of Africa (after Lagos and Cairo).  About eleven million people live there.  Kinshasa is also a province in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Kinshasa is on one side of the Congo river, and Brazzaville, the capital of the Republic of Congo, is on the other side.  Kinshasa and Brazzaville are the nearest country capitals in the world.

Henry Morton Stanley founded (started) the town in 1881 and called it Léopoldville (after King Léopold II of Belgium, who controlled the Congo Free State, now the Democratic Republic of the Congo), next to a village called Nshasa or Kinshasa.  The city was originally private property (not public).  The post developed successfully as the first navigable port on the Congo River above Livingstone Falls, a series of rapids over 300 kilometres (190 mi) below Leopoldville.  At first, all goods arriving by sea or being sent by sea had to be carried by porters between Léopoldville and Matadi.  Later a railway went around the falls.

Karachi (), () is the largest city in Pakistan and the capital of the province of Sindh. Until 1958, it was also the capital of Pakistan. It is also called the City of Lights. It is also one of the world's biggest metropolitan areas. In 2017, there are about 17.63 million people who live in Karachi. It is the largest port city in the Muslim world. Situated at the southern tip of the country along the Arabian Sea coast, Karachi formerly served as the capital city of Pakistan from 1947 to 1959 until the federal capital was shifted to Rawalpindi and then later to Islamabad in 1967.

Karachi has many names including "Mai Kolachi Jo Goth" and "Karatishi". A native of Karachi is called a Karachiite. Quaid-e-Azam (Muhammad Ali Jinnah), who was the founder of Pakistan, was born and buried in Karachi. Karachi has two important regional seaports. Karachi also makes the largest share of Pakistan's GDP and national revenue.

Karachi has five districts: District South, District East, District West, District Central, and District Malir. The city is the financial and commercial center of Pakistan.

Karachi has 26 universities including the University of KarachiIt is home to the National Stadium, which hosts many cricket games, and several other sports complexes. The city has several long sandy beaches including Clifton/Kemari beach and Sandspit beach. Clifton beach suffered from an oil spillage but the beach was cleaned. Karachi has Pakistan's first nuclear site, KANUP in 1952 from Canada. Karachi hosted the first ever night hockey match between India and Pakistan in 1986 at Hockey Club of Pakistan Stadium.The city has a modern international airport (Jinnah International Airport) and two large shipping ports, the Port of Karachi and Port Qasim. Karachi is linked by railway to the rest of Pakistan.

Karachi has a hot desert climate (BWh in the Koeppen climate classification), bordering a hot semi arid climate (Koppen: BSh). It has around 250mm of rainfall, most of which falls during the summer monsoon between June-September.

Franz Joseph Haydn (31 March 1732 – 31 May 1809) was an Austrian composer. He was one of the most famous composers in the Classical music period. He is often called the "Father of the Symphony." He also taught Ludwig van Beethoven and a friend of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (Mozart considered him a mentor).

Haydn's father made wheels for a living. He had the skills of a blacksmith, stonemason, and carpenter. He used that skill in his spare time to make musical instruments for his family to play. The Haydn family would give informal weekend concerts. One of Joseph's relatives thought that Joseph had a great singing voice and should go with him to a boarding school where he would start studying to become a priest.

Haydn did not like it very much at the boarding school, but his voice developed to a point where he was selected to be a part of the Boy's Choir of the Vienna Cathedral. He stayed there until his voice changed. Haydn made a living teaching lessons and playing in the streets for handouts until he met Nicola Porpora, who hired Haydn as an accompanist and general servant.

Eventually Haydn got a job working for Nicholas Esterhazy. He worked for the Esterhazys for over 30 years. He wrote symphonies, string quartets, operas, piano sonatas, and other pieces.

After he was released from his duties with the Esterhazys, Haydn travelled to London. Even at the age of 60 he was still active and wrote some of his most famous symphonies there. While in London, he heard Handel's Messiah, and was inspired to write two oratorios of his own, The Seasons and The Creation. While working on these oratorios in Vienna, Haydn gave lessons to Ludwig van Beethoven. Beethoven had first wanted to study with Mozart, but by the time Beethoven was ready to study in Vienna, Mozart had died.

The house in Vienna where Haydn wrote his oratorios has been turned into a museum called 'Haydnhaus'. There visitors can see the piano by Anton Walter that composer was using for writing music. Haydn was so well-respected in Vienna that he was known as "Papa Haydn" and his influence on music was profound and great.

Johannes Brahms (7 May 1833 – 3 April 1897) was a famous German composer. He started his career as a pianist. He was always very self-critical and destroyed any composition he thought was not really good. He thought that people were expecting him to be the “next Beethoven”, and spent many years on his first symphony before he allowed it to be performed. In the end, he wrote four symphonies altogether, as well as four concertos and a number of choral works, including a requiem. He also wrote chamber music, piano music, and German art songs, or Lieder. One of his best known songs is Wiegenlied ("cradle song"), often called "Brahms' Lullaby," which is often heard in music boxes.

Brahms was born in Germany. His father was a double bass player in the Hamburg city orchestra. He probably gave the young boy his first music lessons. He soon was learning the piano with a teacher named Otto Cossel. When Brahms played in a public concert in 1843 an American agent asked him to tour America, but his teacher realized he was too young. He said that Johannes should study with Eduard Marxsen, a well-known teacher in Hamburg. By 1848 he was playing piano recitals. He also started to compose, and he sent some of his compositions to Robert Schumann to ask for his advice. Schumann sent the parcel back unopened.

At this time there were many Hungarian musicians in Hamburg. Brahms liked their folk music with its unusual rhythms, little triplet figures and sense of rubato. It was to influence his own style of composition. One of the Hungarians was called Remenyi. He played the violin and Brahms often accompanied him at concerts. They went on tour together and met famous people such as the composer Franz Liszt and the violinist Joseph Joachim who became a close friend of Brahms for many years. Joachim told Brahms to go and see Schumann and his wife Clara in Düsseldorf. Schumann liked Brahms and could see that he was going to be a great composer, so he wrote an article in his music journal about him. The article had the title: Neue Bahnen (New Paths). Schumann turned out to be correct: Brahms did become a famous composer and found “new paths” (new ways of composing).

Brahms remained a very close friend of Schumann. When Schumann had a nervous breakdown, Brahms went all the way to Düsseldorf to see him. Brahms soon fell in love with Clara who was 14 years older than himself. He continued to be in love with her after Robert Schumann’s death, and they had a close relationship, though Brahms became interested in other women and was briefly engaged. However, he never married.

In 1859, Brahms settled in Hamburg. He founded a women’s choir and wrote and arranged a lot of music for them. His First Piano Concerto was a great success in Hanover and Hamburg, but not in Leipzig, where a lot of people preferred the wildly Romantic music of Liszt which was quite different from Brahms’s style based on the Classical music style. Brahms decided to go to Vienna. He was to stay there for the rest of his life.

In Vienna he soon made many friends who liked his music. For a short time he was director of a choir called the Vienna Singakademie, who sang some of his compositions. He met Wagner. Wagner was afraid that Brahms would start to write operas which would be more famous than his own. So Wagner wrote an article saying that Brahms was a very bad conductor. Wagner had made himself an enemy of Brahms, who never did write any operas anyway.

In 1870, Brahms became director of a concert series called Vienna Gesellschaftskonzerte. He became more and more famous as a composer, but he was never very good at conducting, and in 1875 a conductor called Hans Richter took over conducting the concerts. During these years he finished one of his greatest works: Ein deutsches Requiem (A German Requiem), as well as one of his most popular works: the Variations on the St Anthony chorale (sometimes wrongly known as Variations on a Theme by Haydn).

At last, in 1876, he allowed his First Symphony to be performed. It was not very successful at first, but in Vienna the audience liked it. He started to compose a lot of his greatest works and received many honours from universities. In the winter he gave concerts and in the summer he spent his time composing. He wrote his last symphony (Fourth Symphony) in 1885 and conducted it, going on tour with the orchestra through Germany and the Netherlands.

From 1889, Brahms spent each summer in Ischl where he had many friends. By 1890 he had decided to stop composing, although he did still write four beautiful works for clarinet after meeting the clarinettist Richard Mühlfeld. In 1896 he wrote Four Serious Songs which were probably inspired by the sad death of Clara Schumann. The next year Brahms died from cancer in Vienna. His father had died of the same illness.

Brahms wrote a great deal of vocal music. The greatest of these works is the German Requiem. There were many works for choirs, and a large collection of songs with piano accompaniment (Lieder). He wrote a lot of piano music which includes sonatas and many shorter pieces such as fantasias, rhapsodies, ballades, intermezzos, capriccios and romances. His chamber music includes string quartets, quintets and sextets and piano trios, quartets and a piano quintet. He wrote four symphonies and four concertos: two for piano, one for the violin and one for violin and cello (the Double Concerto). The German Requiem is his greatest vocal work.

Brahms was also very interested in old music and helped to edit music by François Couperin as well as the music of his friend Robert Schumann. For writing his music Brahms was mostly using German and Viennese pianos. He owned a Conrad Graf piano that he received from Clara Schumann in 1856. Later in life he was mostly playing on a Streicher piano. Brahms kept this piano in his house until his death.

Johannes Kepler (27 December 1571 – 15 November 1630) was a German mathematics teacher, astronomer, optician, natural philosopher, astrologer and Lutheran theologian.

He was Tycho Brahe's apprentice. Tycho Brahe looked at the way the planets moved in the sky. Johannes Kepler found a simple way to say how the planets move. Kepler also studied other things like Kepler's supernova.

A planet moves along a path called an orbit. Kepler used three laws to say what form the path has and how fast the planet moves:

Kepler published the first two laws in 1609, and the third in 1619.

is a Japanese martial art. It was developed in the former Ryūkyū Kingdom in what is now Okinawa Prefecture. Karate was created by mixing two fighting styles. Karate has been an Olympic sport since the 2020 Summer Olympics but in 2020, the IOC decided to drop Karate for the 2024 Paris Olympics, one year later in 2021, the IOC decided to reinstate Karate for the 2028 Los Angeles Olympics. Karate was invented in the 14th century.

Karate uses all parts of the human body as a weapon such as the hand, fist, elbow, leg and knee.

Gichin Funakoshi, a school teacher from the island of Okinawa, introduced Karate to mainland Japan in the early 1900s. Traditional karate is different from boxing, wrestling and kickboxing: in karate, there is just as much importance on the strength of the mind and good manners as there is on strength of the body and self-defence to use when you're in trouble.

Karate became more known around the world because of Karate movies in the 1960s and 1970s. Now people all over the world learn Karate.

After World War II, Karate also became popular in Korea, where a local variation appeared, it is called "tangsudo".

The full name of Karate is "Karate-do" which means "the way of the empty hand" in English.

A person who does Karate is called a "karateka". Notable Karateka include: Gichin Funakoshi, Yoshitaka Funakoshi, Shigeru Egami, Masutatsu Oyama, and Fumio Demura.

When people practice Karate, they wear special clothes called a Gi. The Gi is made up of a white jacket and white pants. People who practice Karate also wear a colored belt, which tells other people their rank. The belt shows how long you have trained rather than how good you are. Two people wearing different colored belts can be surprisingly similar.

Different schools of Karate have different colours of belts for their ranks. You cannot know precisely how good they are without either asking them or knowing how their school arranges the belt colours in ranks. Usually the black belt is for the students who try very hard to be the best that they can be for a long time.

Some schools have several degrees of black belts. They show this by having a white stripe, called a Dan, on the one end of the belt, for the black belt degree the person has. For instance a "3 Dan black belt" would have 3 white stripes on his black belt and would be higher ranked than a "1 Dan black belt".

Juice is a liquid that comes from plants, animals or fruit. The juice from fruit is often made into a drink. Some fruits that are often made into drinks are apple, orange, tomato, pineapple, grapefruit, guava, mango, passionfruit, watermelon, cranberry, grape, lemon and lime, but there are many others.

In the United Kingdom the name of a fruit or fruits followed by juice can only legally be used to describe something which is 100% fruit juice. This is because of the Fruit Juices and Fruit Nectars (England) Regulations and the Fruit Juices & Fruit Nectars (Scotland) Regulations 2003.

Juice can be bought from a store, already in bottles. Companies sell fruit juice just like any other drink. Juices are made by squeezing the juice out of the fruit.

If something has a lot of juice in it, it is said to be juicy. Juice does not have to be a drink. It can just be a liquid contained in something.

Some Juices could be healthy. Orange juice has vitamin C, folic acid, and potassium which may help prevent many diseases.

Lake Victoria or Victoria Nyanza (also known as Ukerewe and Nnalubaale) is a lake in Africa. It is bordered and governed by the countries of Tanzania, Uganda and Kenya. The lake is in the western part of Africa's Great Rift Valley.

Lake Victoria is 68,800 square kilometres (26,560 mi²) in size. It is Africa's largest lake, and the second largest fresh water lake in the world. It was named for Queen Victoria. The White Nile flows out of the lake.

The lake's area is divided among three countries: Tanzania occupies 49% (),  Uganda 45% (), and Kenya 6% ().

The lake has a maximum depth of approximately  and an average depth of . The deepest part is offset to the east of the lake near Kenya.

The main ports on the lake are in Kisumu in Kenya; Mwanza, Musoma, Bukoba in Tanzania; Entebbe, Port Bell and Jinja in Uganda. Many smaller Lake Victoria ports are also in use, the number of ports served by ferries in Tanzania alone reaches 30.

On 20 September 2018, at least 228 people died when the overloaded motor ferry  Nyerere, carrying "close to 270 passengers", capsized on Lake Victoria between Ukerewe Island and Ukara Island, Tanzania.

The ferry Bukoba sank in the Lake Victoria on 21 May 1996 with a loss of between 800 and 1,000 lives, making it one of Africa's worst maritime disasters.

A lemon is a yellow citrus fruit. This is a small tree (Citrus limon) that is of green colour even in a season Winter.

An , yellow fruit, is used while one wants to get a juice   by squeezing it to outdrain a liquid; also, it is being or was used for cooking. Its taste is sour. Its juice, zest, as well as pulp, are often used as a topping over a . Lemon juice is about 5% citric acid, having pH ranging from two to three.

Lemons contain numerous phytochemicals   including polyphenols, terpenes and tannins. Lemons might have an electric charge because of a presence of acid.

People do not know for sure where lemons have come from. However, most people think that lemons first grew in India, northern Burma and China.

Its plants vary in size, yet staying generally small; a one of highest measures six metres.

Journalism is a type of writing. It includes writing for newspapers, news shows on television, news shows on radio, and news magazine.

There are many different news and information jobs in the field of journalism, such as the jobs of newspaper reporter, television news anchor, writer, editor, sub-editor, illustrator, and photographer. People who work in journalism jobs are called journalists.

While various existing codes have some differences, most share common elements including the principles of – truthfulness, accuracy, objectivity, impartiality, fairness and public accountability – as these apply to the acquisition of newsworthy information and its subsequent dissemination to the public.

Leonhard Euler (pronounced Leonard Oiler) (April 15, 1707 – September 7, 1783) was a Swiss mathematician and physicist. He spent most of his adult life in Russia and Germany.

Euler made important discoveries in calculus and topology. He also created many of the words used in math today. He introduced the notation we use to write mathematical functions. He is also known for his works in mechanics, optics, fluid mechanics, astronomy and music theory.

Euler is considered to be the most important mathematician of the 18th century, one of the greatest mathematicians of all time and one of the most prolific writing mathematicians. His collected works fill around 80 volumes. The famous mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace advised, "Read Euler, read Euler, he is a master for us all.”

Euler was featured on the sixth series of the Swiss 10-franc bill and on numerous Swiss, German, and Russian postage stamps. The asteroid 2002 Euler was named in his honor. He is also celebrated by the Lutheran Church on their Calendar of Saints on May 24.

Euler was born in Basel to Paul Euler, a pastor of the Reformed Church. His mother was Marguerite Brucker, a pastor's daughter. He had two younger sisters, Anna-Maria and Maria Magdalena. Soon after the birth of Leonhard, the Eulers moved from Basel to the town of Riehen, where Euler spent most of his childhood. Euler started school back in Basel, where he lived with his grandmother. At the age of thirteen he went to the University of Basel. In 1723, he received his Master of Philosophy. At this time, he was receiving Saturday afternoon lessons from Johann Bernoulli, who quickly discovered his new pupil's extraordinary talent for mathematics.

is a modern Japanese martial art and Olympic sport.  It was developed in 1882 by Jigorō Kanō. Judo is the most internationally competed form of jacket wrestling in the world today.

Judo is very scientific in its training s and fighting techniques.

Jujutsu was an ancient and deadly martial art which used chokes, throws, joint locks, and strikes. Kanō created judo by using techniques which were common in jujutsu. He eliminated techniques that he thought were dangerous in training, so that students could train with resistance. Some basic throws are Tai-otoshi and De-ashi-barai (these are in Japanese). There are two types: groundwork and feet work. Ground work is when both players are on the ground. Usually the attacker would be on top and the uke (defender) would be on the bottom. In feet work both players would move along the mat in a variety of moves.  Every once in a while a player will throw their opponent on the floor. In competitions the players will go full on for each other. Once someone has thrown their opponent down, they need to hold them down for 20 seconds or the point will not count. The person who has the most points at the end wins a gold, silver or bronze.

Judo has been included in the 1964 Summer Olympics in Tokyo for men and female judokas started competing in the 1992 Summer Olympics as well as the Commonwealth Games from 1990 initially as optional sport but from 2022, it is now a core sport.

Al female judokas must tie their hair either into a pony tail, neat hair bun or a messy hair bun. All female judokas also wear either blue or white judogis with a plain white T-shirt and also a black belt. All female judokas can play judo barefoot.

Charles-Edouard Jeanneret-Gris (birth name), (6 October 1887 – 27 August 1965), known by the popular name of Le Corbusier, was an architect and writer born in Switzerland. In the 1930s, he became a French citizen. He is famous for his theories about modernism in architecture. His plans included the improvement of housing for people in large cities. This was because many people lived in poverty at that time. Many of his designs have been built across the world.

He also liked to paint and was skilled at designing furniture.

Le Corbusier grew up in La Chaux-de-Fonds, a small town in the north of Switzerland. In 1907, aged 19, he moved to the French city of Paris. He travelled across Europe, and learned a lot of new ideas. He learned to speak German and worked with famous architects, such as Peter Behrens.

During World War I, Le Corbusier went back to Switzerland and became a teacher. Soon, he opened his own architectural business with his cousin, and they worked together until 1940. It was in 1918 that he met a painter, Amédée Ozenfant, who would become a great friend. They combined their ideas to create a new type of art called Purism.

After the war, Le Corbusier concentrated on his art until 1922. After this, he began designing apartments that could be stacked on top of each other, to house people and meet their needs. This type of low-density housing was to deal with the problem of over-crowding in Paris. He said this transformation was needed, or a revolution could occur from the unhappy lower classes. He created a design for an ideal city (Ville Contemporaine) that was never built. It was a plan developed around a lot of skycrapers. He presented this plan to the French government, who refused it. This did raise their awareness of overcrowding in the city though.

Le Corbusier began to dislike capitalism, and said that people's house size should depend on the size of their family, and not by how rich they were.

Le Corbusier was not active in politics from 1942. Instead, he built smaller housing blocks around France.

The name, Le Corbusier, is French. It is a different version of his grandmother's surname, Lecorbésier. The name translates in to English as "the crowlike one". He chose this name in 1920.

He considered speed in architecture by saying that house is a machine to live in. This machine's purpose is to speed up the activities of the people who live in it.

He introduced an idea of building a residence with just some slabs, columns, and, stairs. These three things can produce any kind of residence, for any class of people.

In 2016, UNESCO added 17 buildings by Le Corbusier to the World Heritage List. The buildings are in seven countries. UNESCO said that they show the new architectural ideas of the Modern Movement and their international influence.

A lipid is a type of organic molecule found in living things. It is oily or waxy. Fats are made from lipid molecules. Sources of lipid can be found in algae, seeds, meat, cheese, butter and fish. Lipids are long chains of carbon and hydrogen molecules. Lipids are classified as simple and complex. Examples of complex molecules could be steroids or phospholipids.

A very important biological function of lipids is as lipid bilayers, the basis of many cell membranes. Another function of lipids is to serve as an energy reserve. Lipids can be hydrophobic (non-polar), or amphipatic (containing both polar and non-polar parts).

Lipids are a group of naturally occurring molecules that include fats, waxes, sterols, fat-soluble vitamins (such as vitamins A, D, E, and K), glycerides, phospholipids, and others. The main biological functions of lipids include storing energy, signalling, and acting as components of cell membranes.

John Maynard Keynes, 1st Baron Keynes, CB (5 June 1883 – 21 April 1946) was a British economist. His ideas, called Keynesian economics, had a big impact on modern economic and political theory. His ideas also had a big impact on many governments' tax and economic policies. He said governments should use tax and banking measures to stop the effects of economic recessions, depressions and booms. He is one of the fathers of modern theoretical macroeconomics.

John Maynard Keynes was born at 7 Melville Road, Cambridge, England. His father was John Neville Keynes, an economics lecturer at Cambridge University. His mother was Florence Ada Brown, a successful author and a social reformer. His younger brother, Geoffrey Keynes (1887–1982) was a surgeon and bibliophile (book lover). His younger sister Margaret (1890–1974) married the Nobel Prize-winning physiologist Archibald Hill.

Keynes first went to King’s College, Cambridge, in 1902. At first he studied mathematics. Later he studied economics under A.C. Pigou and Alfred Marshall. People think Professor Marshall prompted Keynes to change his studies from mathematics and classics to economics. Keynes received his B.A. in 1905 and his M.A. in 1908.

When Keynes was young, he had romantic and sexual relationships with men. One of his great loves was the artist Duncan Grant, whom he met in 1908. Keynes was also involved with the writer Lytton Strachey. Keynes appeared to turn away from homosexual relationships around the time of the first World War. In 1918, he met Lydia Lopokova, a well-known Russian ballerina. Keynes and Lopokova married in 1925.

Keynes was a successful investor and he built up a big fortune. He nearly lost all of his money after the Stock Market Crash of 1929. Later he re-built his fortune.

He enjoyed collecting books: for example, he collected and protected many of Isaac Newton's papers.

Bertrand Russell said Keynes was the most intelligent person he had ever known. Lord Russell said: "Every time I argued with Keynes, I felt that I took my life in my hands, and I seldom emerged without feeling something of a fool".

John Maynard Keynes got a job as a lecturer in economics at Cambridge University. The job was paid for by Alfred Marshall. Soon after, he was chosen to be on the Royal Commission on Indian Currency and Finance. This allowed him to use his economic ideas in real life.

During World War I he worked for the Adviser to the Chancellor of the Exchequer and to the Treasury on Financial and Economic Questions.

Keynes also attended the Conference on the Versailles Treaty to end World War I. He wrote The Economic Consequences of the Peace in 1919, and A Revision of the Treaty in 1922. In his books he said that the reparations which Germany was being made to pay would ruin the German economy and would lead to further fighting in Europe. These predictions were shown to be true when the German economy suffered in the hyperinflation of 1923. Reparations were only completed in 2010.

Keynes's magnum opus (Latin for "Great Work", meaning his most famous book) was the General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. The General Theory was published in 1936. The ideas in that book were very different from classical economics.

Historians agree that Keynes influenced U.S. president Roosevelt's New Deal, but disagree as to what extent. Spending more than the government earned in taxes (called deficit spending) was used in the New Deal from 1938. But the idea had been agreed to by President Herbert Hoover. Few senior economists in the U.S. agreed with Keynes in the 1930s. With time, however, his ideas became more widely accepted.

In 1942, Keynes was raised to the House of Lords. He became Baron Keynes of Tilton in the County of Sussex. When he sat in the House of Lords he was a Liberal member.

During World War II, Keynes wrote a book titled How to Pay for the War. He said the war effort should be paid for by higher taxes. He did not like deficit spending because he wanted to avoid inflation.

Keynes died of a heart attack at his holiday home in Tilton, East Sussex. His heart problems were made worse by the strain of working on post-war international financial problems. He died soon after he arranged a guarantee of an Anglo-American loan to Great Britain. Keynes' father, John Neville Keynes (1852–1949) outlived his son by three years. Keynes's brother Sir Geoffrey Keynes (1887–1982) was a distinguished surgeon, scholar and bibliophile. His nephews include Richard Keynes (born 1919) a physiologist; and Quentin Keynes (1921–2003) an adventurer and bibliophile. Keynes did not have children.

Kālidās (Devanāgarī: कालिदास) was an Indian Sanskrit playwright and the author of Meghadoot, Shākuntal and other Sanskrit works. He has a similar place in Sanskrit as a poet and a dramatist, as Shakespeare in English.

Kālidās's plays and poetry are based on Hindu mythology and philosophy.

There is very little known for certain about the life of Kālidās. It is not clear where he lived, and the time he might have lived is anywhere from 130 BC to 600 CE.

Kālidās wrote three plays: Mālawikāgnimitra ("Mālavikā and Agnimitra"), Abhijñānashākuntala ("The Recognition of Shakuntala"), and Vikramorwasheeya ("Pertaining to Vikram and Urwashi"). Abhijñānashākuntala, that is regarded as a masterpiece was the first to be translated into English and German.

Mālawikāgnimitra tells the story of King Agnimitra, who falls in love with the picture of an exiled servant girl named Mālavikā. When the queen discovers her husband's passion for a servant girl, she becomes very angry and orders that this girl is sent to prison; but it turns out that the girl is a princess, therefore the affair is accepted in the end.

Abhijñānashākuntala tells the story of a king, Dushyanta, who meets in the forests Shakuntalā, the adopted daughter of a wise man who lives with him in a cottage in the forests.

Dushyanta and Shakuntalā fall in love with each other and get married. Dushyanta stays with Shakuntalā in the forests for while until he gets called back to his court for some pressing matter. After many difficulties there follows a happy end.

Kālidās wrote two very good epic poems, Raghuvamsha ("Dynasty of Raghu") and Kumārasambhawa ("Birth of Kumar Kartikeya"), and the lyrical Meghadoota ("Cloud Messenger") and Rutusamhāra ("The Exposition on the Seasons").

Some historians credit Kālidās with a few other works, including the following; however, scholars commonly believe that they were the creations of some other authors writing under the name Kālidās:

Li Bai (also Li Bo or Li Po, ; 701–762) was a Chinese poet. His fellow poet Du Fu counted him to the group of Chinese scholars that he called the "Eight Immortals of the Wine Cup" in a poem. Li Bai is often regarded, along with Du Fu, as one of the two greatest poets in China's literary history. Today we know about 1,100 of his poems.

The first translations in a Western language were published in 1862 by Marquis d'Hervey de Saint-Denys in his Poésies de l'Époque des Thang. The English-speaking world was introduced to Li Bai's works by a Herbert Allen Giles publication History of Chinese Literature (1901) and through the liberal, but poetically influential, translations of Japanese versions of his poems made by Ezra Pound.

Li Bai is best known for the imagination and Taoist imagery in his poetry. He spent much of his life travelling. People tell the story that he fell from his boat when he tried to embrace the reflection of the moon, and therefore drowned in the Yangtze River.

Li Bai was probably born in Central Asia, though the exact location is unknown. His ancestors had lived in exile in that area since around the 7th century. He grew up in a fairly poor family. His father was a merchant. Li Bai did not receive any formal schooling as a child. Despite this, he had always been skilled with the art of words even as a young boy. In 705, Li Bai's father moved the family back to Mien-chou in Sichuan. It was there that he spent most of his early childhood.

As Lai Bai grew up he developed his sword fighting skills. He spent his teenage years traveling all of Sichuan as a knight-errant. At age 25, he traveled to Central China. In 727, Li Bai traveled to A-lu in Hubei. He married the daughter of the retired prime minister. There, he continued to explore the natural world where he lived.

In 735, Li Bai traveled north to the Yellow River, and east to the Yangtze River. In 742, he traveled to Chang’an, and was presented to the Emperor. The Emperor gave Li Bai many compliments, and thought highly of him. He gave Li Bai a position at the Hanlin Academy. Li Bai received a lot of attention from fellow scholar-officials.

Li Bai enjoyed drinking liquor. He is known for often getting very drunk with seven other officials in city taverns. This earned them the title the "Eight Immortals of the Wine Cup" from Du Fu, another one of China's best poets at the time.

In 744, Li Bai left the city of Chang'an. He was bored with the luxuries of city life. A year later, he met up with Du Fu, in Loyang. It was here that he also became a Taoist, a decision that would change the rest of his life. After settling his family down in Loyang, he left on another ten-year journey wandering around northern China. During this time, his poetry reflects his shift in interest to Toasm rather than his youthful interests of knightly behaviors and gallantry. While famous and well known, Li Bai started to struggle with problems like lack of money and property.

Li Bai is best known for his imaginative and witty poetry. It involves romantic descriptions of nature, and opinions on ethics and death. He was famous among both nobles and commoners in his time, and is thought of as one of the four best poets during the Tang Dynasty. He is also well known for his Taoist beliefs and rebellion against Confucian teachings through his writing.

One of Li Bai's most famous poems is Drinking Alone by Moonlight (, pinyin: Yuè Xià Dú Zhuó), which is a good example of some of the most famous aspects of his poetry—a very spontaneous poem, full of natural images. Li Bai actually wrote several poems with the same title; Arthur Waley's version of the most famous reads:

Li Bai’s poetry reflects the state of low feeling one experiences when he finds his life is wasted, and talents unused. To drown his own sorrows, Li Bo became very drunk very often, until it became a lifelong habit. Wine, however did help him write. While he was drunk, Li Bai was able to compose beautiful verses without restraint. Without anything holding him back, Li Bai’s finest poems were composed with much spontaneity and imagination.

Li Bai is influential in the West partly due to Ezra Pound's versions of some of his poems in the collection Cathay, such as . In the east he influenced poets like Mi Fei in the Song Dynasty.

Jesus (or Jesus Christ, or Jesus of Nazareth) was a Jewish preacher and reformer of religion and the central figure of Christianity. In Christian tradition, Jesus is believed to be the Jewish Messiah mentioned in the Hebrew Bible. He is often considered one of the most famous, most recognized, and most influential people.

Most historians agree that Christian Jesus is based on a historical Jesus. They also agree that Jesus was considered a teacher in his time and that he was baptized by John the Baptist, and that he may have been crucified on the orders of Pontius Pilate. Christians believe that Jesus was raised by God three days after his crucifixion.

According to the canonical gospels, Jesus taught that all people should show love and forgiveness, being humble. They tell of the birth, ministry, crucifixion, and resurrection of Jesus, as well as the miracles he performed and his opposition to the Pharisees as hypocrites and exploiters of the law of Moses.

Jesus was arrested by the Jewish leaders who conducted a religious trial on him before handing him over to the Roman authorities to be crucified.

Several Jewish and Roman historians, including Flavius Josephus, Tacitus, Pliny the Younger, and Suetonius, include Jesus in their writings. They do not record the life of Jesus, but they tell of his execution or describe conflicts between his followers and the Roman government.

Manichaeans, Gnostics, Muslims, Bahá'ís, and others have found prominent places for Jesus in their religions. Islam teaches that Jesus was a follower of Allah and a human prophet. Bahá'í teachings consider Jesus to be a "manifestation of God", a Bahá'í concept for prophets. Some Hindus believe that Jesus was an avatar or a sadhu. Some Buddhists, including Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, regard Jesus as a bodhisattva who dedicated his life to the welfare of people.

The name Jesus came from the Greek Iesous, from Hebrew Yeshua, meaning "Yahweh is salvation (or deliverance)." In the early first century, this was a popular name.

The words "Christ" and "Messiah" both mean the same thing. The first one comes from the Greek word "Christos," which means "Anointed One," and the last one comes from the Hebrew word "Mashiach," which also means "Anointed One."

In Jewish tradition, the King of Israel was anointed to show that they were chosen. Hence, "Messiah" and "Christ" are also terms that mean "King of Israel" in the context of the Bible.

The Gospel of Matthew and the Gospel of Luke claim that Jesus had parents named Mary and Joseph, and that Mary was betrothed to Joseph. They say that Mary and Joseph were made aware by the angel Gabriel that Jesus was going to be the King of Israel promised to the Jewish people. When Joseph and Mary go to Bethlehem, Mary gives birth to Jesus and lays him in a manger. Eight days after his birth, Jesus was circumcised.

Most Christians celebrate the day that Jesus was born, which is the Christmas holiday. The Gospels do not say what day Jesus was born, but the date of December 25 was eventually chosen because there was already a Roman holiday on that day.

In the Gospels, John the Baptist knows about Jesus. When he baptizes Jesus, the Spirit of God descends upon Jesus like a dove, and a voice from heaven is heard. Then Jesus is led into the wilderness by the Spirit where he fasted and was tested by the accuser, though Jesus resisted his attempts.

Jesus went into Galilee, settled in Capernaum, and began to preach about the Kingdom of God.

Jesus taught in parables. He said that people should love God and love each other as the scriptures tell them to do, and he taught his followers how to pray. Jesus performed miracles as signs of God's power, such as giving hungry people food and wine, healing sick people, and raising the dead. He also set people free from evil spirits.

Jesus gathered together twelve men, known as the Twelve Apostles, whom he chose and trained to spread his message. He had female disciples, but they could not travel far on their own because of Jewish customs.

The Bible says Jesus became famous. He went to Jerusalem, where many were visiting the city for Passover. When they heard that he was coming, they greeted him as if he was a king. They thought he would free them from the Roman rule, but Jesus rode into Jerusalem on a donkey as a sign that he came in peace.

Jesus did certain things that upset the Pharisees. They thought that he showed disrespect for the customs that the Jews had kept for many centuries, such as the Sabbath: in the Gospel of John, when Jesus heals a crippled man lying on a mattress, he tells the man to pick up the mattress and go home, but carrying the mattress on the Sabbath was against religious custom because it was a kind of labor, so the religious leaders argued with Jesus about it. They then watched everything he did, and remembered all the things that were against the religious customs.

In the Gospel of Mark, it says that Jesus went to the Jewish temple when he arrived in Jerusalem. He became angry because there were sellers and money lenders who were cheating poor people. Jesus chased them away and accused the chief priests and scribes of turning the temple into a den of thieves because they were making money from the poor and taking away homes from poor women who had no other way to pay for the temple worship.

The Gospels say that the temple leaders were angry and wanted to kill him. The Pharisees wanted to crucify him because he claimed to be the Son of God. Pontius Pilate, the governor of Roman Judea, thought that Jesus should be set free, but the Jewish leaders said: "If you release this man, you are no friend of Caesar."

Pilate sentenced him to death because his followers claimed that he was the king of the Jews. The Roman soldiers killed Jesus by crucifixion. He was nailed up to a high cross by his hands and feet. This was a common way for the Romans to kill rebels and criminals.

The body of Jesus was buried in a tomb that belonged to one of his followers. On the day after the Sabbath, early in the morning, women went to treat the body with spice and perfumed oil. But when they got to the tomb, the body of Jesus was missing, though they saw him alive afterward.

Some people, like the disciple Thomas, said, "Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands and put my finger in the mark of the nails and my hand in his side, I will not believe." The Bible claims that five hundred people, including Thomas, saw Jesus alive again. There are many stories in the Gospels about what Jesus did after he was resurrected.

According to the Gospel of Luke, Jesus took his disciples to a hill where he blessed them and told them to spread his teaching through all the world. Then clouds came down, and he was lifted up to heaven.

Most Christians celebrate the time that the Gospels say he died and was raised from the dead as the holiday of Easter.

In the New Testament, there are letters (epistles) written from 1st-century to the 2nd-century, though none of them were written by Jesus. Most of them were written by Paul, an apostle who used to persecute Christians but converted to Christianity after witnessing the resurrected Jesus. The ones that were written by Paul were addressed to churches and intended either to praise them for their faithfulness or to correct their mistakes.

A few of these letters, like the Epistle to Titus, probably weren't written by Paul, even though they are traditionally attributed to Paul.

There are other letters in the New Testament by other writers including Peter, James, and John, but their authorship is debated. These letters all help to build the beliefs that modern Christians have.

Whether or not Jesus is God in nature, and in what sense, has been the subject of much debate for a long time. Many Christians, including those from the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Protestant denominations, believe that Jesus was both God in nature and Human in nature. Jesus is described in different parts of the New Testament as being "the Word," "the Son of God," and "the Son of Man," though these can all (excluding "the Word") be interpreted as different titles for the King of Israel.

These teachings, which are believed by most Christians, are not believed by many other people. The Islamic teaching is that Jesus was a human prophet, but he was not part of God or the "Son of God." In Jesus's own time, many Jews became very angry at Jesus for saying that he was the "Son of God" and also because his followers said he was the "Messiah." Most Jews do not believe this.

These Bible verses are often interpreted as supporting Trinitarianism:

Many Christians believe that these verses say Jesus is God in nature, and all Christians believe that Jesus's death on the cross allows all people to be forgiven by God for their sins. Most Christians believe that if a person asks God to forgive them, he will do so, and they will get to live forever with him in heaven.

Many Christians believe that Jesus was not only truly God but also truly human, and that this was part of God's plan to bring humans closer to understanding him. People who do not have Christian beliefs have different ideas about Jesus.

In the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus is often called "the Son of Man," which is a Hebrew expression that just refers to a person (i.e., son of Adam). Matthew has borrowed these words from the Old Testament, where they are often used to show that humankind is very far from God. In the Bible, God is often praised and thanked for helping ordinary humans, who are called "sons of man." In the Book of Psalms, the Psalmist asks God: "what is man that you are mindful of him, and the son of man that you care for him?"

Jesus says, in the Gospel of Matthew, "Then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in heaven, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see 'the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven' with power and great glory." Like the Psalmist, Jesus is making a difference between his ordinary human life and his great power as the Son of God.

One of the best-loved parts of the Old Testament is a song called Psalm 23. It starts:

In the Gospels, Jesus often spoke about himself as being like a shepherd, caring for sheep. He called himself the "Good Shepherd" who would even give his own life, to protect his sheep. He told the Jewish people, referring to non-Jewish or Gentile believers, that he had "other sheep" that do not belong to this flock. (John 10:16, NRSVUE). In one of his last conversations with his disciple Peter, he told him, "Feed my sheep!", in other words "Take care of my people.".

In Judaism, from ancient times, people are seen as sinful or bad, in need of forgiveness from God. They believed that there were two ways to get God's forgiveness, by prayer and by sacrifice. Prayer could be done anywhere, but sacrifices were done at the temple. A person would bring an animal, often a lamb, or if they were poor, a dove. They would put their hands on the animal to lay their sins on it. Then the animal would be killed, as a punishment for the sin. This type of sacrifice continued until the temple in Jerusalem was destroyed in 71 AD. Paying money to the temple was also a sort of sacrifice. When Jesus drove the traders out of the temple, they were the people who sold lambs and doves, and the people who exchanged Roman money into special temple money.

Part of Christian belief is that Jesus Christ did not just come as a human person so that he could teach a better way of life. Christians also believe that Jesus was the ultimate sacrifice for the sin of humankind, that Jesus is the "Saviour" who came to save. Christians believe that, unlike ordinary people, Jesus was completely pure and free from sin, but that when he died on the cross, he took on himself all the sins of every person who would believe in him, like the lamb sacrificed in the temple.

Based on the Gospel of John, the Christian teaching is that the death and resurrection of Jesus are the sign of his power to forgive the sins of any person who turns to him and truly asks for forgiveness. The Bible says that sinners who are forgiven should try to live a new life and not go back to their sinful behaviour. Christians believe that knowing about God's love helps people to live a new and better life.

These are three verses from the Bible that are important in this Christian belief:

"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have eternal life." John 3:16.

Jesus said to him, “I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me." John 14:6.

"If we say we have no sins, we are fooling ourselves and not telling the truth. But if we tell our sins humbly to God, then He has promised to listen and to forgive our sins and make us clean from all our badness." from the First Letter of John.

Some people who are not Christians believe that Jesus lived at the time that the Gospels say, but do not believe that Jesus was the "Son of God" or "Savior". They believe that Jesus was an ordinary, but very good person, a teacher, or a prophet.

Mohandas Gandhi said, "I am a Muslim, and a Hindu, and a Christian, and a Jew," even though he was born a Jain.

Muslims believe Jesus was the second-to-last Prophet (messenger of God). They call Him "Isa", the Arabic name for Jesus. They believe that Muhammad was the very last Prophet. They believe that both Jesus and Muhammad were ordinary men, chosen by God to be his servant and teach the word of Islam.

Muslims do not believe that Jesus was God or "the Son of God". Islam is strictly monotheistic: it says that there is only one God. Muslims believe that Jesus cannot be part of God, because there is only one God. If someone other than God is worshiped, it is thought to be polytheism (belief in more than one God). It is also thought to be idolatry: idolizing someone other than God.

Islam teaches that Jesus did not die on the cross, but another man disguised as him went on the cross for Isa (Qur'an 4:157). This is very different from Christianity. Jesus' death is a very important part of the Christian belief about salvation. Muslims always say "peace be upon him" after saying Jesus' name as a sign of respect in short and Arabic a.s.

Muslims also accept some other teachings about Jesus. These teachings say that Jesus will return to the earth in the End Of Days; he will then destroy the false messiah or Anti-christ before the day of judgment. Muslims also accept Jesus' claims to be a healer. They believe in the many miracles he is said to have performed, like raising the dead to life and giving sight to the blind. They believe that all his miracles were granted to him from God.

The Qur'an (like the Bible), mentions the virgin birth of Jesus but then it says other things about Mary (Islamic-Maryam). The Bible says that Joseph helped Mary give birth to Jesus, but in Islam there is no Joseph. Instead, Mary walked the desert alone in labor and found a tree. The angel Gabriel (Jibril) asked if she was hungry, then told her to shake the tree and dates fell for her to eat. Then he asked if she was thirsty, and he said look down at your feet and there was water and there she gave birth to Jesus. (Qur'an 19) This is why Muslims fast and how they break their fast. Mary knew she had to go back to her town and when she did, with Jesus in her arms, the people were shouting at her for adultery. Mary wanted to explain herself, but the Angel told her not to speak.

Even though Jesus was a Jew, and his teaching came out of the Jewish religion, most Jewish people do not believe that Jesus was the Messiah that is promised in the Jewish Scriptures.

In the Gospels, it tells that Jesus made the Jewish teachers very angry with his teachings. It says that part of their anger was because he told them they were "hypocrites" which means that they externally made themselves appear to be living a holy life, but internally their hearts were far from God's.

In the Gospels, the other reason that they became angry was that Jesus acted as if he was the Messiah, and said he was the "Son of God". This meant that he was either a terrible liar, that he was mad and just imagined it, or that it was true. But Jesus did not seem to be mad. So that left only two choices. If Jesus was lying, then he was doing something badly against the Jewish religion. It was because of the claims that Jesus was the "Son of God" that some of the Jewish leaders wanted him killed and they handed him to the Roman rulers. The Romans did not care if Jesus said something that was against the Jewish beliefs. But they knew that people had also said that Jesus was "King of the Jews". The Jewish leaders claimed this was against the Roman Government's laws. Although the Roman leaders did not agree, they had him killed to prevent a possible riot.

Although, today and through history, most Jews do not believe what Christians say about Jesus, there are some Jews who do believe that Jesus was the Messiah promised in the Jewish Scriptures. Jews who believe this are called Jewish Christians.

Nearly all modern scholars, both Christian and non-Christian, agree that Jesus was a real person. Both Christian and non-Christian scholars base their studies of him on the Gospels. They are believed to have been written between 60-90 AD.

By tradition, the Gospels were written by four men, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John who gave their names to these books.

This is the order in which they are arranged in the New Testament of the Bible, but scholars think that it is not the order in which they were written. The Gospel of Mark was probably written before the Gospel of Matthew. The four Gospels all tell the story of the Life of Jesus, but they do it from four different points of view, because they were written by different people and each writer had reasons to tell it in a different way.

Other scholars have said that leaders in the Early Christian Church made changes to the Gospel writings. These changes are said to have happened at different times, in different ways and for different reasons. For example, one story was left out of many old versions of the Gospels. It is about Jesus rescuing a woman who had committed adultery (had sex outside marriage) and was about to be killed. St. Augustine of Hippo, (354-430 AD) wrote that this was probably left out because some church leaders thought the story might cause people to act in a sinful way. This story is in all modern Bibles and is thought to contain very important teaching for Christians. Other differences that can be found in versions of the Gospels are mostly small and do not make a difference to what is known about the life of Jesus and his teaching.

Mark's Gospel, which is thought by many biblical scholars to be the earliest, has the name of a young disciple of the apostle Paul who is mentioned several times in the Acts of the Apostles and Paul's Letters. The Gospel was probably written in Rome and is thought by scholars to be from the memories of Jesus' follower or disciple, Peter. It does not tell about Jesus' birth; it starts when he was 30 years old, at the time when the disciples got to know him. It shows Jesus as a man of action: going around the country, teaching and healing people.

Matthew's Gospel was written next. Matthew was one of Jesus' disciples. He was a Jewish man that was hated by other Jews because he worked for the Roman rulers as a tax collector. Matthew tells that one day Jesus saw him sitting at his desk in the market place and said "Follow me".

Most Biblical scholars believe that Matthew had read Mark's Gospel and decided to fill in some things that Mark left out, because, while Mark wrote his Gospel for the Church of Rome, Matthew wanted to write for Jewish Christians all over the Roman Empire. Matthew was a well-educated Jew, so he knew the Jewish Scriptures, (which Christians also use and call the Old Testament of the Bible). Matthew knew the scripture teachings that the Messiah, or God's anointed one would come. In his Gospel, he often mentions these teachings. He also starts off by giving a list of Jesus' ancestors because this was important to Jewish readers.

The apostle Luke was Greek and a friend of the apostle Paul. He was a doctor. Luke came to know about Jesus from the disciples. Luke writes about the birth and the childhood of Jesus and he says, "Mary kept all these things in her heart and thought about them."

Luke was not a Jew, and he writes in a way that is easy for other people who are not Jews to understand. He explains Jewish customs and laws. He wrote a second book called the Acts of the Apostles which tells what the disciples did after Jesus had left them.

It is believed by scholars of the Bible that John was a disciple of Jesus and was probably the youngest of the twelve men who were Jesus' main followers. He lived to be an old man and, because of his teaching about Jesus, he was sent to a small island, called Patmos.

John writes with one particular idea in mind. He wants to prove to the reader that Jesus is God's way of saving humans from the terrible problem of sin or evil. John starts by telling the reader that Jesus was and is God. John says that Jesus is God's Living Communication (or Living Word). Every part of John's Gospel is written to show that Jesus came from God, taught the Message of God and is the way for people to understand God's Love.

The Gospels tell many of the stories that Jesus told when he was teaching people about the way that God loved them and the way they should live. These are called parables. They include the following:

In this story from chapter 10 of Luke's Gospel, Jesus shows what it means to be a good neighbour. Near the Jews lived the people called Samaritans. They did not agree with each other about religious teaching and were considered enemies. One day, a Jewish man was walking, when some robbers beat him up, robbed him, and left him naked and almost dead, by the road. A Jewish priest came along and saw him. He thought, "If I touch that naked bleeding man, I will be unclean and I will not be able to go to the Temple!" So, he pretended that he had not seen him. Another Jew, a Holy Man, came along and acted in the same way. At last, a Samaritan came along with a donkey. When he saw the wounded man, he stopped. He washed his wounds with wine and olive oil. Then he put him on his donkey and took him to the nearest inn. He paid the innkeeper and said, "Keep him until he is well, and whatever is owed, I will pay when I come back this way." Jesus said to the people who were listening "Which one of these people acted like a good neighbour?" They said, "He that stopped and helped." Jesus said, "You go and act the same way."

Jesus told listeners that a sinner who changes his mind makes angels face joy. In the last story of chapter 15 of Luke's Gospel, Jesus tells how a rich man had two sons. They would both get a share of his money when he died, but he was still alive. The younger son said, "Father, give me my money now, so I can go and enjoy myself, while I'm young." He took the money to another place and wasted it on pleasure. Soon he had none left to feed himself and was ashamed. He got a job caring for pigs, an unholy meat to eat, just keep himself from starving. He said to himself, "I'll go home to my father, and I will say, 'Father, I have sinned! Please let me be a servant in your house!'" When his father saw him coming, he ran along the road to put his arms around his son. The father said, "Bring the finest clothes! Kill the fattest calf to make a feast!" When the elder brother heard about the feast, he was angry and said, "I'm a good son to you, but you never even gave me one little calf to have a feast with my friends!" The father said, "You have always been with me. I love you greatly, and all I have is yours, but my son who was lost is now found! Your brother who seemed to be dead is alive! Be happy with me!"

Judaism (Hebrew: יהדות) is the religion of Jewish people, and also the world's oldest Abrahamic monotheistic religion. It was created around the 6th century BCE in Canaan, and it is based on the Torah. There are about 15 million followers. They are called Jews or Jewish people.

It is the second oldest monotheistic religion. The Torah is the most important holy book of Judaism. The laws and  of Judaism come from the Torah, the first five books of the Hebrew Bible and oral s. Some of these were first oral s and later written in the Mishnah, the Talmud, and other works. Both Christianity and Islam are related to Judaism. These religions accept the belief in one God and the moral teachings of the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament), which includes the Torah or "תורה."

The three main beliefs at the center of Judaism are Monotheism, Identity, and covenant (an agreement between God and God's people).

The most important teaching of Judaism is that there is one God, who wants people to do what is just and compassionate. Judaism teaches that a person serves God by learning the holy books and doing what they teach. These teachings include both ritual actions and ethics. Judaism teaches that all people are made in the image of God and deserve to be treated with respect.

The main teachings of Judaism are about God, that there is only one God. According to Judaism, only God created the universe and only God controls it. Jewish people refer to God by many names. The most holy name for God in Judaism is "YHVH", though most Jews avoid saying this name aloud due to how holy it is. Judaism also teaches that God is  and not .

Jews believe that God is one – a : God is one , complete being. God cannot be  into parts and people cannot say how God looks in words; they can only say how God is and what God does.

Jews believe that all  and morality are from God, and that God is  in what people do and  what they do.

Judaism teaches that all people are made in the  of God. This is why people must be treated with  and . A person  God by being like God. This means that they must do what is  and , show mercy, and  with  and love for people.

Judaism says that God  forever, that God is everywhere, and that God knows everything. God is above nature (“supernatural”) but God is in the world and  hears those who pray to God and will answer them. God is the main  in the universe.

Judaism teaches that God  people to choose what to do – this is called “free will.” Free will is the freedom to do whatever a person wants, but that they must be responsible for their own actions. People are  for their actions. God  people who do good, and will  those who do wrong. God gives a person a reward or a punishment in this world, but God gives the final reward or punishment to the soul of the person after their death.

Jews believe that God made an  called a “covenant” with Abraham, the  of the Jewish people. The Bible says that God  to  Abraham and his  if they  God and were  to God. God made this covenant with Abraham's son, Isaac, and with Isaac's son, Jacob. God gave Jacob another name, Israel. This is how Jacob’s descendants got the name the “Children of Israel” or “Israelites.” God later gave the Torah to the Israelites through their leader, Moses. The Torah told the Israelites how to live and build their community. God gave the Israelites the Ten Commandments and other laws in the Torah (613 in total).

The Jews are sometimes called the “ People". This is because the Bible says God told them, “You will be to Me a kingdom of priests and a holy nation” (Exodus 19:6) and “For you are a holy people to the Lord your God, and the Lord chose you to be God's own  nation out of all peoples on the earth” (Deuteronomy 14:2). Jews understand that this means they have special  and   by God. For example, Jews must  a just society and  only God. Jews believe that this  works in two ways: if they follow God’s laws, God will give them God's love and protection, but they are also responsible for their sins – bad actions – and disobeying what God told them. Jews believe that they must teach other people that God exists and that God wants all people to do good actions. Jews believe that their  in the world is to be "a light to the nations" (Isiah 49:6) by  the people of the world  to make the world a  place.

Jews believe that God has given them a   which is to  the world. Their job is to make the world a  place with more good in it. They must use the things in the world to  good and come closer to God. They call this “tikkun olam” – repairing the world. Jews see themselves and all people as  with God. People must repair the world in any way they can – to find ways to   of people and animals, to make more peace, bring  between people and  the earth’s environment from .

Jews do not try to  other people to believe in Judaism. Jews believe they have a special job to show the world that God , but people do not have to be Jewish to  God. All people can serve God by following the Seven Commandments (rules) given to Noah. But, Judaism  people who  to change their religion to Judaism.

Jews believe that God tells them in the Torah the way of life that they must follow. The Torah says God wants the people of Israel to walk in God's ways, to love God, and to serve God, and to keep God’s  (Deut. 10:12–13).  are more important than beliefs and beliefs must be made into actions.

These actions are called mitzvot in Hebrew (singular: a mitzvah מִצְוָה). Sometimes they are called “laws,” "rules" or “commandments”. Many people think of a mitzvah as "a good act," or "a good thing to do." There are 613 mitzvot in the Torah. Jews believe that the Torah gives mitzvot for all people; all people must keep seven laws that were taught to Noah and his children after the flood. The Jews must keep 613 mitzvot, which are listed in the Torah. The rabbis counted 365 mitzvot that Jews must not do ( mitzvot), and 248 mitzvot that Jews must do ( mitzvot). Some mitzvot are for everyday life, and some are only for special times, such as Jewish holidays. Many of the 613 mitzvot are about the Holy Temple in Jerusalem and cannot be done now, since the Temple was destroyed.

Some of the mitzvot are about how people must act to other people. For example, they must give charity to a  person, or help a person who is in danger. They must not steal or lie. These are ethical and moral mitzvot.

Some mitzvot are about how people must act towards God. For example, they must respect God’s name, or not work on the Sabbath. These are religious or ritual mitzvot. Jews believe that God tells them to do both ethical and religious acts.

Jews see mitzvot as acts that sanctify – bring holiness – to the world and bring people and the world closer to God. Jews do the mitzvot to sanctify the physical world and the things in it, such as food and drink, clothing, and natural activities such as sex, work, or seeing  . Before doing many acts, such as eating, Jews say a blessing – a short prayer – that God makes and gives a person the things that they need for life. In Judaism, life is most holy and . A Jew must stop doing other mitzvot of the Torah to help  another person’s life.

Jews believe that they must do the mitzvot with happiness and joy because the Bible says “Serve God with joy; come before God with singing” (Psalms 100:2). Doing a mitzvah helps a person come close to God and that makes the person happy. A group of Jews called the Hasidim say this is the best way to live. They say that worrying takes people away from joy and they will not see the beauty and good in the world.

Many mitzvot in the Torah are about the Land of Israel. The Talmud and later books call these mitzvot “commandments  to the Land” because Jews can only do them in the Land of Israel. For example, Jews give gifts to the poor or the priests from their  every year, and before the Temple was destroyed, take fruit or animals to the Temple in Jerusalem, and must stop working on the land every seven years (the “shmittah” – sabbatical year).

The Land of Israel is holy in Judaism. A Jewish belief is that God created the Earth from Mount Moriah in Jerusalem in the Land of Israel, and God is always  to this land. Jews believe that this land is where God told the Jewish people to build a society to  God, and many mitzvot () in the Torah are about the Land of Israel.

The Jewish people believe their history as a nation begins with Abraham. The story of Abraham in the Torah begins when God tells Abraham to leave his country. God promises Abraham and his  a new home in the land of Canaan. This is now known as the Land of Israel. It is named after Abraham's grandson, Jacob, who was also called Israel and who was the father of the twelve tribes. This is where the name “Land of Israel” comes from. The land is also called “the Promised Land” because in the Torah, God promises to give the land to the children of Abraham (, , , ).

The rabbis of the Talmud  from the Torah () that it is a “mitzvah” for Jews to live in the Land of Israel. Jews often called the land outside of Israel "galut." This is usually translated as "diaspora (a place where people are )", but the word more closely means "exile".

The story of leaving Egypt, called the Exodus, is very  in the way the Jewish people  The Torah tells how God took a group of slaves, the Israelites, from slavery, and tells them how to be God's partner to build the world. Jews see this story as a  for the whole world. In the future, the whole world will change, and all the people of the world will serve the one God. This will be God’s kingdom on Earth. They believe the whole of Jewish history, and world history, is part of this .

The prophets taught that God would send a person to the world who would help all the people of the world see that God is the maker, ruler of the world and has supreme power. This person is called the Messiah. The word Messiah comes from the Hebrew word mashiah, which means "the  one". The Book of Isaiah says the Messiah will be a  king who will  the Jewish people and lead them in God's way. The Messiah will also unite all the people of the world to serve God. People will act with justice and , and the whole world will be filled with peace.

Jews still wait for the Messiah to come. They believe that this will be a person. Other Jews believe in a future time when justice and peace will come through the  of all people and the help of God.

Jews believe that to know what God wants them to do, they must  the books of Torah and its laws and do what they teach. These include both laws about how to behave to other people and how to serve God. The two most important groups of books in Judaism are the Bible and the Talmud. The beliefs and actions of Judaism come from these books. Jewish teachers and scholars wrote more books, called commentaries. They explain and say more about what is written in the Bible and Talmud.

The Torah is the most important of all Jewish writings. The first five books of the Hebrew Bible (known to Christians as the "Old Testament") make up the Torah. The Torah contains the basic laws of Judaism and describes the history of the Jews until the death of Moses. Jewish  says that God told Moses what to write in the Torah, which is also called the Five Books of Moses. Religious Jews believe that Moses brought the Ten Commandments and the Torah down from Mount Sinai.  The Ten Commandments are special because they were heard by all of the Jewish people at Mount Sinai.  However, in traditional Judaism, all of the 613 mitzvot in the Torah are equally important.

Jews divide the Hebrew Bible into three parts and call it the Tanakh. The three parts are the Torah, which is the first five books; the Nevi'im, which are the books of the prophets; and the Ketuvim, meaning the Writings, which are other books of history and  teachings.

Rabbinic Jews also believe that there is another part of the Torah besides the five books of Moses. It is called the Mishnah, also called the Oral Torah or Oral Law.  It explains how to follow the laws written in the 5 books.  There is a commentary (explanation) of the Mishnah, called the Gemara.  Together, the Mishna and the Gemara make up the Talmud. But Karaite Jews believe that there is no additional Torah besides the five books of Moses.

Traditional Jews believe that God gave the Written Torah and Oral Torah to Moses and that Moses told it to the Jewish people, and that it is the same today as it was back then. Traditional Jews also believe that all of the commandments must still be followed today. Liberal Jews believe that the Torah was inspired by God but written by human beings. Liberal Jews believe that all of the ethical laws in the Torah must still be followed, but many ritual laws do not need to be followed today.

It is considered good in Judaism to talk about the commandments and to try to understand how to follow them.  The Talmud has many stories about Rabbis who argued about the commandments.  Over time, some opinions have become the rule for everyone.  Some rules are still being argued about. Jews praise logical argument and looking for truth. There is no single leader of Judaism who can decide how to follow the commandments or what to believe.  Even though Jews believe different things and they disagree about the rules, they are still one religion and one people.

Jews who follow the religious rules called "kashrut" only eat some types of food that are prepared by special rules. Food that a Jew can eat is called Kosher food.

Traditional Jews are very careful about kashrut.  They usually cannot eat many foods in non-kosher restaurants or in the home of someone who does not keep Kasher. Sometimes, this makes it hard to visit people or to do business. People help avoid this problem by choosing to dine with Traditional Jews in a kosher restaurant or serve them Kasher food in their home. Less traditional Jews are not so careful about Kasher, although some of them may keep some rules.

One of the commandments is to keep the Jewish Sabbath or Shabbot. Shabbot starts every Friday at sunset and ends on Saturday at nightfall. Shabbot is a day of rest to thank God for making the universe. The tradition of resting on Shabbot comes from the Torah. According to the Torah, God created the world in six days and on the seventh day, Shabbot, He rested. Many Jews go to their temple or synagogue to pray on the Shabbat.

Orthopraxy-Judaeans follow special rules on Shabbat. These rules require Jews not to do creative work on Shabbat.  One reason for this is to give people a break from all the things that make them busy during the week. This helps them focus more on appreciating God, their family, and the rest of creation. Also it reminds people that God is the creator and ruler of the world; and no matter how great a person's creative power is, it cannot compare with God's creation of the universe and everything in it. Many of these categories of creative work include actions that people might not think of as work. For instance, on Shabbat a Jew cannot:

Traditional Jews are very careful about Sabbath. It is a special day. They clean their houses and prepare special food for the 7th day. They dress in their nicest clothes. They sing songs and say extra prayers in the synagogue. They have dinner and lunch with their families. Many families also invite guests for dinner and for lunch. They eat special food, and sing together Sabbatical songs. On the afternoon of the 7th day people study Judaism together or just visit friends.

Liberal Jews do not follow those rules.  Some do go to synagogue, visit friends or have special meals.  But they may also talk on the phone, drive cars, and go shopping.

For a very long time, most Jews in Europe believed the same basic things about Judaism. Jews in other lands had different beliefs and customs than European Jews.  About 200 years ago, a small group of Jews in Germany decided to stop believing in many parts of Judaism and try to become more "modern" and more similar to Germans. Those Jews were called Reform Jews.

Today there are three main kinds of Judaism: Reform, Conservative, and Orthodox Judaism. There are also kinds with a smaller number of people, such as Reconstructionist Judaism, and Karaite Judaism. Each group has its own practices according to how it understands the Jewish laws. For example, Reform (also called Liberal or Progressive) Judaism encourages people to choose the ways to be Jewish that mean the most to them based on the traditions. Reform Judaism teaches Jews to focus on the ethical laws of Judaism. Conservative Judaism developed after Reform Judaism. The leaders of Conservative Judaism felt that Reform Judaism was too radical. They wanted to conserve (protect) Jewish tradition instead of reforming (changing) it. Orthodox Jews do not believe that Reform or Conservative Judaism are correct because they believe that the laws given by God are timeless, and can't be changed.

In the most recent survey of Jews in the United States in 2000-2001, it was found that 35% of American Jews say they are Reform, 27% say they are Conservative, 10% say they are Orthodox, 2% say they are Reconstructionist and 25% do not say what type they are.

In Israel and Occupied Palestinian Territories, almost all-Jews go to Orthodox Synagogues.  There are very few Reform or Conservative synagogues, but there has been a steady increase since 2009.  In Israel, Jews do not call themselves Reform, Conservative, or Orthodox.  Instead, they mostly call themselves "Haredi" (completely religious) "Dati" (basically religious), "Masorati" (traditional/conservative) or "Chiloni" (secular).  Surveys suggest about 20% of Israelis say they are secular, 25% say they are Dati or Haredi and 55% say they are traditional.

Names are very important in Judaism. Many Jews believe that a name not only tells you who someone is, but also tells you something about them. Names of God are very special in Judaism, so Jews do not write them or speak them fully but use other words instead. That is why some Jews write G-d, with a "-" instead of an "o."

HaShem Means "The Name". It is the word Jews use most often when not praying to talk about Jehovah.

Adonai means "My Lord."  This name tells Jews about God's position.  God is the King of the World, and his name Adonai lets us know that.

Elohim means "one who is strong enough to do everything."  This name is used when talking about God's power to create or God's justice.  This tells us that God is the creator and that God rules the world with just laws.

The two names above are so special that traditional Jews use these names only when they pray and read the Torah. When they are not praying or reading the Torah, they say "Hashem" (The Name) or "Elokim".

God -  Some Jews write "God" by replacing the "o" with a dash, like this: "G-d". They do this because God's name is very holy so they are not allowed to throw away a piece of paper with "God" written on it. However, if by accident "God" is written, then the paper can be disposed of in a special way and buried in a special place.  Others say that "God" is just an English word, not Hebrew, and so it is not holy.

YHWH ("Yehovah"/"Yahweh") is the most sacred name of God in Hebrew, and is not pronounced by most Jews.  No one knows where the name came from, or what exactly it means.  It looks like the Hebrew word "hayah," which is the verb "to be." (According to Hebrew scripture, when Moses asked God who God was, God told Moses I am that I am/I am who I am.) Jews believe that the name YHWH shows that God is endless.  Instead of trying to say it, most Jews say "haShem", which means "The Name."  Some people pronounce this name as Yahweh or Jehovah.  Scholars of religion sometimes refer to "YHWH" as the Tetragrammaton, from an old Greek word that means "four letters".

Maize or Indian corn (called corn in some countries) is Zea mays, a member of the grass family Poaceae. It is a cereal grain which was first grown by people in ancient Central America. Approximately 1 billion tonnes are harvested every year. However, little of this maize is eaten directly by humans. Most is used to make corn ethanol, animal feed and other maize products, such as corn starch and corn syrup.

Maize is a leafy stalk whose kernels have seeds inside. It is an angiosperm, which means that its seeds are enclosed inside a fruit or shell. It is has long been a staple food by many people in Mexico, Central and South America and parts of Africa. In Europe and the rest of North America, maize is grown mostly for use as animal feed. In Canada and the United States, maize is commonly referred to as "corn".

Centuries of cross breeding have produced larger plants, and specialized varieties. Corn has become an important ingredient in American foods through the use of corn starch. People have long eaten sweet corn and popcorn with little processing, and other kinds after processing into flour for making cornbread, tortillas, and other artificial foods.

Maize has been a fruitful model organism for research in genetics for many years: see Barbara McClintock. Research has shown that artificial selection developed maize from a Mexican plant called Teosinte.

There are five species and many subspecies in the genus. They are all plants similar to the cultivated maize, with less developed cobs. The wild ones are sometimes called teosintes, and they are all native to Mesoamerica.

London is the capital and largest city of both England and its surrounding area.

It is also the city with the highest population in the UK. The population is just under 9 million. The city is the largest in western Europe by population and area.

On the Thames, London has been a central city since it was founded by the Gaels millennia ago The Gaelss bridged the river Thames and built a road network to connect it with the rest of the country.

London's original city centre, the City of London is England's smallest city. In 2011 it had 7,375 inhabitants on an area of . The term "London" is used for the urban region which developed around this city centre. This area forms the region of London, the Greater London administrative unit led by the Mayor of London and the London Assembly.

London is one of the world's most important political, economic and cultural centres. London was the capital of the British Empire and so for almost three centuries the centre of power for large parts of the world.

The city has about 9.1 million inhabitants (2018). If one counts the entire metropolitan area of London (London Metropolitan Area), it has about 15 million people. The climate is moderate.

The Romans built the city of Londinium along the River Thames in AD 43. The name Londinium (and later 'London') came from the Celtic language of the Ancient Britons. In AD 61, the city was attacked and destroyed. Then the Romans rebuilt the city, and London became an important trading hub.

After the decline of the Roman Empire, few people remained in London. The Anglo-Saxon people of sub-Roman Britain were mainly agricultural. Once the Romans had gone, trade with Continental Europe got less. In the 9th century, more people started living in London again. It became the largest city in England. However, it did not become the capital city of England again until the 12th century. For a long time after the Romans, England was not unified, and so had no capital.

Trade grew and the East India Company was founded as a monopoly trader. London became the main North Sea port, and migrants went from England. The population rose from about 50,000 in 1530 to about 225,000 in 1605.

The 16th century was a time of great change in the monarchy and the Church. The Church became the Church of England. The Scottish Church stayed loyal to Rome and Catholicism. In England the Bible had already been translated. This meant ordinary people could know for the first time what the Bible actually said. Before that a congregation had to accept what their preacher said. Elizabeth I was the main driver of these changes.

The 17th century saw Londoners suffer from the plague and the fire of London. The century starts with the famous Gunpowder Plot.

In the 17th century the Stuart kings ruled: James I and Charles I. Charles Stuart was defeated by Cromwell, so the century was remarkable in that respect. Cromwell marks the beginning of the modern system whereby Parliament is more important than the monarch. The war between Cromwell and Charles was bitterly fought. London was the key city, and Oxford was also important.

The century also had two great disasters: the Great Plague and the Great Fire of London. The control of London by Cromwell and Parliament was one of the decisive factors in the civil war. Cromwell's victory was followed by his death in 1658, and the country for a time moved back to royal rule under Charles II.

The plague virus, carried by fleas on rats, came to Britain from Europe.

The Great Fire of London broke out at the beginning of September 1666. Unfortunately there were warehouses full of timber, pitch, tallow, wine and tar. These caught fire and, in the end, all the riverfront buildings were destroyed. The fire eventually destroyed about 60% of the city, (mainly the City of London, rather than the large city we have today). Old St Paul's Cathedral was destroyed. Some fires burnt more widely, up to present-day Southwark and even Highgate.

Another famous old part of Greater London is Westminster, which was a different city from the City of London. In Westminster is Westminster Abbey (a cathedral), the Palace of Westminster (the Houses of Parliament), and 10 Downing Street (where the Prime Minister lives).

After the railways were built, London grew much larger. Greater London has 33 boroughs (neighbourhoods) and a mayor. The old City of London is only a square mile in size but has its own Lord Mayor.

In stages, London has several times increased in size by statute in Parliament. The main motive for this has been taxation, and the increase in houses in what was once countryside. Since taxation was paid to the counties surrounding London, there was a motive for absorbing the countryside into London. This happened in several stages.

Outside London, local taxes are paid to the County Councils; inside London they are paid to the Greater London Council. One county has been lost entirely (Middlesex) and all the others have lost land and revenue. The London Boroughs and the GLA (Greater London Authority) both raise taxes, and the representatives are elected. There is a London Plan which sets out the priorities. The number of local authorities which raise local taxes and spend it is 33: 32 London boroughs and the City of London.

One aspect of its geology had big consequences. North of the Thames London is on chalk, which is easy (with modern equipment) to tunnel through. South of the Thames London is on clay, which was, and still is, much more difficult to dig out. So most of the subterranean engineering is north of the Thames. The road system south of the Thames is also inadequate by modern standards. This difference is reflected in the prices for property, the road transport, the Underground railway and the definition of "London" as a taxable area. The growth of London has been more vigorous North of the Thames, and has included the complete absorption of Middlesex, once a separate county.

London has five major business districts: the City, Westminster, Canary Wharf, Camden & Islington and Lambeth & Southwark.

The London Stock Exchange is the most international stock exchange and the largest in Europe.

London's largest industry is finance. This includes banks, stock exchanges, investment companies and insurance companies The Bank of England is in the City of London and is the second oldest bank in the world.

London has many professional services such as law and accounting firms.

The British Broadcasting Company (BBC), which has many radio and TV stations, is in London.

Tourism is one of London's biggest industries. London is the most visited city in the world by international tourists with 18.8 million international visitors per year. Within the UK, London is home to the ten most-visited tourist attractions. Tourism employed about 350,000 full-time workers in London in 2003. Tourists spend about £15 billion per year.

A growing number of technology companies are based in London.

London is a major retail centre, and in 2010 had the highest non-food retail sales of any city in the world, with a total spend of around £64.2 billion. The UK's fashion industry, centred on London, contributes tens of billions to the economy.

For the 19th and much of the 20th centuries London was a major manufacturing centre (see Manufacturing in London), with over 1.5 million industrial workers in 1960. Many products were made in London including ships, electronics and cars. Nowadays, most of these manufacturing companies are closed but some drug companies still make medicine in London.

The city has a huge network of transport systems including trains, underground (metro) and five main airports.

The Victorians built many train systems in the mid-19th century (1850s). Their main stations are in London, and the lines go to every part of Great Britain. There were originally five major companies but the five companies became a national rail network in modern times. Their terminals at King's Cross, St. Pancras, Paddington, Waterloo and Charing Cross are still used as terminals.

There are five airports, though only one is actually in London (London City Airport). The most used airport is Heathrow Airport, although it is actually outside the city. There is the London end of the LondonBirmingham canal, which was important to the industrial 19th century. Really heavy goods can be best transported on water by canal or sea.

The London Underground is a system of electric trains which are in London. It is the oldest underground railway in the world. It started running in 1863 as the Metropolitan Railway. Later, the system was copied in other cities, for example Paris, New York, Moscow and Madrid. Even though it is called the London Underground, about half of it is above the ground. The "Tube" is the name used for the London Underground, because the tunnels for some the central lines are semi-round tubes running through the ground. The Underground has 274 stations and over 250 miles (402 km) of track. Over one billion passengers used the Underground each year.

With the need for more rail capacity in London, the Elizabeth line (also known as Crossrail) opened in May 2022. It is a new railway line running east to west through London, with a branch to Heathrow Airport. It is Europe's biggest construction project, with a £15 billion projected cost.

There is a black taxi system regulated by the Metropolitan Police, and various other private enterprise hire car companies. Efforts are being made to make roads safer for cyclists.

London's biggest tunnel has just been completed to take sewage from the capital to the East where it is processed.

London has a temperate oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfb). It is not usually very hot or cold. It is often cloudy.

Summers are generally warm, sometimes hot. Winters are generally cool. Spring and autumn are mild.

London has regular, light rain throughout the year. July is the warmest month, with an average temperature at Greenwich of 13.6 °C to 22.8 °C. The coldest month is January, with an average of 2.4 °C to 7.9 °C. The average annual precipitation is fairly low at 583.6 mm, and February is normally the driest month. Drought is sometimes possible, especially during longer heatwaves in summer. Snow is uncommon but usually falls at least once each winter and heavy snow is rarer and does not happen every winter. While snow is uncommon in central London itself, there is more snow in the outer areas; this is because the "urban heat island" the big city generates makes the city about 5 °C warmer than surrounding areas in winter.

Temperature extremes in London range from  at Heathrow Airport on 19 July 2022 down to  at Northolt on 1 January 1962.

London has twin and sister city agreements with these cities:

The litre (international spelling) or liter (American spelling) (symbol: l or L) is one of the metric units of volume. It is not a basic SI unit, but it is a supplementary unit.

One litre is the volume of 1000 cubic centimetres, that is a cube of 10 × 10 × 10 centimetres (1000 cm3). One litre of water at  has the mass of exactly one kilogram. This results from the definition given in 1795, where the gram was defined as the weight of one cubic centimetre of melting ice.

Liters are usually utilized to measure the volume of liquids, this is because the density of liquids can vary a lot. However it can be applied to solids as well, for example 1 liter of Iron is around 7.7 kg. The symbol for litre is l or L. The script letter ℓ is also sometimes used.

For smaller volumes, the decilitre is used: 10 decilitres = one litre.

For smaller volumes, the centilitre is used: 100 centilitres = one litre.

For smaller volumes, the millilitre is used: 1000 millilitres = one litre.

The capital letter "L" is preferred by some people as the small "l" can look like the number one "1".

The metric system was first introduced in France in 1791. That system did not have its own unit of capacity or volume because volume can be measured in cubic metres. In 1793 work to make the metric system compulsory in France was started by the Temporary Commission of Republican Weights and Measures. Due to public demand, the commission said that the cubic metre was too big for everyday use. They said that a new unit based on the old cadil should be used instead. One cadil was to be 0.001 cubic metres. This was equivalent to a cube with sides 10 cm. The cadil was also known as the pinte or the litron. The pinte had been an old French unit of measure of capacity. In 1795 the definition was revised. The cadil was given the name litre.

In 1795 the kilogram was defined to be exactly one litre of water at 4 °C. In 1799 the kilogram was redefined. The new definition said that the kilogram was the mass of the kilogram des archives. In 1901 scientists measured the volume of one litre of water at 4 °C very carefully. They found that it occupied about  dm3. The BIPM redefined the litre as being exactly the volume of one kilogram of water at 4 °C.

In 1960 the SI was introduced. The BIPM changed the definition of the litre back to "one dm3". The litre is not part of SI. The BIPM defined the litre as a "Non-SI unit accepted for use with the SI". This was because it is used in many countries. The BIPM said that the litre should not be used for very accurate work.

According to SI rules, the symbol for the litre should be "l". This is because the litre was not named after somebody whose name was "Litre". However the symbol "l" and the number "1" are easily confused. In 1979 the BIPM made an exception for the symbol for the litre. They said that people could use either "L" or "l" as its symbol.

In Europe, milk is sold in one litre cartons. One litre bottle is also a popular package for soft drinks. Most alcoholic drinks are sold as 1/3 litre (0.33 l),  litre (0.5 l) 3/4 litre (0.75 l) or 1 litre bottles.

Madrid (pronounced: “mah-drid or /məˈdrɪd/) is the capital and largest city of Spain. Madrid is in the middle of Spain, in the Community of Madrid. The Community is a large area that includes the city as well as small towns and villages outside the city. 7 million people live in the Community. More than 3 million live in the city itself. It is the largest city of Spain and, at 655 m (2,100 ft) above sea level, the second highest capital in Europe (after the Andorran capital Andorra la Vella).  It is the second largest city in the European Union.  As it is the capital city, Madrid is where the monarch lives and also where the government meets. Madrid is the financial centre of Spain. Many large businesses have their main offices there. It has four important footballs teams, Real Madrid, Atlético Madrid, Getafe, and Rayo Vallecano. People who live in Madrid are called madrileños.

Madrid was ruled by the Romans from the 2nd century. After AD 711 it was occupied by the Moors. In 1083 Spain was ruled again by Spaniards. Catholic kings ruled the country. By the mid-16th century it had become the capital of a very large empire. Spain was ruled by monarchs from the House of Habsburg, then the House of Bourbon. After the Spanish Civil War it was ruled by a dictator until the mid-1970s when it became a democracy.

Although it is a modern city, a lot of its history can be seen and felt as one walks along the streets and in the large squares of the city. There are beautiful parks, famous buildings, art galleries and concert halls.

During the history of Spain many different people have lived there. Madrid's name comes from the Arabic word magerit, meaning “place of many streams". The Phoenicians came in 1100 BC, followed by Carthaginians, Romans, Vandals, Visigoths and Moors. It was not until 1492, when the Catholic Monarchs got power, that Spain became a united country. Jews and Moors, who had lived happily there for many years, were driven away. Spain became very rich because it conquered many overseas countries, especially in Central and South America. However, Spain fought many wars and lost much of its treasure. It was very poor in 1936 when the Civil War was fought. General Franco became a harsh dictator until 1975 when Juan Carlos I was brought back to Spain and made king. There is now a democratic government.

In prehistoric times people lived in the area which is now Madrid. The Romans lived there for several centuries. The origin of today’s city really starts in the 9th century when Muhammad I had a small palace built where the Palacio Real stands today. The Moors built strong forts in Madrid in 865 and put a wall round the city. These walls stood until 1476 when they were knocked down. In 1561 Felipe I moved the royal court from Toledo to Madrid. Madrid had now become the capital of a very large empire. Over the next years and decades the Plaza Mayor was built and many great buildings and monuments, many of which still stand.

When Ferdinand II of Aragon and Queen Isabella of Castile came to Madrid, Spain had become a very rich country. The 16th and 17th centuries are now known as the “Golden Century”. Their grandson was the famous Charles I of Spain (also known as Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor). He liked his court to be in Seville. His son, Philip II (1527–1598) moved the court to Madrid in 1561.

In the late 1800s there was a revolt, known as the First Spanish Republic. Later the monarchy was restored, but then there was a Second Spanish Republic followed by the Spanish Civil War. The Second Spanish Republic started on 14 April 1931 and was celebrated in La puerta del Sol which is the center of the city. Madrid suffered a lot in this war. It was bombed by airplanes.

During the dictatorship of Francisco Franco, especially during the 1960s, south Madrid became very industrialized, and many people from the rural areas moved to Madrid especially to the south east of the city.

When General Franco died and democracy was restored, Madrid became more prosperous. During the 1980s and 1990s many new buildings were put up. Also when Franco died, the Spanish monarchy returned.

Madrid has been attacked many times by terrorists. This includes the bombing of a restaurant in 1985, killing 18 people and the of trains in 2004, killing over 190 people.

Madrid has a borderline cold semi-arid climate (BSk in the Köppen climate classification) and a hot-summer Mediterranean climate (Csa in the Köppen climate classification). Most rain falls in autumn and spring. The winters are cool because it is high up, and occasionally it snows. The summers are hot and dry. Often the temperature is above 30 °C (86 °F) in July and August and can often reach 40 °C (104 °F). At night it is much cooler. This is why many offices and businesses are closed and people have a sleep (siesta) in the afternoon when it is hot. Then they come out again in late afternoon and often eat dinner late at night.

Spain's Royal Palace is in Madrid. It is one of the largest palaces in all of Western Europe. But the king and his family do not live there anymore; they live in a smaller palace, and only use the Royal Palace for important events, like meeting other kings and other official ceremonies. One can go inside the Royal Palace and learn about the history of Spanish monarchy.

Other famous buildings are: The Prado Museum, the Temple of Debod, the Santiago Bernabeú Stadium and the Cuatro Torres Business Area.

There are a lot of very big and important art museums in Madrid. The most famous ones are the Prado Museum, the Queen Sofia Museum, and the Thyssen-Bornemisza museum. These show off paintings, sculptures, and other works of art from some of the most famous artists in the world.

Many famous, important, and valuable works of art are in these museums. For example, the Queen Sofia museum has a famous painting by Pablo Picasso, called Guernica. Picasso painted this painting to show how sad and angry it made him when the German Nazis destroyed a town in Spain called Guernica in 1937. Picasso had said that the painting should never return to Spain until it was a democracy again. Once that happened, they built the Queen Sofia museum just to have a good place to put it.

There are many other sights to see in Madrid. Many people go to see the Plaza Mayor which was a market place. The Plaza de la Villa was another famous market place. There are a lot of shops along the Gran Via. Real Madrid football fans celebrate at the Plaza de Cibeles. Two famous gates to see are the Puerta del Sol and the Puerta de Alcalá. A more recent landmark is the Almudena Cathedral.

Madrid has some lovely parks. The Retiro Park is the most famous. The Cristal Palace can be found in this park.

The Plaza de Toros is visited by many tourists. Bullfights take place there.

The mass of an object is a measure of how much of it there is. For example, A mountain has more mass than a rock. Mass is different from weight. Weight is the product of mass times gravitational acceleration.

You can measure the mass of an object by using a force on it. The more mass it has, the less it will change how fast it moves. This is called inertial mass because it measures the inertia.

An object with a lot of mass, like a planet, attracts objects with less mass and keeps them from floating away from the planet. This is called gravity. a  When measuring the force of gravity on an object, you can find the object’s gravitational mass. Tests of inertial and gravitational mass show that they are the same or almost the same.

The unit of mass in the International System of Units is the kilogram, which is represented by the symbol 'kg'. Fractions and multiples of this basic unit include the gram (one thousandth of a kg, symbol 'g') and the tonne (one thousand kg), amongst many others.

In some fields or applications, it is convenient to use different units to simplify the discussions or writings. For instance,

Traditional units are still in encountered in some countries: imperial units such as the ounce or the pound were in widespread use within the British Empire. Some of them are still popular in the United States, which also uses units like the short ton (2,000 pounds, 907 kg) and the long ton (2,240 pounds, 1010 kg), not to be confused with the metric ton (1,000 kg).

Mass is an intrinsic property of the object: it does not depend on its volume, or position in space, for instance. For a long time (at least since the works of Antoine Lavoisier in the second half of the eighteen century), it has been known that the sum of the masses of objects that interact or of the chemicals that react remain conserved throughout these processes. This remains an excellent approximation for everyday life and even most laboratory work.

However, Einstein has shown through his special theory of relativity that the mass m of an object moving at speed v with respect to an observer must be higher than the mass of the same object observed at rest m0 with respect to the observer. The applicable formula is

where c stands for the speed of light. This change in mass is only important when the speed of the object with respect to the observer becomes a large fraction of c.

In atomic nuclei, example in protons and neutrons,the residual mass comes from the binding kinetic and potential energy of the quarks and gluon field. An analogy to go along with is to think of the 3 quarks as balls with the gluons as a spring connecting the quarks. This mass accounts for 99% of the mass of these baryons with the remaining 1% coming from the individual quarks which comes from quantum interactions with the Higgs field.

Mammals are in the  class Mammalia.  They are a group of vertebrate animals. They have fur or hair and very precise temperature regulation.

With the exception of the monotremes, all mammals bear live young. Unlike other vertebrates, they are the only animals that produce milk for their young through their mammary glands. Parental care of the young is universal among mammals, sometimes for long periods.

Mammals became the dominant land animals after non-bird dinosaurs were eliminated. Recent work helped to explain their success: epigenetics seems to have started in early mammals.

Most marsupial and eutherian mammals have a reproductive cycle known as the oestrous cycle (U.S: estrous cycle). Females are sexually active in the oestrous stage, when they are 'on heat' for a few days each month. If an ovum is not fertilized, the endometrium (uterus lining) is resorbed. Oestrus cycles may occur once or twice a year, or many times a year. Each type of mammals has its own frequency.

Humans and primates, are quite different. They have a menstrual cycle. In this case, females are sexually receptive at any time, but only fertile when an ovum is released from an ovary. In this case, the endometrium (if not needed for an fertilised egg) is discarded. In this system, eggs are released from the ovaries mostly in the middle of the cycle, away from the menstrual period. This ovulation is 'concealed', meaning, it is not obvious when it occurs. This process, so it is thought, tends to keep the male and female together, which is unusual in mammals with the oestrous cycle. Keeping males and females together is related to the long learning period of primates.

One diagnostic feature of mammals is the lower jaw. Unlike earlier forms, it is a single bone, the dentary. This is one feature which can be seen in fossils, or at least those which are complete enough to have the lower jaw. Another diagnostic feature is the ear ossicles. Mammals have three little bones in their inner ear. These ear ossicles are bones which were, long ago, part of the lower jaw in early proto-mammals.

There are quite a number of other features in the skull and limbs, so that it is usually possible to identify and describe a mammal from its skeleton alone, or even a partial skeleton.

Another diagnostic feature is the neocortex of the brain, which no other vertebrate has. This is involved in the kind of flexible behaviour and learning typical of mammals. Reptiles and birds have much of their behaviour controlled by "inherited behaviour chains", which roughly translates as "instincts". Almost all animals can do some learning, but mammals do far more than other vertebrates. Their behaviour is much more flexible than lizards, for example, and that is made possible by their neocortex.

Other things in the life of mammals seem to be connected with this flexibility and learning. Play is a kind of early learning period in which, according to one theory, mammals develop skills which they will need in life. All mammalian young play, and this is very obvious in the more intelligent mammals (primates, cats).

The emotions of mammals are very noticeable, and rather similar to ours. It is possible, and quite common, for humans to have a friendly relationship with another mammal. Any kind of relationship with a snake or a gecko will be less deep because they can't show emotions as easily (for example). This is because reptiles don't have many of the same ways to show emotions (like smiling, wagging tails, etc) that mammals do, but they can still feel happy, and can recognize owners.

Once, most mammals were nocturnal. Today, many (more than two-thirds) are still nocturnal. It makes a lot of sense when you realise that the daytime was ruled by dinosaurs for so long, Primates (except humans) sleep at night in trees. They are active during the daytime, and some come out onto more open ground.

Baboons (and humans!) are rather special in that they come out onto the grassland in the daytime. Humans are fully daytime animals, and can see colours quite well (nocturnal animals have poor colour vision, but can see in the dusk.).

There are about 50 characters which are typical of mammals: some of the most important are discussed above. A few more examples will make it clear that mammals are very different from reptiles and birds:

In the language of cladistics, the 50 unique characters are apomorphies which prove that mammals are a clade descended from a common ancestor.

All mammals feed milk to their young, and protect and look after them.

The vast majority of mammal species give birth to live young, these are the placental mammals, most of which are classified as Eutheria and a small number are classified as marsupials.

Marsupials are mammals with pouches to carry young in, like the kangaroo.

There are only five species (the monotreme mammals) that lay eggs, the duck-billed platypus Ornithorhynchus, and four species of spiny anteater Echidna. The monotremes are confined to Australia and New Guinea, and are the sole survivors of an earlier group of mammals.

By number of species, mammals (with 5488 species), are not the most successful vertebrates. Birds, with about 10,000 species have nearly twice as many, and reptiles have just as many as birds. Fish have even more species. There are 27,000 species of fish, of which nearly 26,000 are bony fish. However, the word "fish" covers more than one class of animal.

Most zoologists regard mammals as a successful group of animals. One reason is that they are successful in all habitats on Earth. In the air, in the water, in forests, in the colder regions of the world, and above all on grasslands, where they are outstandingly successful.

In the air, the bats (Chiroptera) are the mammalian order with the most species. They 'own' the nighttime, since birds are largely diurnal (daytime) animals. Bats are hugely successful, mostly as nighttime predators of insects.

Seagoing mammals, the Cetacea and the pinnipeds, are very successful and significant predators. This includes the whales, seals, walrus, dolphins and others.

The terrestrial mammals are fewer in number of species than lizards, but they are huge in individual numbers, and far more important in the life of the terrestrial biomes. Their ability to move from place to place and adapt has made them a most effective group. Many mammals live in cold places. These mammals have thick hair or blubber to keep them warm. Others may live in rainforests. On land the rodents (rats, mice) are hugely successful, more common in numbers than any other mammals. Large mammals on land have been hunted to extinction in some parts of the world, but the ones which remain are now better protected.

Last, but certainly not least, are the primates. Their natural habitat, with few exceptions, are the forests. Most live in the trees, with hands that grasp, good colour vision, and intelligence. In the Pliocene period some moved out onto the savannas as grassland replaced forests. Mankind is the result of this shift into the savannas.

The evolutionary relationships among land vertebrates is as follows:

This sort of classification is not traditional, but it does reflect our knowledge of palaeontology and evolution.

A somewhat standardized classification system has been adopted by most current mammalogy classroom textbooks. It is based on living animals. The following taxonomy of extant and recently extinct mammals is from Vaughan et al. 2000.

Because two quite different dates are given in the taxobox, an explanation is needed. Rowe defines mammals as "the taxon originating with the most recent common ancestor of extant (living) Monotremata and Theria". That puts the emphasis heavily on living mammals, where, as Rowe points out, the database of characters is extensive.

Kemp explains the problem with that approach: "If the definition of a mammal is based rigorously upon possession of all the characters of living mammals, then some fossil forms that are extremely mammalian in anatomy... are excluded".

"An altogether different perspective on defining Mammalia is based on traditional palaeobiological practice. An arbitrary decision is made about which characters to select as defining characters... Characters deemed appropriate are those reflecting the... fundamental mammalian biology. The essence of mammalian life is to be found in their endothermic temperature physiology, greatly enlarged brain, dentition capable of chewing food, highly agile, energetic locomotion, and so on. The organisms that achieved this grade of overall organisation are deemed to be Mammalia... Around the end of the Triassic period, about 205 mya, a number of fossils are found of very small animals that have [most] of the skeletal characters of modern mammals".

This difference in outlook explains the difference in the two dates given in the taxobox.

Los Angeles (L.A.), officially the City of Los Angeles, is the largest city in California, in the United States. There are many ethnicities of people living in the city, and over 18 million people in the Greater Los Angeles region. The city has an area of . Los Angeles is the city with the second-biggest population in the United States after New York City, overtaking Chicago in the 1970s.

Los Angeles is known for its Mexican food, Mexican culture and has the largest Mexican population.

It is a car-centric city requiring much parking, and it is one of the most spread-out cities in the world. Greater Los Angeles is home to many movie stars and many of the biggest rock bands in the history of the United States. Los Angeles is surrounded by South Los Angeles, East Los Angeles, Huntington Park, Maywood, Walnut Park, Commerce, Bell, Glendale, South Pasadena, Monterey Park, South Gate, Carson, Cudahy, West Hollywood, Alhambra, Bell Gardena and Westmont.

Los Angeles has Spanish and Mexican influences due to being a former colony of Mexico and Spain. Los Angeles is a diverse city with many ethnic groups such as Mexican, Japanese, Korean, Vietnamese, Italian, Salvadoran, Iranian/Persian and Armenian. Mexican and Spanish architecture can be seen in Los Angeles.

Many celebrities live throughout the city of Los Angeles. Los Angeles is known to be the entertainment capital of the world. Many movies, television shows and fashion shows are made in Hollywood and are often set in Los Angeles.

Los Angeles has the second largest Hispanic and Latino population in the United States, only behind New York City. Many are of Mexican and Central American descent.

The area comprising present-day Los Angeles County was first settled by small groups of Native Americans for centuries before the first European contact in 1769 when Gaspar de Portola and a group of missionaries camped on what is now the banks of the Los Angeles River. The name Los Angeles comes from the Spanish language, and it means "The Angels". The name is an abbreviation from the original name of the place. The original name is "El Pueblo de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles del Río Porciúncula" (in English, "The Town of Our Lady the Queen of the Angels of the River Porciúncula"), giving it both one of the longest and shortest (referring to its shortening of "LA") place names in the world. Los Angeles was founded in 1781 while the area was within the borders of the Viceroyalty of New Spain. The area had been explored earlier by two Franciscan priests named Junipero Serra and Juan Crespi.

Following the Mexican War of Independence, the region passed into the hands of Mexico, which subsequently ceded control of California to the U.S. in 1848. On April 4, 1850, California became a state of the USA. Los Angeles began half a century of rapid growth after railroads arrived in the city in the 1870s. Los Angeles was home to the Olympic Games in 1932 and 1984. It will host the Olympic Games in 2028. The city broke out in riots three times: in 1943, in 1965, and in 1992, all due to racism. In 1994, an earthquake killed 72 people and damaged many buildings.

The June 2025 Los Angeles protests started; Rioting is ongoing (as of the second week of June).

Los Angeles has the second largest Mexican, Belizean, Armenian, Salvadoran, Filipino and Guatemalan population by city in the world, the third largest Canadian population in the world, and has the largest Japanese, Iranian/Persian, Cambodian and Roma (Gypsy) population in the country.

Spanish is the most spoken foreign language in Los Angeles. Korean, Filipino, Armenian, Chinese, and Persian are also spoken in the city.

In the 2020 census, there were 3,898,747 people, 1,410,260 households, and 839,676 families living in Los Angeles. The population density was 8,304.2 people per square mile (3,206.3/km²). There were 1,496,453 housing units. The breakdown by race was 34.9% White, 11.9% Asian, 8.6% Black, 1.7% Native American, 0.2% Pacific Islander, 29.5% from one other race, and 13.3% from two or more races. Hispanics and Latinos made up 46.9% of the people.

The median (middle) age was 36.5 years. The age breakdown was 19.3% under age 18, 67.2% from 18 to 65, and 13.6% over 65. The gender breakdown was 49.4% male and 50.6% female.

Of the households, 28.3% had children under age 18, 37.0% had a married couple, 8.4% had an unmarried couple, 31.5% had a woman with no partner, 23.1% had a man with no partner, and 29.2% had one person living alone. The average household size was 2.68 people.

Most tourists in Los Angeles come from UK, Canada, Mexico, China, Australia, Japan,  South Korea, Germany, France, Scandinavia, the Middle East, and India. They come to visit places such as the  Hollywood Walk of Fame and the Hollywood Sign.

Los Angeles is a very large city, and the edges of the city are very far from the center, going from the beaches to the mountains. The Santa Monica Mountains run through the city, separating it into the San Fernando Valley to the north and the Los Angeles Basin to the south. The Los Angeles River also runs through the city some . Los Angeles moves about one-quarter of an inch (6.3 millimeters) to the east every year. It is caused by the city's tectonic plates and rough ground geography and since Los Angeles is at a close distance with the San Andreas Fault. This brings Los Angeles and San Francisco  closer together each year.

The climate in Los Angeles is a Mediterranean climate. The weather is usually warm and dry during the summer, and it is mildly cold and rainier in the fall and winter. The weather is different depending on how far away from the ocean you are, so places near the beach usually do not get as hot in the summer. It is very rare for temperatures to go below freezing near the coast but can occur further inland. The city receives about  of rain each year, although the amount can change a lot from year to year. Snow is very rare except on the mountain tops where some occasional light snow might fall.

L.A. has many famous sights. There are many very long beaches, such as Venice Beach,  Dockweiler State Beach and Bruce's Beach. Many visitors go to Hollywood, home to the Hollywood Walk of Fame, the Hollywood Sign, Grauman's Chinese Theatre, Dolby Theater, El Capitan Theatre, Hollywood Pantages Theater and L.A. Live and Hollywood Park entertainment complexes. Los Angeles also has many fine museums, such as the L.A. County Museum of Art, California Science Center, and the Getty Museum. Other sights include the Griffith Observatory, the historic Baldwin Hills Crenshaw Plaza, Beverly Center and Westfield Culver City malls and the Los Angeles City Zoo. Los Angeles is the only major city in the world with an active population of wild mountain lions.

Los Angeles is known for its large movie and television industry. Much of this is located in Hollywood. Some military aircraft are also made there, as well as spacecraft. The music industry is also concentrated in the area. The city is also a banking center. The San Pedro area has a busy port where the Los Angeles Harbor resides, where a lot of shipping businesses ship goods and provides ferry services for spectators.

Los Angeles has dozens of neighborhoods and named areas, including:

Los Angeles leans politicly to the left. As of December 2022, the mayor of Los Angeles is Karen Bass.

Los Angeles has a rich history and culture of popular music. Many of the most notable recording artists in the history of the United States either started or flourished in Los Angeles or Greater Los Angeles. The surf music scene is largely associated with Los Angeles and suburbs like Malibu. Motown Records moved from Detroit, Michigan to Los Angeles in the 1970s. The West Coast hip hop scene and other genres such as R&B, Smooth jazz, Yacht rock, New jack swing,  Pop rap, Rock and G-funk are largely centered in Greater Los Angeles.

Mecca or Makkah (officially: Makkah al-Mukarramah; ) is a city in Saudi Arabia and the holiest city in Islam. As of the 2004 census, 1,294,169 people lived there. The city is  inland from Jeddah, in the narrow sandy Valley of Abraham. It is  above sea level. It is  from the Red Sea.

Makkah is the holiest city in the Islamic world. Every year, millions of Muslims take a pilgrimage to Mecca, called the Hajj. They follow in the footsteps of Muhammad. All Muslims who are able to perform the Hajj are expected to do so at least once in their life. The Kaaba and Masjid al-Haram, are the holiest mosques in Islam. Mecca is closed to non-Muslims except for some journalists reporting on the Hajj.

The Kaaba, the small cubical building which Muslims pray towards is believed to have been built by Ibrahim and has been a religious center ever since. Muslims believed that God commanded Ibrahim to send his second wife Hajar and her son Ismail there. They found the Zamzam Well which led to people settling nearby, and thus Makkah was born. When Ismail was big enough, he helped his father to build the Kaaba. The Kaaba is the place towards which Muslims turn in prayer. This is known as the Qibla.

Literature is a group of works of art that are made of words. Most are written, but some are shared by word of mouth. Literature usually means a work of poetry, theatre or narrative. There are many different kinds of literature, such as poetry, plays, or novels. They can also be put into groups by their language, historical time, place of origin, genre, and subject. The word "literature" comes from the Latin word "literatura," which means "writing formed with letters."

Most of the earliest works were epic poems. Epic poems are long stories or myths about adventures, such as the Epic of Gilgamesh from ancient Mesopotamia. Ramayana and Mahabharta, two Indian epics, are still read today. The Iliad and Odyssey are two famous Greek poems by Homer. They were shared over time through speaking and memory and were written down around the 9th or 8th century BCE.

Literature can also mean imaginative or creative writing, which is read for its artistic value. Literature is also related to people and community. According to Sangidu (2004) as quoted by Arfani et.al (2023), "literature is a part of society, a fact that inspires authors to involve themselves in the life order of the community where they are and try to fight for the position of the social structure and the problems face in society".

Logic is the study of reasoning. The rules of logic let philosophers make logical deductions about the world. Logic helps us decide whether something can be true or false.

Logic is often written in syllogisms, which are one type of logical proof. A syllogism is made from a collection of statements used to logically prove the final statement, called the conclusion. One popular example of a logical syllogism was written by the Classical Greek philosopher Aristotle:

The conclusion is the final statement. This syllogism connects the first two statements to make a logical deduction: Socrates is mortal.

The syllogism is made from three logical statements or propositions. These statements are short sentences describing a small step in a logical argument. The small statements make up the argument, the same way atoms make up molecules. When logic is correct, the statements are said to "follow" from each other. Statements have a truth value, meaning they can be proved to be true or false, but not both. Illogical statements or mistakes in logic are called logical fallacies.

Logical statements can be written in a special type of short hand writing, which includes the symbols of the symbolic logic. These symbols are used to describe logical reasoning in an abstract way. For instance:

By replacing the English words with letters, one can make the syllogism even simpler.

Similar to mathematical symbols for operations like addition and subtraction, symbolic logic separates abstract logic from the English-language meaning of the original statements. With these abstract symbols, people can study pure logic without the use of a specific written language.

The syllogism is now written in the most abstract and simple way possible. Any distracting elements, such as English language words, have been removed. Anyone who understands logical symbolism can understand this argument.

A logical proof is a list of statements put in a specific order to prove a logical point.  Each statement in the proof is either an assumption made for the sake of argument, or has been proven to follow from earlier statements in the proof. All proofs must start with some assumptions, such as "men exist" in the above syllogism. A proof shows that one statement, the conclusion, follows from the starting assumptions. With a proof, we can prove that "Aristotle is mortal" logically follows from "Aristotle is a man" and "All men are mortal".

Some statements are always true. That kind of statement is called tautology. One popular classical tautology, credited to the philosopher Parmenides of Elea, says "That which is, is. That which is not, is not." This essentially means that true statements are true and false statements are false. Due to their simple nature, tautologies may not always be helpful in building logical arguments.

A tautology is represented in symbolic logic as , meaning "Either a or not a." Assuming that there are no unmentioned possibilities, this covers every possible case. Another symbol used to represent a tautology is .

Because logic is a tool used to think more rationally, it can be used in countless ways. Symbolic logic is employed far and wide, from philosophical treatises to complicated mathematical equations. Computers use the rules of logic to run algorithms, which let computer programs make decisions based on data.

Logic is critical to pure mathematics, statistics, and data analysis. Logic is also studied in philosophy. People who study math create proofs that use logical rules to show that mathematical theorems are correct. There is an area of mathematics called mathematical logic that studies logic using mathematics.

A mental illness is an illness of the mind. It can be a psychiatric disorder, a psychological disorder, mental disease, mental breakdown, nervous breakdown, or mental health conditions. Historically, people with mental illness were called lunatics. People with a mental illness may behave in strange ways, or have strange thoughts. Mental illnesses can create problems for what a person has to do every day.

Mental illnesses develop during the life of a person. This may be linked to genes and experience. What people call mental illness has changed over time. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) by the American Psychiatric Association is used around the world.

People with a mental illness sometimes have problems dealing with other people, or have a hard time doing what would be easy for everyone else. Some mental illnesses can be treated with medicine.

In some cases, mental illnesses change the way the brain works. Many conditions which affect the brain are not mental illnesses, because they do not change the way people think: Neither epilepsy nor Parkinson's disease is a mental illness, even though they both affect the brain.

According to the New Freedom Commission on Mental Health in the United States, the most common type of disability in the United States is major mental illnesses (which include major depression, bipolar disorder, personality disorders, body dysmorphic disorder, schizophrenia, and obsessive-compulsive disorder).

Thirty-three percent of North American adults will have a mental illness in a given year, according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness. But in more than half of these cases, the mental illness is not bad enough to disrupt daily life activities.

There is a genetic basis which makes some people more likely to develop mental illness. A study published in The Lancet, a medical journal, found the same set of genetic markers in people with five different disorders: schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, autism, major depression, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).

Even though the media show this differently, studies have shown that people with a severe mental illness are not necessarily violent. Statistically, violence is often caused by factors such as drug abuse, or those related to the personal, social and economic situation.

Findings show that people with a mental illness that live in the community will be victims of violence more often that they will be those starting or spreading it. A study that looked at people diagnosed with "severe mental illness" living in a US inner-city area found that a quarter of them had been victims of at least one violent crime over the course of a year; this proportion was eleven times higher than the average. For people which have been diagnosed with a mental illness it is more difficult to get a trial started, because fewer people believe them, and many people have a  against people with a mental illness.

There are a few specific diagnoses which are defined by conduct problems and violence. These include conditions such as childhood conduct disorder, adult antisocial personality disorder or psychopathy. There are conflicting findings about how much specific symptoms are linked to an increase in violent behaviour. These symptoms include psychosis (hallucinations or delusions) that can occur in disorders such as schizophrenia, delusional disorder or mood disorder. The factors that lead to violent behaviour are more often demographic or economic in nature, such as being young, male, of lower socioeconomic status or of abusing drugs, including alcoholism, to which some people are particularly vulnerable.

Some studies show that disabled people are sometimes treated badly. For example, people with mental illness may deal with ableism. An example of ableism is insults, for example calling a mentally ill person a retard.

High-profile cases have led to fears that serious crimes, such as homicide, have increased because people with certain mental illnesses are not treated in specialized institutions, but the evidence does not support this conclusion. Violence that does occur in relation to mental disorder (against the mentally ill or by the mentally ill) typically occurs in the context of complex social interactions, often in a family setting rather than between strangers. It is also an issue in health care settings and the wider community.

Marco Polo was born in 1254 and died on January 8, 1324. He was an Italian trader and explorer. He was one of the first Europeans to explore Central Asia and East Asia. Many other explorers, including Christopher Columbus, looked up to him. He spoke four languages.

Marco Polo was known for the book, Travels of Marco Polo, where he talked about Asia.

Marco Polo was born in Venice, one of the most successful trading cities. Polo's mother died when he was very young and he was raised by his aunt and uncle. His father and uncle returned from their Silk Road travels when Marco was about 15 years old. Two years later, the three of them started their journey to Cathay (China). His family were well-known merchants, not explorers. He learned about writing, reading, and arithmetic, and how to do business.

Polo went on a 24-year trip to China with his father and uncle during the Mongol Dynasty. He left Venice at the age of 17 on a boat that went through the Mediterranean Sea, to Acre, and later to Tabriz and Kerman. Then he travelled across Asia getting as far as Beijing. On the way there he went over mountains and through deserts, across scorching hot lands and places where the cold was unbearable. Arriving in Cathay at age 21, he served in Kublai Khan's court for 17 years. He left the Far East and returned to Venice by sea. There was sickness on board and 600 passengers and crew died. Nevertheless, Marco Polo survived the journey. Polo returned to Venice with treasures like ivory, jade, jewels, porcelain and silk.

Some scholars believe that while Marco Polo did go to China, they doubt that he went to all of the other places described in his book.

Soon after Polo returned from his journeys he fought in a war against Genoa, got captured and put in prison. When he was in prison, he became friendly with a fellow prisoner, Rusticello, who was a writer of romances and novels. He told the writer about all his adventures, which became a book called The Travels of Marco Polo. The published version was written by Rustichello da Pisa, based on what Polo had told him. It became famous throughout Europe. In the book he said that Kublai Khan's wealthy new empire had a postal system. He also talked about the Chinese people. China used paper money that was made from mulberry bark.

Ludwig van Beethoven (baptized 17 December 1770 in Bonn – 26 March 1827 in Vienna; pronounced LUD-vig vahn BAY-TOH-ven) was a German composer. He wrote classical music for the piano, orchestras and different groups of instruments. His best-known works are his third (Eroica), fifth, sixth (Pastorale) and ninth (Choral) symphonies, the eighth (Pathetique) and fourteenth (Moonlight) piano sonatas, two of his later piano concertos, his opera Fidelio, and also the piano piece Für Elise. Beethoven lived when the piano was still a new instrument, and when he was a young man, he was a talented pianist. Beethoven was popular with the rich and important people in Vienna, Austria, where he lived.

However, in 1801, he began to lose his hearing. His deafness became worse. By 1817, he was completely deaf. Although he could no longer play in concerts, he continued to compose. During this time he composed some of his greatest works. He is said to be one of the greatest classical composers who has ever lived. When Beethoven died, he was surrounded by friends on his death bed. His funeral was held at the Church of the Holy Trinity. Between 10,000 and 30,000 people are estimated to have attended. Franz Schubert was a pall bearer at his funeral, even though the two were never close.

Very little is known about Beethoven’s childhood. He was baptized on December 17, 1770 and was probably born a few days before that. Beethoven's parents were Johann van Beethoven (1740 in Bonn – December 18, 1792) and Maria Magdalena Keverich (1744 in Ehrenbreitstein – July 17, 1787). Magdalena's father, Johann Heinrich Keverich, had been Chief at the court of the Archbishopric of Trier at Festung Ehrenbreitstein fortress opposite to Koblenz. His father was a fairly unimportant musician who worked at the court of the Elector of Cologne. This court was in Bonn and it was here that he lived until he was a young man. His father gave him his first lessons in piano and violin. Beethoven was a child prodigy like Mozart, but while Mozart as a little boy was taken all over Europe by his father, Beethoven never traveled until he was 17. By that time, his piano teacher was a man called Neefe who had learned the piano from Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach, the son of Johann Sebastian Bach. Neefe said to the Elector that the young Beethoven should be given the chance to travel, so he was allowed to go to Vienna. There, he might have had one or two lessons from Mozart, but then Beethoven got a letter saying that his mother was dying, so he hurried back to Bonn. Soon his mother died, and Beethoven had to help to look after the family because his father had become an alcoholic. Beethoven played the viola in the orchestra of the Elector, he started to compose, and made many friends. Some of these friends were musicians and others were very important people, many of them were aristocrats who would be able to help him in his career.

In 1792, the elector let Beethoven travel to Vienna again. They expected him to return after a while. However, Beethoven never left Vienna. He stayed there for the rest of his life. He would have loved to have had some more composition lessons from Mozart, but Mozart had just died, so he had lessons from Haydn instead. Haydn was a good teacher, but a year later, he went off to England. Therefore, Beethoven took lessons from a man called Albrechtsberger who was not famous like Haydn. He was a good teacher too, and he made him write lots of technical exercises. He showed him how to write advanced counterpoint and fugues. This helped him to be a great composer.

Beethoven wanted to become famous as a pianist and composer, so he started to get to know important, aristocratic people. Some of these people had already heard him in Bonn when they had traveled there, so his name was becoming known in Vienna.  It also helped that he could say he was the pupil of the famous Joseph Haydn. There were a lot of aristocratic people in Vienna who liked music, and many had their own private orchestras. Some of them started to give Beethoven places to live when the Elector of Bonn stopped sending him money in 1794. Beethoven started to perform in private houses, and he became known for his improvisations. In 1795 he performed one of his piano concertos at a concert. He also had his first publication (his opus 1). This was a group of three Piano Trios. Haydn had heard them at a private concert a year before and had advised Beethoven not to publish the third one. However, he did publish it, and that was the one which became the most successful. His opus 2 was a group of three piano sonatas which he played at the court of his friend Prince Lichnowsky. When he published them, he dedicated them to Haydn.

Beethoven was starting to become famous, travelling to places like Prague and Pressburg. He wrote much chamber music. He was, perhaps, a little jealous of the success that Haydn had with his latest symphonies he had written for London. In 1800 he gave his first public concert with his own music. He conducted his First Symphony as well as the Septet. By now several publishers were trying to persuade him to let them publish his new works. Beethoven was becoming famous as a composer. And during this period Beethoven produced his most famous piano sonata: No. 14, in C sharp minor, nicknamed, "Moonlight". This was written for his girlfriend, 16-year-old Giulietta Guicciardi. However, he was far from happy because he realized that he was starting to become deaf. And when he asked for Giulietta's marriage, her parents refused and married her to another 20-year-old man instead.

Beethoven seems to have tried to forget these bad thoughts by working very hard. He composed a lot more music, including his Third Symphony, called the Eroica. Originally he gave it the title Bonaparte in honour of Napoleon whom he admired. But when Napoleon crowned himself emperor in 1804, Beethoven began to think that he was just a tyrant who wanted a lot of power. He went to the table where the score of the symphony was lying and tore up the title page. Beethoven stayed in Vienna that year, working hard at an opera and giving piano lessons to Josephine von Brunsvik to whom he wrote passionate letters. She was a young widow with four children. It is impossible to know quite what her feelings were for Beethoven, but socially she belonged in higher society and probably thought that a wild musician was not a suitable husband. In the end she married a Baron, but this marriage, like her first one, was not happy either.

In 1805 Beethoven wrote his only opera. The next spring it had two performances but was then not performed again for another eight years. Beethoven had made several changes to the opera which became known as Fidelio. The overture that he had written for the 1806 performance is now known as Leonore 3 and is usually performed separately at concerts. The opera is a “rescue” opera, a typical French kind of opera describing a man who is imprisoned and rescued by his lover who disguises herself as a man and manages to get into the prison.

Beethoven continued to write compositions: a Violin Concerto, symphonies, piano concertos, string quartets and chamber music. Two of his greatest symphonies were produced in 1806: Symphony No. 5 and Symphony No. 6 (Pastorale). The first one was known for its dark and deep tone, especially in its first movement. The second was famous for its depiction of the countryside. He also wrote Piano Concerto No. 4 and Piano Concerto No. 5 "Emperor". He earned money by pleasing the aristocrats, dedicating works to them in return for fees, and by selling his music to publishers. Occasionally he earned money from concerts. It was not a regular income. He would have liked the job of Kapellmeister to the emperor. He was not able to get this, but in 1809 three rich aristocrats: the Archduke Rodolph, Prince Lobkowitz and Prince Kinsky gave him an income for the rest of his life on condition that he stayed in Vienna. This meant that Beethoven did not have to worry so much about money. He was asked to write music for Egmont, a play by Goethe. The overture is very often performed as a concert piece. Beethoven very much wanted to meet Goethe. The two great men met in Teplitz. Goethe later described Beethoven as a rather wild-mannered man who made life difficult for himself by his cross attitude to the world. Beethoven admired several women, including one to whom he wrote a passionate letter. She is known as the “Immortal Beloved”, but no one knows who she was. Beethoven seems to have become deeply depressed because he never found true happiness in love.

In a letter dated June 29, 1801, Beethoven told a friend in Bonn about a terrible secret he had for some time. He knew that he was becoming deaf. For some time, he had spells of fever and stomach pains. A young man does not expect to become deaf, but now he was starting to admit it to himself. He was finding it hard to hear what people were saying. Just at the moment when he was starting to become known as one of the greatest of all composers, it was a terrible blow to realize that he was losing his hearing. In 1802, he stayed for a time in Heiligenstadt which is now a suburb of Vienna but at that time it was outside the city. There he wrote a famous letter which is known as the Heiligenstadt Testament. It is dated October 6 and told about his rising frustration at his deafness. He asks people to forgive him if he cannot hear what they are saying. He said that he had often thought of suicide, but that he had so much music in his head which had to be written down that he decided to continue his life. This very emotional letter was found amongst his papers after his death. He never sent it to anyone.

By 1814, Beethoven had reached the height of his fame. The Viennese people thought of him as the greatest living composer, and he was often invited by royal people to their palaces. It was the year in which he played his famous Piano Trio Op. 97 The Archduke. That was the last time he played the piano in public. His deafness was making it impossible to continue.

Beethoven had many problems when his brother Caspar Carl died, leaving a 9-year-old son. The boy’s mother may have been incapable of looking after him, but Beethoven had to prove this in a court of law. For several years he looked after his nephew, but it was a difficult relationship and it involved a lot of legal letters and quarrels with people. In 1826, Karl tried to shoot himself. He survived, but people persuaded Beethoven to stop being his guardian. Karl went into the army.

The last years were unhappy years for Beethoven. During this time he composed very little. Then, in 1817, he recovered and wrote his last two symphonies, a mass called Missa Solemnis, his last five piano sonatas, and a group of string quartets which were so modern and difficult that very few people at the time understood the music. Nowadays, people think they are the greatest works ever written for string quartet.

His Ninth Symphony is called the Choral Symphony because there is a choir and soloists in the last movement. At the time people did not understand this either, because a symphony is normally a work for orchestra, not a work with singers. Beethoven chose the words of a poem by the German poet Friedrich Schiller: An die Freude (Ode to Joy). It is all about living together in peace and harmony, so that it sends an important message to people. This is why it has been chosen in recent years as the National Anthem for the European Union. The Ninth Symphony was performed at a concert on May 7, 1824. After the scherzo movement the audience applauded enthusiastically, but Beethoven could not hear the applause and one of the singers had to turn him round so that he could see that people were clapping.

Beethoven died on March 26, 1827. About 20,000 people came onto the streets for his funeral. The famous poet Franz Grillparzer wrote the funeral speech. One of the torchbearers was Franz Schubert. Schubert died the next year. In 1888 Beethoven’s and Schubert’s remains were moved to another cemetery in Vienna and were placed side by side.

Regarding the instruments, that the composer was using throughout his life, there was a variety of pianos (fortepianos). After moving to Vienna, Beethoven purchased a piano from Streicher. As recalled by his student, Carl Czerny, he also had a Walter piano. Beethoven's last instrument was a fortepiano from a Viennese piano builder Conrad Graf. After the composer's death, it was sold to Wimmer family and now is displayed at the Beethovenhaus in Bonn.

Beethoven’s music is usually divided into three periods: Early, Middle and Late. Most composers who live a long time develop as they get older and change their way of composing. Of course, these changes in style are not sudden, but they are quite a good way of understanding the different periods of his composing life.

His first period includes the works he wrote in his youth in Bonn, and his early days in Vienna up to about 1803. His middle period starts with the Eroica Symphony and includes most of his orchestral works. His last period includes the Ninth Symphony and the late string quartets.

Beethoven is probably the most famous of all composers, and the most written about. He had a wild personality and this was something that the Romantics in the 19th century always expected from great artists. The Romantics thought that the artist was somehow a person with exaggerated qualities who was not like normal people. Beethoven had a very strong personality. He lived in the time of the French Revolution and had strong views on independence and ways of living free from tyranny. This made him a hero in many people’s eyes.

His music was so famous that many composers in the 19th century found it quite hard to compose because they thought they would be compared to him. For example, Johannes Brahms, took a long time to write his First Symphony. He thought that everyone was expecting him to be the next Beethoven. It was only towards the end of the 19th century that Gustav Mahler wrote several symphonies which include singing, although he does this very differently to Beethoven.

Meat is animal flesh which is used for food. Most often, it is used to describe skeletal muscles and fats that are found with it. Types of meats include beef, veal from cattle, pork, ham, bacon from pigs, mutton from sheep, venison from deer, fish, insects, poultry from chickens, ducks, turkeys. The word meat is also used for sausages made from ground meats and for non-muscle organs which are used for food, for example liver, brain, kidneys.

In the meat processing industry, the word "meat" can be used to mean only the flesh of mammalian specieses such as pigs, cattle, etc. But does not include fish, insects, poultry, etc (non-mammals).

Red meat refers to meat that is obtained from mammals, particularly beef, pork, lamb, veal. It is characterized by its reddish color, primarily due to the presence of myoglobin, a protein responsible for oxygen storage in muscle tissues.

Animals such as members of the cat family that mainly eat animals are called carnivores.

Meat is an important part of the diet of many people, because it has the highest amount of proteins. Proteins help in the growth and healing of the body and gives the highest nutrient energy. Meat is a high protein food, but costs more than other foods like bread and vegetables. Meat is also the source of the highest amount B vitamins. People who cannot afford meat, or who do not like to eat it, need to find other ways to get enough proteins in their diet. Beans and certain nuts are also somewhat high in proteins, but plant proteins are as not high as animal proteins. People that choose not to eat meat are called vegetarians, and those who do not eat any animal products are known as vegans.

Red meat is darker-coloured meat (usually from mammals), different from white meat such as chicken or fish. There is a greater risk of diseases and parasites when eating raw meat, but there are some special dishes which are made from raw meat. Examples are steak tartare, sushi, oysters. The meat used in these dishes are usually of high quality.

According to the National Health Service (NHS), meat is defined as "meat from cattle, sheep, swine, goats, including veal, lamb, pork".

Beef refers to the flesh of mature cattle, specifically distinguished from veal. It is a type of red meat known for its firm texture, marbling, and rich flavor. High-quality beef has lean, velvety, well-marbled flesh of bright red color.

Pork is the meat derived from pigs, typically slaughtered between six months and one year old. It is classified as red meat and is widely consumed worldwide. Pork comes in various cuts and is known for its versatility.

Lamb is the tender and mild-flavored meat from young sheep, typically under 12 months old. It is also classified as red meat and is rich in essential amino acids, high-quality protein, B vitamins, zinc, and iron. Lamb is lean compared to other red meats and contains unique antioxidants like CLA.

Goat meat, also known as mutton, is the flesh of goats and it is a red meat. It is consumed in various cuisines around the world. Goat meat is lean, tender, and has a distinct flavor.

Chicken meat is made up of different edible portions such as the breasts, thighs, drumsticks, wings. It is a widely enjoyed and flexible type of poultry meat that is high in proteins and low in fats. With a variety of cuts to choose from, chicken can be utilized in numerous recipes and prepared using various cooking techniques.

Duck meat is obtained from various types of ducks, such as Peking, Serati, Balinese ducks. Ducks are waterfowl known for their tender and tasty meat, thanks to their higher fat content. Duck meat is considered a white meat, similar to chicken, and can be used as an alternative in cooking. It offers a distinct flavor and is appreciated by many.

Due to religious dietary law, halal (حلال), meaning permissible in Arabic, is used as a visual marker for Muslims in meat shops and on food products made from meats according to Islamic traditions. Likewise, kosher (כַּשְׁרוּת) meaning lawful in Hebrew, is used as a visual marker for Jews in food sourced and prepared from meats according to Jewish traditions. In Hinduism, eating beef is a complete sin because they consider cattle as their foster-parents. Some people who follow Buddhism, as well as those who follow Jainism and who support animal rights, tend to avoid eating meat all together.

Marxism is the name for a set of political and economic ideas.

These ideas come from the works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels and their most notable work is The Communist Manifesto. They have had a lot of influence in many countries. Marxism influenced other political views.

People disagree a lot on how a Marxist society should be organized: "Marxist political economists differ over their definitions of capitalism, socialism and communism. These differences are so fundamental, the arguments among Marxist political economists have sometimes been as intense as their oppositions to capitalism".

Marxism is placed on the left-wing to far-left of the political spectrum.

Marxism says that people in the world are organized into different groups, or classes, based on what they do for work.

Most people are called "workers" because they work in factories, offices, or farms for money. They belong to the "working class" (or "proletariat"). These people do not own the places they work in or the materials they need for their work.

Another group, who are not as big as the working class, are "capitalists" (or "bourgeoisie"). They own the factories, land, and buildings that the workers work in.  They also own some of the tools the workers have to use. Marx calls capitalists the "Ruling Class" because they live off of the work of all the workers. He also says that the capitalists own the government, army, and courts.

In Marxist views, capital is the "means of production" and money which the capitalist can invest in different places of business, so that they can "profit" or gain more capital.

Most workers work for companies owned by either capitalists or "petit-bourgeois" (small-time exploiters). The capitalist pays the worker for the worker's time. The capitalist has bought a period of time from the worker, which the worker must then use to labor for the capitalist. According to Marxist thinking, this is the only way that a capitalist can create extra money from a commodity (a piece of merchandise).  The capitalist exploits the worker's time as much as they can. The capitalist receives a certain price for the commodity the worker made.  The capitalist builds up capital by paying the worker less than that price.  In this way, the capitalist exploits the worker's labor by:

Here is an example of exploitation of labor.  Jane is a shoemaker. She works for Michael, who owns a shoe factory that can make 60 pairs of shoes in a day. Jane makes 60 pairs of shoes every day. Michael pays Jane $20 a day.  However, Michael sells each pair of shoes for $2 each.  This means he makes $120 in a day.  After he pays Jane her $20 wage, Michael has $100 left over. However he then has to pay for materials which cost $1 for each pair, so that's $60 each day. Then running expenses of the factory cost him $10 a day. So he only gets $30 at the end of the day for managing the business.  This remaining wealth is called "Profit" or "Surplus [extra] Value." In other words, even though Jane makes 60 shoes every day, she only gets paid the value of 10 pairs of shoes. The rest of the day, while she is making the other 50 shoes, she is creating money for her boss.  Her labor is making him richer and helping him earn money.

It is this Surplus Value, or Profit, which Marxism thinks as an exploitation of labor. This exploitation allows the smaller class (capitalists) to live without working while making a profit, while the bigger class (the workers) have to work for the capitalists to survive under usually poor working conditions.

Marxism says that factories, tools, and work places cannot create new value on their own. They are like a blueberry bush: it has no value on its own. People have to create that value by laboring. For example, someone spends a day picking blueberries. Those blueberries can now be traded or eaten because of the labor that was put in to pick them.

Marxist thinking claims that capitalists and workers are constantly struggling. They call this "Dialectical Materialism."  This is the idea that the history of humans is the history of conflict between classes. Different classes with different interests argue or fight each other. Social change (or in its absence, social stagnation) is the result.

Marxism says that capitalists want to exploit the workers as much as possible and make their pay as low as they can. The capitalists do this to create as much profit for themselves as possible, as quickly as possible.  Workers, on the other hand, have to struggle to keep their wages up and to keep the "rate of exploitation" low, so that they can live more peaceful lives. This is what Marxism calls "class struggle": where workers and their bosses fight against each other to gain for themselves.

Marxists think that all of written human history has been divided by economic classes. One example is feudal society (a medieval society controlled by feudal lords and nobles). The ruling class got their power and wealth from the labor of peasants (farmers). But as peasants demanded more and more for themselves, small shopkeepers and tradespeople began to appear. Many of these people formed guilds and eventually began to employ workers.  These workers were able to gain wealth for themselves at these jobs. These historical events created capitalism.

In this way, Marxists think that history has been pushed forward by class struggle. They think that change will be born from this struggle, just like capitalism was.  However, they also think that capitalism will give way to communism; as the exploitation of workers becomes worse it will lead workers to revolt against their capitalist rulers.

The core of Marxist thinking is called Materialism. Materialism is a philosophical view that says that communities develop from the "ground up".  It says that the "higher" qualities of culture (like art, manners, customs, and religions) are actually founded on the "lower" or simpler qualities of life.  These qualities include having enough of what people need to survive, like food and shelter; who has money and what they have to do to get it; who is allowed to work, and who is forced to work.

Changes in the higher qualities of culture (sometimes called the "Superstructure") are often linked to changes in the lower qualities of life (sometimes called the "Base"). One example is that in medieval times,  people thought "honor" or duty to people with more power than them was very important.  Today, in Western countries, many people see ambition (being someone who works hard for their own goals) as more important.  This is because, in medieval times, people worked their entire lives under lords who depended on them not only for work but for war.  Today, people work for themselves more, and our society lets some people move up from being poor to being rich. In this case, what people see as good and important depends on how the rulers get value out of their workers.

Marxism recognizes that in earlier time periods, we lived first under rulers who owned everything.  Then we lived under lords who owned land with workers who lived and worked on that land. In Marx's time, people lived under governments that allowed many people to own property. Eventually, Marxists believe that we will move to a society where everyone owns everything in common. This will be called communism.

In other words, human society has always been based on the economic forces that human beings can control. For Marxism, this means that each society would take its form based on its "mode of production."

Marxists believe that humans' ability to produce goods and services today means people can move beyond the conflicts of a society that is divided into classes. Many Marxists believe that there will always be revolts and, with the right conditions, revolutions. In these revolutions, the workers will fight the capitalists. If they win, they will set up a socialist "workers' state" (a form of government where the workers are the rulers of society). This workers' state will only be temporary.  Its job will be to take power away from the capitalists, until all the capitalist countries in the world are defeated, and social classes no longer exist.

Marxists believe that if the working class makes itself the ruling class, and destroys the basis for class society (private property, or what Marx called "Bourgeois Property"), there will be a "classless society."  In a Marxist society, no social classes are in conflict, and there is no government anymore.  The state will no longer be needed. There would be no countries. The world will have no borders. There will be communes around the world.  Workers will organize production of goods and services based on what people need, not based on profits.

Some Marxists say that modern "communism" is not communism at all. They say that "communist" countries like the Soviet Union, the People's Republic of China, Cuba, and Vietnam are really using different forms of capitalism, often with heavily "nationalized" industries. A thinker named Tony Cliff was one of the biggest supporters of these ideas. He wrote that states like the Soviet Union and Communist China (before 1980) were "State-Capitalist."

Not all communists, socialists, or Marxists agree on this question. However, many strong supporters of Marxism agree that:

People use these terms interchangeably but this is incorrect. These concepts have different meanings:

Martin Luther (November 10, 1483 ‒ February 18, 1546) was a German monk and theologian of Christianity credited with leading the Protestant Reformation, a movement that marked the start of Protestantism. Luther founded the Lutheran Church, the first large Protestant church.

Martin Luther studied philosophy at the University of Erfurt. In 1505, he entered into the Augustinian Order as a monk. Luther studied theology and ancient languages in Erfurt. In 1512 he became a doctor of theology in Wittenberg and began his lectures on the Psalms and the Letters of Saint Paul.

In October 1517, Luther wrote his Ninety-Five Theses. Many people think that he put them on the door of a church in Wittenberg, but no one said so at the time and so that may be a myth. Instead, he published a copy and presented it to church officials at Worms Cathedral. Luther called it The Disputation of Doctor Martin Luther on the Power and Efficacy of Indulgences. It questioned the teaching of the Catholic Church, its ideas about penance, the authority of the Pope, and the usefulness of indulgences.

The Catholic Church was selling indulgences to get out of purgatory and to go right to heaven after death. Indulgences were sold for money for the dead so that they could go to heaven faster. Poor people could not be able to go to heaven as quickly, but the priests in the church could be rich from selling them. Luther thought that all of that was wrong and against the Bible.

After studying the Letters of Paul, especially the Letter to Romans, Luther came up with the idea sola fide. That means that only by faith can people get salvation by God. That would mean that many of the Church's customs were useless and so should be cast away. Luther at first believed that he could reform the Church from the inside and wanted to stay part of it, but the papacy considered his Theses to be as heresy and excommunicated him on June 15, 1520, with a paper saying that he did not have its permission to go to heaven. In October, Luther burned the paper in public and showed he would not obey it unless it accepted his words.

Emperor Charles V opened the imperial Diet of Worms on January 22, 1521 to hear the case. For Luther, it was the last chance to say that he had been wrong. However, he did not change his mind and so the Diet declared Luther an outlaw.

With the help of a friend, Luther hid in Wartburg Castle, near Erfurt. There, he translated the Bible. He wrote the New Testament in German, instead of the original Greek. Later, he translated the Old Testament into German from Hebrew. Until then, the Mass and the Bible were usually in Latin, which very few people understood. That made most people going to Mass not understand what the priest was saying. Luther translated the Bible so that more people could read and understand it. They now no longer depended on the priest to tell them what was in the Bible, but they could read it themselves.

Luther started his own church, the Lutheran Church, with his friend Philip Melanchthon. Luther strongly believed that his cause was righteous. He wrote harsh criticism against his enemies, especially Catholics and Jews, who he believed to be false prophets from the Devil. He rejected Jewish beliefs about the Old Testament and accused Jewish leaders of lying. He advised rulers to deal violently with the Jews in their realms. Those arguments make him controversial.

From the Bible, Luther formed firm ideas about families. Luther knew that what a child learned at home would greatly influence his life. He said in Table Talks, "Sermons very little edify children, who learn little thereby; it is more needful they be taught and well instructed in schools, and at home, and that they be learned and examined what they have learned; this way profits much; 'tis very wearisome, but very necessary." Luther also preached against the Catholic Church's refusal to let priests marry. After hearing his preaching, many nuns wrote to him to ask for help in escaping their convents. Luther helped nine nuns escape from a convent. On April 4, 1524, Luther had a friend help the nuns sneak over the wall and hid them in barrels on a wagon until they were out of the city. One of the nuns was Katherine von Bora.

After finding husbands for the nuns whose families would not accept them, Luther had to find a husband for Katherine. Katherine, however, rejected a match that Luther had arranged for her, and said that she would accept only Luther or another pastor, Nicolaus von Amsdorf, as her husband.

At first, Luther did not really like Katherine and thought that "she was proud and haughty." His feelings changed, however, and they married on June 13, 1525. Luther later said, "And thank God it hath turned out well; for I have a pious (holy, God-loving) and faithful wife, to whom one may safely commit (give) his heart." They had six children. On June 6, 1526, Luther wrote, "I am a happy husband... for from the most precious woman, my best of wives, I have received, by the blessing of God, a little son, John Luther, and, by God's wonderful grace, I have become a father."

The firstborn was John Luther. The next was a daughter, Elizabeth, but she died when she was just eight months old, and Luther wrote in a letter, "My little daughter Elizabeth is taken from me, and hath left me with a bleeding and almost womanly heart, so sad am I on her account. I never thought the heart of a father was so tender towards his children. Pray the Lord for me." A third child, Magdalene, also died young. Then came Martin, then Paul, and finally Margaret. It was for his children that Luther wrote the Small Catechism, a book showing the basics of Lutheran beliefs.

Despite his historical contributions to Christianity and important role in European history, Luther held highly problematic views about Jews. On the Jews and Their Lies (1543), a 65,000-word thesis written by Luther, a 16th-century Christian reformer, consists of accusations of "Jewish conspiracy against Christianity" and incitement to extreme violence towards Jews. The claims in Luther's 16th-century book are still being promoted by some influencers.

In his book, he classified Jews as the biggest threat to Christianity and called for these actions against them:

In his sermon Warning against the Jews on February 18, 1546, Luther said,

Meanwhile, Luther was a folk hero in Nazi Germany, and his teachings were widely circulated among the public. Luther's statues were also built across Nazi Germany, along with regular celebrations of "German Luther Day", a national holiday designated by Adolf Hitler in 1933.

It is important to note, however, that modern-day Lutherans do not uphold Luther's anti-semitism; the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod "deeply regrets, deplores, and repudiates" it. Similarly, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America does not approve of Luther's attacks against Jewish people.

Johannes Wallman (1930–2021), a professor of church history at the Ruhr-Universität Bochum, wrote in 1987:

Richard Steigmann-Gall, a history professor at Kent State University, wrote in his 2003 book The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity, 1919–1945:

Since the time of the silent movies, 28 movies about Luther that have been made. The newest one, Luther, was released in 2003.

Louis XIV (5 September 1638 — 1 September 1715), also popularly known as the Sun King and Louis the Great, was the King of France, King of Navarre and Prince of Andorra from 14 May 1643 until his death. He was a king for 72 years and 110 days. This was the longest recorded rule in the history of the whole world. He is often seen as the  example of absolutism. He was the older of two brothers and the other being Philippe. The two were very close and Philippe was later created the Duke of Orléans.

Louis' parents were Louis XIII and Anne of Austria. He was the unexpected child of King Louis XIII and Anne of Austria, who had not had children in their 22-year marriage. He was christened Louis Dieudonné (literally, “gift of God”). In 1643, before his fifth birthday, his father died, and Louis inherited the throne of France. Because Louis XIV was too young to rule, his mother ruled France with Cardinal Mazarin, the Italian financier who had been the principal minister of Louis XIII. Mazarin had guided the nation through the later stages of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648). In this war France struggled against the Habsburg dynasty that ruled Spain for military supremacy in Europe.

After Mazarin died in 1661, Louis declared that he would rule France without a chief minister, something no French king had done in living memory. He intended to rule as an absolute monarch, believing that his power as king was derived from God and that he was responsible to God alone. He was obliged to rule for the benefit of his people. While Louis assumed responsibility for decision making, he understood that he must rule within the constraints of the laws and customs of his kingdom. Louis consulted widely with his nobles and ministers, and he met weekly with members of his high council. He created an informal cabinet, which was eventually led by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, chief minister of finance.

Nevertheless, the system of absolute monarchy emphasized the role of the king, and no monarch was more successful in creating the image of monarchy than Louis XIV. He took the sun as his emblem and connected himself to its radiant image.

Starting in 1661, King Louis XIV transformed a humble hunting lodge into a glittering palace. Over 30,000 men worked on constructing the Palace of Versailles, a project that drained the royal treasury for decades. Expenses included not only building but also diverting rivers, piping in fresh water, and planting thousands of orange trees to mask the smell of sewage that could not be properly drained away. In May 1682, Louis moved the capital of France to Versailles, 20 kilometres\12 miles away from Paris. It was Louis XIV's motive to remove himself and his  nobles from the political intrigues of Paris. It became a symbol of his Absolute Monarchy.

Although Louis dreamed of a Spanish inheritance for his heirs, his military policy was not to expand French territory. He fought his early wars for defensive purposes—to secure France’s northern border and to dislodge the Spanish from strategic towns.

Louis fought the War of the Devolution (1667-1668) to assert his claims to a portion of Spain’s possessions after his wife’s father, Philip IV, died. Louis claimed the Spanish Netherlands in place of the wedding gift that Philip IV had never paid.

The French aggression in the Spanish Netherlands caused relations between France and Holland to deteriorate. The Dutch had already fought the Spanish for generations to protect against an invasion of their country. They had no intention of allowing the French to pose the same threat by occupying the territories on their border. The result was war in the Netherlands from 1672 to 1678, during which Louis again demonstrated the effectiveness of French might. In a sweeping campaign, Louis almost succeeded in conquering Holland. To protect themselves, the Dutch opened their dikes, flooded the countryside, and turned Amsterdam into a virtual island. Louis’s armies could not advance farther, and they began negotiating a truce. War resumed, however, when Spain and Austria allied themselves with Holland, and Louis signed a treaty with England in 1670 to keep the English navy neutral. Neither side could win a decisive victory, and both suffered from financial exhaustion, which ultimately led to a treaty to end the war.

Louis revoked, or ended, the Treaty of Nantes. This Treaty said that there would be freedom of religion in France. This means that everybody in France could worship the way they wanted to. When Louis revoked the Treaty of Nantes, he said that all people in France must be Catholic. Because of this, 50 thousand Protestant workers left France and went to America, England, and Germany.

While Louis ruled, France became the most powerful country in all of Europe, and many other countries copied the French people's way of dressing and thinking. He also encouraged people to explore Canada, and tried very hard to make France larger. Louis spent a lot of money on wars, and France went into deep debt because of him.

By the middle of the 1680s the Sun King was losing much of his shine. Mazarin had taught him to work rigorously, and Louis maintained a punishing schedule throughout his life, shrugging off a series of minor illnesses and not listening to the advice of his physicians. Eventually a broken arm put an end to his vigorous horseback riding, and gout ended his long walks around Versailles. He was wheeled to the throne room or carried to his carriage. In 1683 his first wife died, and Louis secretly married his longtime mistress, Françoise d’Aubigné, Marquise de Maintenon. In 1711 he went through the tragedy of the death of his oldest son and the following year that of his oldest grandson. Therefore, the kings successor was his little five year old great-grandson Louis Duke of Anjou, who became King Louis XV of France after the death of his great-grandfather in 1715.

French kings after Louis XIV taxed a lot of money from the poor people to try and pay off the debt. This is part of what led to the French Revolution.

In a world that regarded territory, power, and wealth as paramount, Louis XIV was recognized as a great king. He transformed France into the dominant nation in Europe, expanded its boundaries, and left his heirs secure in their possessions. Louis reached the height of his power in the 1670s, and he protected what he had achieved for the next four decades in the face of a Europe united against him. Moreover, he eventually realized his dream of seeing a Bourbon on the Spanish throne. During Louis’s reign, France also consolidated the administration of its colonial possessions and commerce, becoming a world power. On the domestic front, Louis strengthened the central government’s control over the diverse regions of France, incorporating his territorial gains into a united state. On the other hand, he provoked controversy when he restored Catholic religious unity by revoking the Edict of Nantes and repressing Protestantism. Unfortunately many of Louis’s policies, both domestic and foreign, caused great hardship to ordinary people, many of whom suffered starvation, fled their homeland, or lived in terror of persecution. Ultimately, Louis XIV wished to bring glory to France and to his dynasty, and he died believing that he had.

A man is an adult male human. Culturally, he is considered the opposite of a woman. People use the word "man" (one man, two or more men) to talk about gender. Manhood is the period in a male's life after he changes from a boy. A boy is a male child; a female child is called a girl. After boys reach maturity, they can be called a man.

Like most other male mammals, a man inherits an X chromosome from his mother and a Y chromosome from his father. What makes someone a man is not agreed on globally.

There are some sexual differences between a man and a woman. Men have sex organs which we call "external" (not inside the body). But many parts of the male reproductive system are internal too. The study of male reproduction and sex organs is andrology.

Men normally have the same illnesses as women, but there are some sexual illnesses which men have only, or more often.

There are more differences between men and women, not only sexual differences.

Some examples of secondary sexual characteristics in male humans:

Men are usually taller than women. In 1996, the average height of men around the world was 171 cm.

Biology is not the sole factor which makes someone a man and to be perceived as such. Cultural and social referents are used to express and perceive one's manhood, which are independent of assigned sex at birth.  Some men have hormone or chromosomal differences. There are transgender man, who were assigned female at birth, but identify as male and may undergo hormonal therapy and surgeries to transition their sex. Men may have intersex conditions. Intersex people may also be transgender.

A machine is a thing that is created by people to make work easier. It is a tool or invention which multiplies the effect of human effort. The machine produces a mechanical advantage.

Some machines have many parts that move. Examples are bicycles and clocks.

Some machines do not have parts that move. Examples are computers and telephones.

Often a machine will change one form of energy to another form of energy. Simple machines increase or change the direction of a force.

Compound machines are made up of two or more simple machines.

Martin Luther King, Jr. (born Michael King, Jr.; January 15, 1929 – April 4, 1968) was an American pastor, activist, humanitarian, and leader in the Civil Rights Movement. He was best known for improving civil rights by using nonviolent civil disobedience, based on his Christian beliefs. Because he was both a Ph.D. and a pastor, King was sometimes called the Reverend Doctor Martin Luther King Jr. (abbreviation: the Rev. Dr. King), or just Dr King. He is also known by his initials MLK. He was the pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, Georgia.

Martin Luther King Jr. worked hard to make people understand that not only black people but that all races should always be treated equally to white people. He gave speeches to encourage African Americans to protest without using violence.

Led by Dr. King and others, many African Americans used nonviolent, peaceful strategies to fight for their civil rights. These strategies included sit-ins, boycotts, and protest marches. Often, they were attacked by white police officers or people who did not want African Americans to have more rights. However, no matter how badly they were attacked, Dr. King and his followers never fought back.

King also helped to organize the 1963 March on Washington, where he delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech. The next year, he won the Nobel Peace Prize.

King fought for equal rights from the start of the Montgomery Bus Boycott in 1955 until he was murdered by James Earl Ray in April 1968.

Michael King, Jr. was born at 501 Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia, on January 15, 1929. Although the name "Michael" appeared on his birth certificate, his name was later changed to Martin Luther in honor of German reformer Martin Luther.

As King was growing up, everything in Georgia was segregated, 70 years after the Confederacy was defeated and blacks were later separated away from white people.  This meant that black and white people were not allowed to go to the same schools, use the same public bathrooms, eat at the same restaurants, drink at the same water fountains, or even go to the same hospitals.  Everything was separated.  However, the white hospitals, schools, and other places were usually much better than the places where black people were allowed to go.

At age 6, King first went through discrimination (being treated worse than a white person because he was black).  He was sent to an all-black school, and a white friend was sent to an all-white school.

Once, when he was 14, King won a contest with a speech about civil rights.  When he was going back home on a bus, he was forced to give up his seat and stand for the bus ride so a white person could sit down.  At the time, white people were seen as more important than black people.  If a white person wanted a seat, that person could take the seat from any African American.  King later said having to give up his seat made him "the angriest I've ever been in my life."

King went to segregated schools in Georgia, and finished high school at age 15.  He went on to Morehouse College in Georgia, where his father and grandfather had gone.  After graduating from college in 1948, King decided he was not exactly the type of person to join the Baptist Church. He was not sure what kind of career he wanted. He thought about being a doctor or a lawyer. He decided not to do either, and joined the Baptist Church.

King went to a seminary in Pennsylvania to become a pastor.  While studying there, King learned about the non-violent methods used by Mahatma Gandhi against the British Empire in India. King was convinced that these non-violent methods would help the civil rights movement.

Finally, in 1955, King earned a Ph.D. from Boston University's School of Theology.

King first started his civil rights activism in 1955.  At that time, he led a protest against the way black people were segregated on buses. They had to sit at the back of the bus, separate from white people. He told his supporters, and the people who were against equal rights, that people should only use peaceful ways to solve the problem.

King was chosen as president of the Montgomery Improvement Association (MIA), which was created during the boycott.  Rosa Parks later said: "Dr. King was chosen in part because he was relatively new to the community and so [he] did not have any enemies." King ended up becoming an important leader of the boycott, becoming famous around the country, and making many enemies.

King was arrested for starting a boycott. He was fined $500, plus $500 more in court costs. His house was fire-bombed. Others involved with MIA were also threatened. However, by December 1956, segregation had been ended on Montgomery's buses.  People could sit anywhere they wanted on the buses.

After the bus boycott, King and Ralph Abernathy started the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC).  The group decided that they would only use non-violence.  Its motto was "Not one hair of one head of one person should be harmed."  The SCLC chose King as its president.

In 1963, King helped plan the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.  This was the largest protest for human rights in United States history. On August 28, 1963, about 250,000 people marched from the Washington Monument to the Lincoln Memorial.  Then they listened to civil rights leaders speak. King was the last speaker.  His speech, called "I Have a Dream," became one of history's most famous civil rights speeches.  King talked about his dream that one day, white and black people would be equal.

That same year, the United States government passed the Civil Rights Act. This law made many kinds of discrimination against black people illegal.  The March on Washington made it clear to the United States government that they needed to take action on civil rights, and it helped get the Civil Rights Act passed.

In 1964, King was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.  When presenting him with the award, the Chairman of the Nobel Committee said:

Today, now that mankind [has] the atom bomb, the time has come to lay our weapons and  aside and listen to the message Martin Luther King has given us[:] "The choice is either nonviolence or nonexistence"....

[King] is the first person in the Western world to have shown us that a struggle can be waged without violence. He is the first to make the message of brotherly love a reality in the course of his struggle, and he has brought this message to all men, to all nations and races.

King and many others then started working on the problem of racism in voting.  At the time, many of the Southern states had laws which made it very hard or impossible for African-Americans to vote.  For example, they would make African Americans pay extra taxes, pass reading tests, or pass tests about the Constitution.  White people did not have to do these things.

In 1963 and 1964, civil rights groups in Selma, Alabama had been trying to sign African-American people up to vote, but they had not been able to.  At the time, 99% of the people signed up to vote in Selma were white.  However, the government workers who signed up voters were all white.  They refused to sign up African-Americans.  In January 1965, these civil rights groups asked King and the SCLC to help them.  Together, they started working on voting rights.  However, the next month, an African-American man named Jimmie Lee Jackson was shot by a police officer during a peaceful march.  Jackson died.pp. 121–123  Many African-American people were very angry.

The SCLC decided to organize a march from Selma to Montgomery.  By walking 54 miles (87 kilometers) to the state capital, activists hoped to show how badly African-Americans wanted to vote.  They also wanted to show that they would not let racism or violence stop them from getting equal rights.

The first march was on March 7, 1965.  Police officers, and people they had chosen to help them, attacked the marchers with clubs and tear gas.  They threatened to throw the marchers off the Edmund Pettus Bridge.  Seventeen marchers had to go to the hospital, and 50 others were also injured.  This day came to be called Bloody Sunday.  Pictures and film of the marchers being beaten were shown around the world, in newspapers and on television.  Seeing these things made more people support the civil rights activists.  People came from all over the United States to march with the activists.  One of them, James Reeb, was attacked by white people for supporting civil rights.  He died on March 11, 1965.

Finally, President Lyndon B. Johnson decided to send soldiers from the United States Army and the Alabama National Guard to protect the marchers.  From March 21 to March 25, the marchers walked along the "Jefferson Davis Highway" from Selma to Montgomery.  Led by King and other leaders, 25,000 people who entered Montgomery on March 25.  He gave a speech called "How Long?  Not Long" at the Alabama State Capitol.  He told the marchers that it would not be long before they had equal rights, "because the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice."

On August 6, 1965, the United States passed the Voting Rights Act.  This law made it illegal to stop somebody from voting because of their race.

After this, King continued to fight poverty and the Vietnam War.

King had made enemies by working for civil rights and becoming such a powerful leader. The Ku Klux Klan did what they could to hurt King's reputation, especially in the South. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) watched King closely.  They wiretapped his phones, his home, and the phones and homes of his friends.

On April 4, 1968, King was in Memphis, Tennessee.  He planned to lead a protest march to support garbage workers who were on strike.  At 6:01 pm, he was shot while he was standing on the balcony of his motel room.pp. 284–285  The bullet entered through his right cheek and travelled down his neck.  It cut open the biggest veins and arteries in King's neck before stopping in his shoulder.

King was rushed to St. Joseph's Hospital.  His heart had stopped.  Doctors there cut open his chest and tried to make his heart start pumping again.  However, they were unable to save King's life as he died at 7:06 p.m.pp. 284–285

In March 1969, James Earl Ray was found guilty of killing King. He was sentenced to 99 years in prison. Ray died in 1998.

Just days after King's death, Congress passed the Civil Rights Act of 1968.  Title VIII of the Act, usually called the Fair Housing Act, made it illegal to discriminate in housing because of a person's race, religion, or home country.  (For example, this made it illegal for a  to refuse to let a black family buy a house in a white neighborhood.)  This law was seen as a tribute to King's last few years of work fighting housing discrimination in the United States.

After his death, King was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom.  King and his wife were also awarded the Congressional Gold Medal.

In 1986, the United States government created a national holiday in King's honor. It is called Martin Luther King, Jr. Day. It is celebrated on the third Monday in January. This is around the time of King's birthday. Many people fought for the holiday to be created, including singer Stevie Wonder.

In 2003, the United States Congress passed a law allowing the beginning words of King's "I Have a Dream" speech to be carved into the Lincoln Memorial.

King County in the state of Washington, is named after King.  Originally, the county was named after William R. King, an American politician who owned slaves.  In 2005, the King County government decided the county would now be named after Martin Luther King, Jr.  Two years later, they changed their official logo to include a picture of King.

More than 900 streets in the United States have also been named after King.  These streets exist in 40 different states; Washington, D.C., Puerto Rico. and many others

In 2011, a memorial statue of King was put up on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

There are also memorials for King around the world.  These include:

A machine gun is a weapon that can fire one bullet after another as long as the trigger is pulled and there are bullets ready to fire. This is called  fire. A more general name for this type of weapon is an automatic weapon. Machine guns fire bullets delivered from a long chain of cartridges called an ammunition ('ammo') belt, or use spring-loaded boxes called magazines. Machine guns are usually divided into heavy-duty machine guns, light machine guns, and sub-machine guns.

Heavy machine guns (HMG) are placed on the ground, supported on a tripod, or on a vehicle. The vehicle would have a support for the gun with a rotating base or turret. Heavy machine guns often need two men to operate it, one to assist with loading ammunition, and one to aim and fire. It always takes two or more men to carry one. Famous examples include the M2 Browning machine gun, the MG42, the M1919 Browning, the M134 minigun, the Type 92 heavy machine gun, and the Maxim gun.

Light machine guns (LMG) are usually carried and fired by one man. Despite the name, an LMG is almost always rested on a bipod or a tripod while firing since the gun is normally too heavy to fire while standing, although some LMGs such as the Bren LMG and the BAR are light enough to be fired without a bipod or tripod when a sling is worn around the user. Famous examples include the Bren, the BAR, the SAW M249, the M240, the RPD, the RPK, the PK, and the M-60.

Submachine guns (SMG) are lighter weapons which fire less powerful bullets (usually pistol bullets). They are much easier to conceal and carry than the heavier versions. Submachine guns have handles (stocks), and are carried by individual soldiers or police officers. Famous examples include the Uzi, the Heckler & Koch MP5, the Thompson (a.k.a. Tommy gun), the MAC-10, the PPSh, and the MP-40.

Assault rifles have automatic capabilities but they are not called machine guns. They are used mainly in semi-automatic fire, and also normally fire lighter bullets than machine guns.

Many heavy machine guns, such as the Browning M2 .50 caliber machine gun, are exact enough to hit distant targets. During the Vietnam War, Carlos Hathcock shot at 7382 ft (2250 m) using a .50 caliber heavy machine gun with a telescopic sight.

The Mediterranean Sea is the body of water that separates Europe, Africa and Asia.

The Mediterranean Sea is connected to the Atlantic Ocean by a narrow passage called the Strait of Gibraltar.  The sea is almost completely surrounded by land, on the north by Europe, on the south by North Africa and on the east by the Middle East. It covers around . Its name was invented in the Early Middle Ages from the Latin words Mare Mediterraneum meaning "sea in the middle of the land".

To the east, it connects the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea by the Dardanelles and the Bosporus. The Sea of Marmara, which is an inner sea like the Black Sea, is rarely considered to be part of the Mediterranean Sea. As well, the much larger Black Sea is generally not considered a part of the Mediterranean Sea.

The ancient Greeks called the Mediterranean Sea simply ἡ θάλασσα (hē thálassa; "the Sea") or sometimes ἡ μεγάλη θάλασσα (hē megálē thálassa; "Great Sea"), ἡ ἡμετέρα θάλασσα (hē hēmetérā thálassa; "Our Sea"), or ἡ θάλασσα ἡ καθ'ἡμᾶς (hē thálassa hē kath’hēmâs; "the sea around us"). The Romans called it Mare Magnum ("Great Sea"), Mare Internum ("Internal Sea") or , starting with the Roman Empire, Mare Nostrum ("Our Sea").

The 163 km (101mi) long man-made Suez Canal, in Egypt, connects the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. It was built from 1859 to 1869.

Some of the most ancient human civilizations were made around the Mediterranean Sea and so it has greatly influenced the history and the ways of life of the regions cultures. It provided a way of trade, colonization and war, and was the basis of life (like fishing and catching other seafood) for many communities throughout the ages. The combination of similar climate and geology and the access to a common sea has led to many historical and cultural connections between the ancient and modern societies around the Mediterranean.

Above all, it was the main way of transport in ancient times. It allowed for trade and cultural exchange between peoples of the region: the Phoenicians, Egyptians, Iranians, Greeks, Minoans, and Hittites on its eastern side and the Carthaginians, Romans, Etruscans, Celtiberians, Gauls, and Amazighs on the western side.

The history of the Mediterranean is important in understanding the origin and development of

The ancient Punic Wars and the Battle of the Mediterranean during World War II gave the winners control over it so they could destroy the losers.  Today the Mediterranean Sea still connects the economies of Europe, North Africa, and the Middle East as it did in ancient times.

Almost 6 million years ago, continental drift closed the Strait of Gibraltar. With no water coming in from the Atlantic Coast, the Mediterranean partly dried up. The remaining part became extremely salty. After half a million years the straits opened again, making the Mediterranean as it is now.

Being nearly landlocked affects the Mediterranean Sea's properties. Tides are limited by the narrow connection with the Atlantic Ocean. The water is saltier, partly because of evaporation. The Mediterranean has a deep blue color.

Evaporation greatly exceeds precipitation and surface runoff in the Mediterranean, a fact that is central to the water circulation within the basin. Evaporation is especially high in its eastern half, causing the water level to decrease and salinity to increase eastward. This pressure gradient pushes relatively cool, low-salinity water from the Atlantic across the basin; it warms and becomes saltier as it travels east, then sinks in the region of the Levant and circulates westward, to spill over the Strait of Gibraltar.  Thus, seawater flow is eastward at the Strait's surface, and westward near the bottom.  In the Atlantic, this chemically distinct deep "Mediterranean Intermediate Water" can persist thousands of kilometers away from its source.

Max Karl Ernst Ludwig Planck (April 23, 1858 in Kiel – October 4, 1947 in Göttingen) was a physicist from Germany. He discovered quantum mechanics. He won the Nobel Prize in physics.

Planck came from an old fashioned, intelligent family.  His great-grandfather and grandfather were both theology professors in Göttingen; his father was a law professor in Kiel and Munich; and his paternal uncle was a judge.

Planck was born in Kiel, Holstein, to Johann Julius Wilhelm Planck and his second wife, Emma Patzig. He was baptised with the name of Karl Ernst Ludwig Marx Planck; of his given names, Marx (a now not used variant of Markus or maybe simply an error for Max, which is actually short for Maximilian) was indicated as the primary name. However, by the age of ten he signed with the name Max and used this for the rest of his life.

He was the sixth child in the family, although two of his brothers and sisters were from his father's first marriage. Among his earliest memories was the marching of Prussian and Austrian troops into Kiel during the Danish-Prussian war of 1864. In 1867 the family moved to Munich, and Planck enrolled in the Maximilians gymnasium school, where he came under the tutelage of Hermann Müller, a mathematician who took an interest in the youth, and taught him astronomy and mechanics as well as mathematics. It was from Müller that Planck first learned the principle of conservation of energy. Planck graduated early, at age 17. This is how Planck first came in contact with the field of physics.

Love is a mix of feelings and actions that shows a deep liking for someone or something. Love involves caring for another. Romantic love can lead to things such as dating and marriage , but a person can also feel for friends, such as platonic love, or family.

There are also chemical reactions within the brain that can be triggered by the different types of love.

There are many kinds of love. There can be self-love, love towards a friend (such as platonic love), love in romance, towards family, toward God(s), or towards an object or idea.

Often love can be confused with other feelings. Being sexually or physically attracted is the feeling of lust. Lust and love may be thought of as different. Normal friendship is a form of love that can be distracted by lust and misunderstanding.

People  the person that they first loved romantically as their "first love." For example, in William Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, Romeo is Juliet's very first love. At that time, she was only 13. In Maria Edgeworth's book Belinda, Mr. Vincent says, "First loves are silly things."

The biological model of lust is different from love because it is more like hunger or thirst. Helen Fisher, an expert in the topic of romantic love, divides it into three stages: lust, attraction, and attachment. Lust makes people like each other, attraction encourages people to focus on mating, and attachment helps people tolerate the spouse (or the child).

Lust is the  sexual  that promotes mating. This usually lasts only a few weeks or months. Attraction is more for one person specially. Recent studies in neuroscience say that as people fall in love, the brain releases chemicals, including dopamine. These chemicals make people less hungry and sleepy, and also adds an intense feeling of excitement. Research shows that this stage normally lasts from one and a half to three years.

Since these lust and attraction stages are both described as temporary, a third stage might describe long-term love. Attachment can be used to describe the bonding period that helps keep partners together for many years. Attachment occurs in the longer term.

Love has consequences for health and well-being. Joyful activities such as love activate areas in the brain responsible for emotion, attention,

motivation and memory, and it may further lead to reduction of cortisol, which reduces stress. Some people usually do not feel love. They are called aromantics.

Malaria is an infectious disease caused by a parasite, known as plasmodium. It is one of the most common diseases in the world. Every year it infects hundreds of millions of people and kills hundreds of thousands..

Malaria is produced by four species of the protozoan parasite Plasmodium, which is endemic in many tropical countries. It is spread by the bite of an infected mosquito. When the parasite enters a person's blood, it causes an infection that can be deadly.

Malaria cases declined until the mid-1970s. In the 1950s there were 75 million cases of malaria; in the 1960s, there were only 0.1 million. However, it staged a comeback in the mid-1970s, causing 6.47 million cases in 1976. This increase resulted from several factors - for example, many mosquitoes became resistant to commonly used insecticides.

According to 2011 estimates from the World Health Organization, between 149 million and 274 million people get malaria each year. Of these, around 655,000 people die from the disease. This averages out to one malaria death every minute.

Today, around 90% of people who get malaria live in Africa. However, malaria is endemic and sub-endemic to many parts of the world. For example, 80% of the Indian population lives in malaria risk areas. However, in India, the National Malaria Eradication Programme (NMEP), started in 1958, achieved near complete disappearance of the disease in 1960s (from 75 million cases in 1950s to 0.1 million cases in 1960s).

The parasite that causes malaria is a protozoan called Plasmodium. Protozoa are organisms with only one cell, but they are not bacteria. Bacteria are smaller and simpler than protozoans.

People usually get malaria from the Anopheles or Culex mosquitoes : they are the vectors of the disease. The Plasmodium lives in the mosquito's special saliva. When any mosquito bites a person, it injects an anticoagulant into the person to prevent their blood from clotting. If the mosquito has Plasmodium in its saliva, it transmits the parasite to the human along with the anticoagulant.

Female mosquitoes consume blood as a source of protein for their eggs. However, male mosquitoes live on the nectar of flowers. Because of this, only female mosquitoes transmit malaria.

Malaria usually results from mosquito bites. However, there are other methods of transmission. A fetus can get malaria from its mother. (This is called vertical transmission or maternal-fetal transmission.) People can also get malaria from a blood transfusion. In addition, a person can get malaria if they use a needle that someone with the disease used before them.

There are several species (kinds) of Plasmodium that cause malaria in humans:

P. vivax and P. falciparum cause most malaria cases in humans.

When Plasmodium enters the blood, it is in the form of sporozoites. The sporozoites travel to the liver, where they make more sporozoites. Then they change into a different form of Plasmodium called merozoites. The merozoites enter the red blood cells, then multiply.

The merozoites break out of the red blood cells again and again. When they do this, the person gets very sick, and shows symptoms of malaria. This happens every few days, and is called a paroxysm.

P. vivax and P. ovale can survive in the liver for a long time. A person can look well, but still have the Plasmodium in their liver. This is called a dormant phase. Weeks or months later, the Plasmodium can travel from the liver to the blood, and the person will get sick again.

P. falciparum is the most dangerous type of malaria. It multiplies more quickly in the blood, so because there are more merezoites, it makes people sicker. Also, with falciparum malaria, the red blood cells are sticky and block blood vessels. When a blood vessel is blocked, it cannot bring blood and oxygen to that part of the body. This can hurt that part of the body and cause organ damage.

Children and pregnant woman are worst affected by malaria. When they get malaria, they often get sicker than other people.

40% of people live in a place where there is malaria. These areas are:

Every year, 300 to 700 million people get malaria. It kills 1 million to 2 million people every year. Most of the people who die from malaria are children. Even if children do not die, many have brain damage.

Many of these deaths might be stopped with medicine or mosquito control. But many of the places malaria may be found are in poor countries. These countries do not have enough money to stop the mosquitoes, or to give people medicine. Money, however, is not the only problem. A country must have an organised medical system to provide services. Many countries in central Africa have been disrupted by warfare and conflict between groups, and general unrest. Also, easy solutions to kill the parasites do not exist as they did 50 years ago. This is because the insects are resistant to many insecticides, and the Plasmodium parasite is highly resistant to quinine and most other common drugs. This is a normal evolutionary process: the chemicals weed out the non-resistant organisms, and the offspring of the few resistant organisms multiply.

Symptoms are changes in someone's body that are signs for a disease. Most people who get malaria get symptoms 10–30 days after they get infected (the Plasmodium gets in their blood.) But some people can get symptoms after only a week, and some may be infected with malaria and not have symptoms for a year.

The most common symptom of malaria is fever, when the body temperature is high. The fever from malaria usually comes very suddenly. The people who have malaria often feel like they had influenza.

Pregnant women and young children have more complications. People who get malaria for the first time have more complications. Falciparum malaria has the most complications.

A technician looks for the malaria parasite in blood films (blood smears).

Microscopic view of malaria parasites in a blood smear. Arrows point to infected red blood cells.

A clinical diagnosis is based on the signs and symptoms of a disease, it is a diagnosis made without medical testing. In the case of malaria one of the main symptoms which may lead to a clinical diagnosis of malaria is a fever.

Any clinical diagnosis of malaria should be confirmed by a trained professional based upon laboratory results as soon as it is possible.

A Malaria rapid diagnostic test is a blood test which can confirm a diagnosis of malaria in about twenty minutes. RDTs are not foolproof and have a number of drawbacks, and as such a negative rapid diagnostic test should not be accepted at face-value and follow-up with malaria microscopy is necessary.

To see if patients have malaria, doctors may do a blood test. This test is called a Giemsa blood smear. Blood is put on a slide which is a thin piece of glass. The Giemsa stain is put on the slide. This stain helps doctors see the malaria. Then they look at the slide under a microscope. The Plasmodium is seen in the red blood cells.

Malaria is one of the leading causes of the ruin of families and entire lives around the world. Malaria does not only affect children, who are its primary victims, but also claims the lives of many parents. The death of a parent deeply weakens the family, leading to loss of income, children dropping out of school, long-term poverty, and many other much more serious consequences. Thus, this disease causes not only human suffering but also large-scale social disruption.

People with different kinds of malaria need different medicines. The medicine that works for one kind of malaria may not for another kind. So it is very important to know which species of Plasmodium the person has.

If the species is not known, the person should be given medicine and care like they have falciparum malaria  the worst kind.

It is also important to know where the person got malaria. Plasmodium in some places is resistant to some medicines. So the medicines to treat malaria in Africa are different from the medicines to treat malaria from South America.

Everywhere except New Guinea, the treatment is the same. In New Guinea most P. vivax is resistant to chloroquine. It can be treated with quinine, but this medicine can make people sick. Everywhere else, non-falciparum malaria is treated with chloroquine.

Chloroquine kills the Plasmodium in the blood. But the Plasmodium in the liver is not killed by chloroquine. P. vivax and P. ovale both stay in the liver a long time. This is the dormant phase. Another medicine must be given with chloroquine for P. vivax and P. ovale. This is to kill the Plasmodium in the liver. The medicine used to kill malaria in the liver is primaquine. In southeast Asia, some P. vivax is resistant to primaquine. Most other places, primaquine works very well.

Some people get very sick from primaquine. So people have to be tested to see if they have G6PD-deficiency before they take primaquine.

Falciparum is the worst kind of malaria. People with falciparum malaria should be treated in a hospital if they are:

Even people who are treated with medicines at home should stay with the doctor for 8 hours. This is to make sure they do not get sicker. It also makes sure they can take the medicines by mouth. Malaria does not start to become a life-threatening disease until it has been a couple of weeks after the bite without being treated.

Falciparum malaria also has more resistance to medicines. This makes it much harder to treat. Falciparum malaria is always treated with two or more medicines. Doctors choose the medicines by where in the world the person got malaria. Different places have P. falciparum that is resistant to different medicines.

The most important resistance is chloroquine-resistance. In some places in the world, P. falciparum is killed by chloroquine. In some places it is chloroquine-resistant. This means chloroquine does not kill it. In these places quinine can be used. Quinine is taken by mouth.

Vector control is one way to stop malaria. Vector means an organism that carries an infectious disease to another organism. For malaria, the vector is the Anopheles mosquito.

The most used method of vector control is pesticides. These are chemicals that kill the mosquito. The first pesticide used for vector control was DDT. DDT worked very well for vector control. It killed mosquitoes. It did not make people very sick at the time it was used. It did not cost very much money. Other chemicals for vector control had not been invented yet.

In many places mosquitoes became resistant to DDT. This meant that DDT did not work anymore in these areas. Scientists worried that DDT was making people and animals sick. It killed a lot of wildlife too. DDT also stays in the environment for a long time. For these reasons, people mostly use other chemicals for vector control. Organophosphate or carbonate pesticides are used, like malathion or bendiocarb.

Vector control is not the only way to stop malaria. And DDT is not the only chemical that can be used for vector control. The best way to stop malaria is to use a combination of methods. In some places, DDT may be a useful part of a program to stop malaria. This is why DDT is still allowed to be used for controlling malaria.

The mosquito that carries malaria comes more at dawn (when the sun comes up) and dusk (when the sun goes down.) Be most careful at these times. Wear long trousers and shirts with long sleeves. Wear mosquito repellent (this is a chemical that mosquitoes do not like, so they do not bite.) Mosquitoes will bite through thin cloth. So repellent should be used on skin and clothes.

Pesticides can be used in rooms to kill mosquitoes. When sleeping outside, people use a mosquito net. This is made from cloth that air can go through but keeps mosquitoes out. It is put over a bed where people sleep to keep mosquitoes out. Sometimes people also use it when they are not sleeping. It is best to use mosquito nets that have been treated with Permethrin, which repels and kills mosquitoes.

People can take medicine when they are in a place where there is malaria. This reduces the chances that they contract malaria. This is called prophylaxis.

Some people take prophylactic medicines for years. Many people in areas where there is malaria do not have the money to buy this medicine.

People who live where there is no malaria usually have not had malaria. The first case malaria is usually much worse. So people from places where there is no malaria may take prophylactic medicines when they go to places where there is malaria. The kind of prophylactic medicines people take depends on where they are. This is because not all medicines work on the malaria in every place.

To make them work best, prophylactic medicines have to be taken the right way. The medicine should start before going to an area with malaria. Most medicines should be taken for 4 weeks after coming home. One medicine (Malarone) only needs to be used for one week after coming home.

There are some children in Tanzania who are naturally immune to malaria. Researchers are using this to develop a new vaccine. U.S. researchers have found the children produce an antibody which attacks the malaria-causing parasite. Injecting a form of this antibody into mice protected the animals from the disease. The researchers plan to do tests on primates, including humans.

It was Britain's Sir Ronald Ross, working in the Presidency General Hospital in the Kolkata, who finally proved in 1898 that malaria is transmitted by anopheles mosquitoes. He did this by showing that certain mosquito species transmit malaria to birds. He isolated malaria parasites from the salivary glands of mosquitoes that had fed on infected birds. For this work, Ross received the 1902 Nobel Prize in Medicine. After resigning from the Indian Medical Service, Ross worked at the newly established Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and directed malaria-control efforts in Egypt, Panama, Greece and Mauritius. The findings of Finlay and Ross were later confirmed by a medical board headed by Walter Reed in 1900. Its recommendations were used during construction of the Panama Canal. This public-health work saved the lives of thousands of workers and helped develop the methods used in future public-health campaigns against the disease.

The first effective treatment for malaria came from the bark of cinchona tree, which contains quinine. This tree grows on the slopes of the Andes, mainly in Peru. The indigenous peoples of Peru made a tincture of cinchona to control malaria. The Jesuits noted the efficacy of the practice and introduced the treatment to Europe during the 1640s, where it was rapidly accepted. It was not until 1820 that the active ingredient, quinine, was extracted from the bark, isolated and named by French chemists.

In the early 20th century, before antibiotics became available, Julius Wagner-Jauregg discovered that patients with syphilis could be treated by intentionally infecting them with malaria. The resulting fever would kill the syphilis spirochaetes, and quinine could be administered to control the malaria. Although some patients died from malaria, this was preferable to the almost-certain death from syphilis.

In the twentieth century between 2% and 5% of all deaths were from malaria. Malaria was the largest hazard encountered by U.S. troops in the South Pacific during World War II, where about 500,000 men were infected. Sixty thousand American soldiers died of malaria during the North African and South Pacific campaigns.

The liver is an organ in the abdomen. It is part of the digestive system. Sometimes people use hepar- or hepat- as a prefix when they talk about the liver.

The liver is the body's chemical factory. It does many important things:

There are many different liver diseases. Liver disease can make someone very sick because of all the important work the liver does. People who have bad liver disease usually die unless they can get a liver transplant. This is when the liver from someone who has just died is put in another person by surgery. Such surgeries are usually technically challenging but can be life-saving.

The symptoms of liver disease happen because the liver does not do the work it should.

The liver cannot metabolize toxins and waste so these bad things stay in the blood longer. One thing that builds up is a substance called bilirubin. When red blood cells die, the hemoglobin in them leaks into the blood. The hemoglobin becomes bilirubin (a yellow substance that makes bile yellow). The liver takes the bilirubin out of the blood and puts it into the bile. The bile goes into the intestines and then goes out with the waste from your body. If the liver is hurt, it does not remove the bilirubin, so the bilirubin stays in the body. This makes the person's body look yellow and is known as jaundice. So yellow eyes and yellow skin are symptoms of liver disease.

Hepatitis is when liver cells get inflamed (swollen, or increased in size). This can be from virus infections. This can be caused by toxins or poisons. The most common toxin to cause hepatitis is alcohol. It can also have genetic, or autoimmune causes, when the body's immune system hurts itself.

Cirrhosis is caused by death of liver cells that happens again and again. When the cells die, scar tissue forms. This scar tissue damages the structure of the liver. This makes the liver not work as well. But it also makes the pressure in the veins that go to the liver very high. This high pressure makes esophageal varices. The most common reason for cirrhosis in the world is hepatitis B virus infection.

Some diseases cause bad things to build up in the liver. Hemochromatosis causes extra iron to build up in the liver. Wilson's disease causes extra copper to build up in the liver. Both of these diseases hurt the cells and can cause very bad liver disease that kills people.

You can also get cancer of your liver. This can be metastatic cancer that came from some other place in your body. The liver is a common place to get metastases because it takes bad things out of the blood. So it takes cancer cells out of the blood and they grow in the liver. Cancer can also grow in the liver. If it grows in the liver it is called hepatocellular carcinoma (liver cell cancer). Most hepatocellular carcinoma is from cirrhosis.

Some liver diseases can be treated easily with medicine. Hemochromatosis is treated by taking (removing) blood from patients at intervals (times) based on the seriousness of the disease in amounts about equal to what would be taken from a normal blood donor (~470 ml).

Some liver viruses can be stopped before they start. Two types of viral hepatitis can be stopped with an immunization. Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B can be prevented with a total of five shots in a person's life.

Some liver diseases can only be treated by a liver transplant.

The liver from livestock is a source of protein like muscle meats. It also a great source of some micro-nutrients. The flavor might be strong for some people, so it might be slightly over-seasoned. It might be toxic if you eat way too much of it.

Menstruation, or menses, happens in human adult females (and other primates) when the egg is unfertilized and causes the lining of the vagina to shed (a period). During a period, blood comes out of the vagina of the female. It causes blood because the egg was released (it comes down) into the vagina and now it has to clean itself. The menstruation process takes two to seven days depending on the person.

Menstruation occurs every month there is no pregnancy. Some people might have irregular periods, and sometimes miss a month or have two periods close together. The menstrual cycle is between the first day of the period (first day of menstrual bleeding) to the day before the next period. A period is irregular when it is less than 25 days or more than 35 days between periods. A more common word for menstruation is a "period" or menstrual cycle (menses).

Inside the thick part of the uterus are blood vessels and nutrients that a baby will need to grow. Every month after puberty in a human female, the brain sends signals to the ovaries that tell them to release an ovum (egg). The ovum then travels through the fallopian tube (with the expectation of becoming fertilized by a sperm cell) into the uterus.

If an ovum is fertilized, it sticks to the wall of the uterus and starts to grow. If the ovum is not fertilized, it does not stick. The uterus then gets rid of the ovum and the extra tissue by releasing it from the body with blood. Tissue mixed with blood comes out of the uterus through the vagina. This is called menstruation or having a period. The bleeding normally lasts about 3-5 days, though some people may bleed longer or have a bit of bleeding between periods.The cycle then repeats until menopause or during pregnancy.

For most people, the time between their periods is about one month. For about 2 years after menstruation starts, the time between periods is not always the same. Some menstruators may skip a month, or have 2 periods close to each other. It is also possible and normal to have cramps (mildly painful, squeezing feelings) or to feel bloated (swollen up) in the abdomen at periods. Serious pain (dysmenorrhea) is not normal even during a period. There are medicines made to treat problems, for example heavy bleeding, in women who bleed heavily (menorrhagia) during a period.

People who have periods often use tampons or sanitary pads to soak up the blood and tissue. A sanitary pad is a piece of material that absorbs (takes in) liquids which is worn between the vulva and underpants. A tampon is a stick of absorbent material that is placed in the vagina. Pads and tampons can be disposable or reusable.The use of a menstrual cup (or disc) is also possible. A menstrual cup is a silicone cup that is inserted inside the vagina to collect blood and other tissues. A menstrual disc follows the same idea but is made of more flexible material and is round and flatter than a cup, it is also inserted higher in the vagina.

Most people menstruate for 3–5 days every month. However, anywhere from 2–7 days is normal. The amount of blood lost is normally about 50ml. Menstruators usually use a pad or a tampon to keep the blood from staining their undergarments, but there are many other forms of sanitary protection.

Menopause is menstruation stopping at the age of around 45-70 (age 55 on average), which is caused by hormones. Symptoms include irritability, heat, vaginal burning and/or discomfort, and vaginal dryness. A slang word for it is called "the change". Most people must take a few months to adjust to the dryness. After they stop their period they can no longer produce babies.

The fluid that comes out looks like blood, but it is more than just blood. It also has endometrial tissue. This is the tissue that lines the inside of the uterus (womb).

Menses happens in the first days of the menstrual cycle. This is the changes that happen in a woman's body every month. These changes are started by changes in hormone levels in the blood. These changes also cause a person to ovulate and make an ovum (also called "egg"). Menstruation usually starts around the age of 11, even as early as 9 years old, and ends when the menstruator is too old to have children. However, some females can still have children from the age of 50-70.

Some people have lower abdominal pain when they menstruate. This is called dysmenorrhea, or cramps. Extreme and continuous  (always happening) cramps are not normal and should be checked upon with a medical practitioner. The hormones that are produced before and during a period can also make a woman feel moody, or just strange. This is called premenstrual syndrome (PMS), or premenstrual tension (PMT). A person can feel bloated or swollen and have long cramps.

Some menstruators have extremely bad reactions to menstruation and may even feel suicidal. This is called premenstrual dysphoric disorder, or PMDD. Other physical effects include headaches, tender breasts, lower back pain, fatigue, acne, diarrhoea or constipation, trouble sleeping for example.

Most menstruators use something to absorb or catch their menses. There are a number of different methods available. The most common methods of absorbing the flow are:

Which is extremely dangerous. Sponges, towels, or reusing tampons, which may happen in places of poverty, can cause disease as well as toxic shock syndrome.

In addition to products to contain the menstrual flow, pharmaceutical companies provide, commonly non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), to relieve menstrual cramps.

Some herbs, such as dong quai, raspberry leaf and crampbark, are also claimed to relieve menstrual pain, however there is no documented scientific evidence.

Mao Zedong (26 December 1893 – 9 September 1976) was a Chinese Communist politician and revolutionary. He was also called Chairman Mao, because he was the first Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) from 1943 until his death in 1976.

Mao founded the People's Republic of China (PRC), and was its first state chairman from 1954 to 1959. He was also the first and eighth chairman of the Central Military Commission.

Mao led the Chinese Communist Party to victory in the Chinese Civil War. This united China as a single communist country. As CCP Chairman, he drastically transformed China's economy.

Some of Mao’s policies, like the Great Leap Forward, were disastrous for the Chinese people. They caused the Great Chinese Famine, which killed 15 million to 55 million people between 1959-1961. Mao also started the Cultural Revolution, which resulted in widespread persecution and suffering. It ended after Mao's death in 1976.

Mao developed a form of Marxism-Leninism called Maoism. He has been called one of the most influential people in history.

"Mao Zedong" is Mao's name in the Latin alphabet. "Mao" is his family name - in China, family names are placed first.

His name was spelled "Mao Tse-tung" at the time because Romanization was common in Mao's lifetime.

Mao Zedong was born into a loving family on December 26, 1893, in the small village of Shaoshan in the Hunan province.

His family were poor farmers. This made Mao Zedong care about the problems of the peasants. He went to school and learned about new ideas.

After finishing school he worked as a librarian, where he first read Marxist literature. In 1921, he founded the Chinese Communist Party.

In 1927, members of the Kuomintang (KMT), the Chinese Nationalist Party, purged members of Mao's Communist Party in Shanghai. Both groups wanted control of China; Mao's CCP also wanted to make China into a communist country. The purge began the Chinese Civil War.

The CCP and the KMT fought until 1937. That year, Imperial Japan invaded China during World War II. At that point, Mao formed an alliance with the KMT, and they fought together against the Japanese.

This alliance lasted until Japan surrendered in 1945. Mao became the CCP's first chairman on 20 March 1943. After that, the CCP and the KMT began fighting with each other again. Finally, in 1949, the CCP won the Chinese Civil War.

Mao established the People's Republic of China (PRC). China was now unified as a single country under communist rule. Mao became the country's first chairman on 27 September 1954.

When Mao became the leader of the PRC in 1949, most people in China were farmers. Mao wanted China's technology to improve in just a short time. He wanted China's industry to catch up quickly with countries like the United Kingdom and United States.

LinBiao promoted a personality cult of Mao in the culture revolution. This made it dangerous to disagree with him, and people were expected to follow him without question. His "Little Red Book" of quotes was widely used throughout the country.

In 1953, Mao started the First Five Year Plan. This was a plan to collectivize farms and industrialize China in a short period of time.

In 1958, Mao started the Second Five Year Plan, which included the Great Leap Forward. Its goal was to change China very quickly from a farming country into a modern socialist nation.

This was a disaster for the Chinese people. Many crops failed because of poor farming practices. Many cities could not make daily items like clothes and machines. Between 1959 and 1961, between 15 million and 55 million people starved to death in the Great Chinese Famine. Some people think this was the biggest famine in history.

In 1966, after the Great Leap Forward, Mao launched the Cultural Revolution. His goals were to keep communist ideas strong and prevent the restoration of capitalism.

This period caused a lot of chaos in China. The Cultural Revolution lasted for a decade, until Mao's death in 1976.

In 1968, Mao feared that Liu Shaoqi would overthrow him and take over the Chinese Communist Party.  In 1968 he accused Liu of being a capitalist and put him in prison.  Liu died there in 1969 from brutal treatment, hunger, and terrible conditions.

After Liu was imprisoned, defence minister Lin Biao became the second most powerful person in the CCP. He hoped to succeed Mao as Chairman. In 1971 he tried to assassinate Mao and seize power for himself. He failed, and was killed (along with his wife) in a plane crash while trying to flee China.

Mao formed a strong alliance with the Soviet Union (USSR) under Joseph Stalin. Mao liked Stalin and respected the way he led. In 1953, Stalin died and Georgy Malenkov became the leader of the Soviet Union. Malenkov continued Stalin's alliance with China.

However, in 1955, Nikita Khrushchev took power from Malenkov. He thought Stalin was a criminal and a dictator. The alliance between China and the USSR ended. After that China had just a few allies, like Albania, North Korea, Democratic Kampuchea, and Pakistan. This change of friends was called the Sino-Soviet split.

During the 1970s, Mao became friendlier with the United States. In 1972, American president Richard Nixon visited China and met Mao.

Mao died in September 1976, and the Cultural Revolution ended that same year. Deng Xiaoping became CCP leader in 1978, and Mao's supporters were imprisoned. Trying to transform China's economy, Deng Xiaoping made major changes to Mao's economic policies.

Mao had been in poor health for several years before his death in 1976. His health had declined visibly for at least six months before he died. Unconfirmed reports have suggested that he had ALS (Lou Gehrig's disease).

Mao last appeared in public on 27 May 1976, when he met Pakistani Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. Bhutto was on a one-day visit to Beijing at the time.

At around 5:00PM on 2 September 1976, Mao suffered a heart attack after a brutal attack with a man named Zhihen Chen. This was his third heart attack, and it was far more severe than the first two. It affected a much larger area of his heart.

Mao survived in critical condition until 7 September. That day, he got worse very quickly. His organs failed, and he entered a coma shortly before noon. He was put on life support machines, but they were removed around 11:45pm. Mao was pronounced dead at 12:08 am on 9 September 1976, at the age of 82.

Mao's body lay in state at the Great Hall of the People, an important government building. During his memorial service, people honored him by keeping silent for three minutes.

Mao wanted to be cremated. In fact, he was one of the first high-ranking officials to sign the "Proposal that all Central Leaders be Cremated after Death" in November 1956. Nevertheless, his body was later placed into the Mausoleum of Mao Zedong, where it remains a site of interest and controversy to this day.

Many Chinese people still believe that Mao was a great leader, though they also know he did bad things. According to Deng Xiaoping, Mao was "seven parts right and three parts wrong ... [his] contributions are primary [most important] and his mistakes secondary [less important]".

However, Mao has many critics (including many historians). They say that his bad ideas and policies killed millions of people. They blame him for making China lose its most important ally, the Soviet Union, in the Sino-Soviet split.

Critics say that China's population grew too quickly because Mao did not support family planning and people had more children than they could care for. Reacting to this population growth, Chinese leaders after Mao began the one child policy. Over the long term, this made the Chinese population much smaller.

Mao made several changes to the Chinese language. For example, he switched from the Wade-Giles system of Romanisation to Pinyin. For this reason, Nanking is now called Nanjing on modern maps. (Taiwan still uses Wade-Giles, so its capital is called Taipei instead of the pinyin Taibei.)

Mao also simplified Chinese characters. He thought this would make them easier to read and write, so that more people would be literate.

Many of Mao's successors (except Xi Jinping) had less power than he did.

Mao created an ideology called Maoism. This ideology spread across China, and influenced many people around the world. Many communist parties around the world believe in Maoism.

Samuel Langhorne Clemens (November 30, 1835 – April 21, 1910), more widely known as Mark Twain, was an American writer. He was born in Florida, Missouri.  He worked mainly for newspapers and as a steamboat pilot on the Mississippi River before he became a writer. He married in 1870, and raised his family in Hartford, Connecticut. In later life he invested and lost the money that his writing had made, and toured the world giving lectures that brought him enough money to pay his debt and recover his fortune.

Clemens was  best known for his works in fiction, and especially for his use of humour. His first published story, in 1865, was The Celebrated Jumping Frog of Calaveras County.

Adventures of Huckleberry Finn is considered by many to be Clemens' best work.  This story of a white boy who helps a black man escape slavery in the southern United States is known for its humanity.

Clemens's style was usually informal and humorous. This made him different from many important 19th century writers whose books he disliked. For example, he greatly disliked Jane Austen's works, such as Sense and Sensibility and Pride and Prejudice, and famously remarked, "She makes me detest (hate) all her people, without reserve."

Actor Hal Holbrook played Mark Twain on stage in a one-man show called Mark Twain Tonight.

Halley's Comet appeared in the sky during the year Twain was born and the year he died. This periodic comet comes back every 74 years, which is how long he lived.

The lung is an organ in many vertebrates (animals having a spine, or backbone). It takes blood oxygen from the air, and expels carbon dioxide. Most vertebrates with lungs have two of them.

In animals, the lungs are the area where gas exchange takes place. Without gas exchange, oxygen would not pass into the blood from the lungs so the body cells would not be able to receive the oxygen needed for respiration.

Gas exchange happens in the alveoli. The alveoli are moist to allow oxygen to move from the lung through the alveoli into blood vessels and red blood cells. Carbon dioxide passes from the blood into the alveoli. The oxygen-filled blood goes back to the heart and the carbon dioxide in the alveoli is pushed out of the lungs and into the air we breathe out.

Birds lungs are smaller than mammal lungs, and do not have alveoli, instead they have millions of para-bronchi. These para-bronchi end up in tiny capillaries or very small blood vessels and they pass close to the body's blood vessels, so diffusion can occur and the oxygen and carbon dioxide is exchanged. The oxygen and carbon dioxide in birds lungs are continuously  diffused into and out of the blood, not like in mammals where diffusion can only happen in the alveoli. Air does not go into and back out of the lungs as in mammals. Instead, muscular air sacs push the air forward through bird lungs.

Reptile lungs open and close because of the ribs surrounding them pressing down on them and then opening up with the help of muscles. The liver is also attached to the bottom of the lungs and when a muscle which is attached to the liver pulls, the liver moves away from the lungs and pulls them, making them bigger.

Frog lungs are very simple compared to most other lungs, they are simply balloons, with moist outsides allowing for diffusion. But frogs do not move around much and so do not need lots of oxygen, but they can also take in oxygen through their moist outer skin if a big demand of oxygen is needed (e.g. Fight or flight response)

Louis Armstrong (August 4, 1901 – July 6, 1971) nicknamed Satchmo or Pops was an American jazz trumpeter and singer from New Orleans, Louisiana. He sang the blues and played the trumpet and the cornet. He was famous in many countries. He was also known for his good singing voice and he also encouraged the style of scat to the jazz world. Armstrong won many awards during his career.

He died of a heart attack on July 6, 1971 in Corona, Queens, New York City.

Louis Pasteur (December 27, 1822 – September 28, 1895) was a French microbiologist and chemist.

He and his wife, Marie, are best known for their experiments supporting the germ theory of disease, and he is also known for his vaccinations, most notably the first vaccine against rabies and anthrax.

He made many discoveries in the field of chemistry, including the asymmetry (different shapes) of crystals. He is also well known for his way of keeping milk and wine from going sour for longer periods of time. That process is called pasteurization. It is when the milk and or wine is put under about 161 Fahrenheit (72 Celsius) for fifteen seconds.

Pasteur's later work on diseases included work on chicken cholera. During this work, Pasteur noticed how a culture of the responsible bacteria had spoiled, and it failed to induce the disease in some chickens, which he was infecting, with the disease.

Louis Pasteur was born on December 27, 1822 in Dole in the Jura region of France, into the family of a poor tanner. Louis grew up in the town of Arbois. He gained degrees in Letters and in Mathematical Sciences before entering the École Normale Supérieure, an elite college, as well as the Conservatoire national des arts et métiers.

After serving briefly as professor of physics at Dijon Lycée in 1848, he became professor of chemistry at the University of Strasbourg, where he met and courted Marie Laurent, daughter of the university's rector, in 1849.

Louis Pasteur and Marie were married on May 29, 1849, and together had five children. Only two survived to adulthood; his other three children had died of typhoid fever. These personal tragedies inspired Pasteur to try to find cures for diseases, such as typhoid.

In 1895 at Marnes-la-Coquette, a commune in Paris, Pasteur died after several strokes.

A magnet is made of magnetic metals such as iron, nickel, or cobalt, and sometimes certain rare earth metals like neodymium. When a magnet goes near one of these magnetic metals or another magnet, and the poles (sides) touching are opposite, it will pull, or attract the other object closer. If the two poles are the same, the magnet and the other object will push away, or repel, from each other. This attraction and repulsion is called magnetism.

All magnets have north and south poles. Opposite poles are attracted to each other, while the same poles repel each other like south and south or north and north. When you rub a piece of iron along a magnet, the north-seeking poles of the atoms in the iron line up in the same direction. The force generated by the aligned atoms creates a magnetic field.

Magnets have many uses; for example their attractive and repulsive properties are use in electric motors.

Soft magnets (meaning impermanent magnets) are often used in electromagnets some of the magnets are (bar magnet,wand and ball magnet).  These increase (often hundreds or thousands of times) the magnetic field of a wire that carries an electrical current and is wrapped around the magnet.  The field also increases with the current. Magnetic Materials: Soft Magnets. Soft magnetic materials are those materials that are easily magnetised and demagnetised.

Permanent magnets have ferromagnetism. They occur naturally in some rocks, particularly lodestone, but are now commonly manufactured. A magnet's magnetism decreases when it is heated and increases when it is cooled. It has to be heated at around . Like poles (S-pole and S-pole/N-pole and N-pole) will repel each other while unlike poles (N-pole and S-pole) will attract each other.

Magnets are only attracted to special metals. Iron, cobalt and nickel are magnetic. Metals that have iron in them attract magnets well. Steel is one. Metals like brass, copper, zinc and aluminium, silver are not attracted to magnets.  Non-magnetic materials such as wood and glass are not attracted to magnets as they do not have magnetic materials in them.

Lanthanum elements can make strong magnets. The spin of their electrons can be aligned, resulting in very strong magnetic fields. So  these elements are used for high-strength magnets when their high price is not a concern. The most common types of rare-earth magnets are samarium–cobalt and neodymium–iron–boron (NIB) magnets.

Natural/permanent magnets are not artificial.  They are a kind of rock called lodestone or magnetite.

A compass uses the Earth's magnetic field, and points to the North magnetic pole. A north side of the magnet is attracted to the south side of another magnet. However, the north side of the compass points to the north pole, this can only mean that the "north pole" is really the magnetic south, and the "South magnetic pole" is really the magnetic north.

Ancient people discovered magnetism from lodestones (or magnetite) which are naturally magnetized pieces of iron ore. Lodestones, suspended so they could turn, were the first magnetic compasses.

The earliest known surviving descriptions of magnets and their properties are from Anatolia, India, and China about 2500 years ago. The properties of lodestones and their affinity for iron were written of by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia Naturalis Historia.

Mathematical analysis is a part of mathematics. It is often shortened to analysis. It looks at functions, sequences and series. These have useful properties and characteristics that can be used in engineering. Mathematical analysis provides a rigorous logical foundation to calculus, which studies continuous functions, differentiation and integration.

Mathematical analysis is a short version of its old name "infinitesimal analysis", with some of its key subfields including real analysis, complex analysis, differentiation equation and functional analysis.

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Isaac Newton developed most of the basis of mathematical analysis.

A foundational concept in mathematical analysis is the concept of limit. Limits are used to see what happens very close to things. Limits can also be used to see what happens when things get very big. For example,  is never zero, but as  gets bigger,  gets closer and closer to zero. The limit of  as  gets bigger is exactly zero. This is described by "The limit of  as  goes to infinity is zero", and written as .

The counterpart would be . When the  gets bigger, the limit goes to infinity. It is written as .

The fundamental theorem of algebra can be proven from some basic results in complex analysis. It says that every polynomial  with real or complex coefficients has a complex root (where a root is a number  satisfying the equation , and some of these roots may be the same).

The function  is a line. The  shows the slope of the function and the  shows the position of the function on the ordinate. With two points on the line, it is possible to calculate the slope  with:

A function of the form , which is not linear, cannot be calculated like above. It is only possible to calculate the slope by using tangents and secants. The secant passes through two points and when the two points get closer, it turns into a tangent.

This is called difference quotient. The  now gets closer to . This can be expressed with the following formula:

is read as "the integral of  with respect to  from  to ", and refers to the area between the x-axis, the graph of function , and the lines  and . The  is the point where the area should start, and the  where the area should end.

A martial art is any form of fighting and an art that has a set way of practice. There are many martial arts that come from certain countries. They are practiced for many reasons: fighting, self-defense, sport, self-expression, discipline, confidence, fitness, relaxing, meditation. A martial art is a style of combat, in many instances directed towards the self-defence. In the common usage, the word applies to the systems of combat developed all around the world.

Martial arts may be used for self-defense, combat, and fitness.

The idea of "martial art" appeared first time in the English language in the 1920 Takenobu's Japanese-English Dictionary as a translation of the word bu-gei or bu-jutsu which means "art or solution of the military matters".

The martial arts are fighting systems. There are many schools and styles of martial arts, but all share the same goal: self-defence. Some of them, like taiji quan also can be used to improve health and the form as flowing of the qi.

Some martial arts were not born in Asia. For example, savate appeared in France and the movements of sport of the capoeira came from Brazil.

Many martial arts include punches (boxing, karate), kicks (taekwondo, kickboxing, karate), holds and throws (judo, jujutsu, wrestling), weapons (iaijutsu, kendo, kenjutsu, naginatado, fencing, Filipino eskrima) or certain combination of these elements (several styles of jujutsu).

Martial arts are divided in two main sets: the so-called "hard martial arts" like karate and kickboxing which give special consideration to the attack to beat the opponent, and the "soft martial arts" like judo and aikido which fight the opponent in a less aggressive manner, using the force of the other to surrender him.

It is difficult to compare the effectiveness of the different existing arts. Recently, people developed competitions like the Ultimate Fighting Championship in the United States of America or Pancrase in Japan. These competitions also are known as "mixed martial arts" or MMA. But these competitions only test the fighting styles in limited situations (fighting against an expert, only fighting one opponent, fighting while wearing the right clothes - none of which would be true in other situations such as self-defense).

The martial arts are defined in this method: through the history, to the soldier in the battlefield, the only thing that was important for them was to beat the enemy that one have before himself. Whether a style is soft or hard or how many points are gained with a blow are details and subjects of discussion that appear in periods of peace, when there were hand to hand combats.

Martial arts are part of the art of war. If the main goal in a competition depends on noting points to somebody's advantage, then it could be said that this is a sport, not a martial art.

The history of martial arts is long. The act of developing of the fighting systems dates from when the man had been able to cause to pass the knowledge, along with the strategies of war. Part of the most ancient written material on the subject dates from the 15th century in Europe and the authorship fall to famous masters, like Hans Talhoffer and George silver. Also transcriptions of still more ancient texts had been brought to our days, one of them is a document written by hand. That document is called I.33 and dates from the end of the 13th century.

The persons who train martial arts disagree with relation to the matter of the competitions. Some arts, like the boxing or the Thai boxing, give attending to the sparring -fights during training - and to taking part in competitions, yet the most common of aikido and krav maga reject the competitions. The reasons that cause these opinions are different. Many of the arts desiring to compete argue that the competitions give place to better and more efficient techniques. However, certain styles not desiring to compete claim that the rules with which people developed these competitions ruin the art and does not represent what can happen in a real situation.

In recent years, there have been tries to return to life some martial arts thought to be important to history. Examples of this historical reconstruction of the martial arts are the pankration and the school of Shaolin that have not a continual tradition.

Materialism is the philosophical belief that the world is made of material, and that there are no other types of  (things). Everything is composed of material. Things that are not made of material, such as consciousness, are the result of actions by material. In other words, matter is the only real substance. Physicalism is a related term.

Especially, a materialist does not believe in supernatural entities. Many of history's materialists thinkers have found the idea of a spirit either meaningless or not scientifically proven. By definition, these thinkers are therefore also atheists, though not all atheists are materialists, and there have even been some historically important Materialist thinkers who believe in a Pantheist idea of God (such as Baruch Spinoza and Friedrich Engels).

Modern philosophical materialists extend the definition to include other basic entities proven by science, such as energy, forces, and the curvature of space. Matter and energy are known to be interchangeable, and much else, such as gravity, is caused by matter. However, the concept of matter is itself not entirely clear.

There are other types of materialism that of philosophers have shared. Some examples are reductionism, logical positivism and empiricism.

The origin of materialism is in a type of Ancient Greek philosophy. Thales, Epicurus, and Lucretius are early materialist philosophers. The idea also appeared in other ancient cultures.

The magnetic field is a vector field around a magnet in which there is magnetic force. Moving electric charges can make magnetic fields. Magnetic fields can be illustrated by magnetic flux lines. At all times the direction of the magnetic field is shown by the direction of the magnetic flux lines. The strength of a magnet has to do with the spaces between the magnetic flux lines. The closer the flux lines are to each other, the stronger the magnet is. The farther away they are, the weaker. The flux lines can be seen by placing iron filings over a magnet. The iron filings move and arrange into the lines. Magnetic fields give power to other particles that are touching the magnetic field.

In physics, the magnetic field is a field that passes through space and which makes a magnetic force move electric charges and magnetic dipoles. Magnetic fields are around electric currents, magnetic dipoles, and changing electric fields.

When placed in a magnetic field, magnetic dipoles are in one line parallel with the field lines, as can be seen when iron filings are in the presence of a magnet. Magnetic fields also have their own energy and momentum, with an energy density proportional to the square of the field intensity. The magnetic field is measured in the units of teslas (SI units) or gauss (cgs units).

There are some notable kinds of magnetic field. For the physics of magnetic materials, see magnetism and magnet, and more specifically diamagnetism. For magnetic fields made by changing electric fields, see electromagnetism.

The electric field and the magnetic field are  of the electromagnetic field.

Research on magnetic fields began in 1269 when French scholar Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt mapped out the magnetic field on the surface of a spherical magnet using iron needles. He said magnets always have both a north and south pole, no matter how finely one slices them.  The law of electromagnetism was developed by Michael Faraday.

Physicists say that the force and torques between two magnets are caused by magnetic poles repelling or attracting each other. This is like the Coulomb force repelling the same electric charges or attracting opposite electric charges. In this model, a magnetic H-field is produced by magnetic charges that are 'smeared' around each pole. So, the H-field is like the electric field E which starts at a positive electric charge and ends at a negative electric charge. Near the north pole, all H-field lines point away from the north pole (whether inside the magnet or out) while near the south pole (whether inside the magnet or out) all H-field lines point toward the south pole. A north pole, then, feels a force in the direction of the H-field while the force on the south pole is opposite to the H-field.

In the magnetic pole model, the elementary magnetic dipole m is formed by two opposite magnetic poles of pole strength qm separated by a very small distance d, such that m = qm d.

Magnetic poles cannot exist apart from each other. All magnets have north–south pairs which cannot be separated without creating two magnets each having a north–south pair. Magnetic poles do not account for magnetism that is produced by electric currents nor the force that a magnetic field applies to moving electric charges.

where  represents the 'free current' enclosed by the loop so that the line integral of  does not depend at all on the bound currents. For the differential equivalent of this equation see Maxwell's equations. Ampere's law leads to the boundary condition:

Similarly, a surface integral of  over any closed surface is independent of the free currents and picks out the 'magnetic charges' within that closed surface:

The -field, therefore, can be separated into two independent parts:

where  is the applied magnetic field due only to the free currents and  is the demagnetizing field due only to the bound currents.

The magnetic -field, therefore, re-factors the bound current in terms of 'magnetic charges'. The  field lines loop only around 'free current' and, unlike the magnetic  field, begins and ends at near magnetic poles as well.

The Mahābhārata (; ) is one of the two major Sanskrit epics of ancient India and Hinduism written by saint Vyasa, the other is the Rāmāyaṇa. It tells of issues between two groups of cousins in the Kurukshetra War. It also tells the fates of the Kaurava and the Pāṇḍava princes and their successors.

The Mahābhārata includes philosophical and devotional material. It has a discussion of the four "goals of life" or puruṣārtha (12.161). The stories in the Mahābhārata include the Bhagavad Gita, the story of Damayanti, the story of Shakuntala, the story of Pururava and Urvashi, the story of Savitri and Satyavan, the story of Kacha and Devyani and the story of Rishyasringa. It also has a shortened version of the Rāmāyaṇa.

The Mahābhārata is normally said to be written by Vyāsa. Most of it was probably put together between the 3rd century BCE and the 3rd century CE. The oldest parts o it are not much older than around 400 BCE. The text probably became in its final form by the early Gupta period (c. 4th century CE).

The Mahābhārata is the longest epic poem known. It has been said to be "the longest poem ever written". Its longest version has over 100,000 śloka or over 200,000 individual verse lines. It also has and long sections of prose. The Mahābhārata has about 1.8 million words in total. It is about ten times the length of the Iliad and the Odyssey combined, It is about four times the length of the Rāmāyaṇa. The importance of the Mahābhārata to world civilization has been compared to that of the Bible, the Quran, the works of Homer, Greek drama, or the works of William Shakespeare. It is sometimes called the fifth Veda.

These sections deal with a number of topics such as a number of aspects of Hinduism, Hindu mythology, ethics, and the Hindu way of life. There is also a nineteenth section named Harivamsha. The Bhagavadgita, a dialogue between Krishna and Arjuna, is a part of the Mahabharata.

Sage Vyasa taught this epic to his son Suka and his students Vaisampayana and others. King Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit and grandson of the heroes of the epic, performed a great sacrifice (yajna). The epic was retold by Vaisampayana to Janamejaya at the advice of Vyasa. Later on, the other sage Suta retold the Mahabharata similar to Vaisampayana to Janamejaya, to Saunaka and others, during a sacrifice performed by Saunaka in Naimisaranya, which is near Sitapur in Uttar Pradesh.

Noted below are few words about the eighteen sections of the Mahabharata. In Mahabharata, these sections are called parvan. A parvan means a book. The names of all parvas or books of the Mahabharata are noted below.

Kunti wants to fulfil her maternal expectations, but she has no man. She recollects the moment when her first son Karna was conceived from an arcane mantra which had given her once. Surya, the Sun God, appeared to her then. Thus, Kunti remembers her secret mantra and gives birth to the three sons – Yudhistra, Bhima and Arjuna. Yudhisthira’s father was god Yama, Bhima’s father was god Vayu, and Arjuna's father was Indra.

Madri, the second wife of Pandu, gave birth to two other sons - the twins, whose fathers were Ashwins (divine twins). Madri's sons are Nakula and Sahadeva.

In the year 1932, The Bhandarkar oriental research institute located in Pune, needed money for the compilation and publication of the Holy Mahabharata and a guest house. A formal request was made to the seventh Nizam of Hyderabad State, Mir Osman Ali Khan who in no time released a farman to donate Rs.1000 per year for a period of 11 years.

Whereas, Rs. 50,000 was offered for the guest which is known as "Nizam guest house".

Malnutrition is eating a diet which does not supply enough nutrients. There are two broad categories of malnutrition:

Sometimes, people need to lose weight, and eat according to a special diet. This is usually not called malnutrition.

Malnutrition  is considered a more scientific and official term than starvation which has negative associations.  Malnutrition is not, however, simply a matter of eating too little.  Someone can be malnourished if they eat an unhealthy diet.  This can be cured by eating a proper balanced diet.

Children whose daily diet contains less carbohydrate and protein do not grow well.  They do not gain weight. Their hands and legs appear as skin and bones.  They cry all the time with hunger.  They are not active and have sunken eyes.  Such children often fall sick.  Lack of a particular vitamin is another kind of malnutrition which can cause a particular deficiency disease, such as beriberi and rickets.

Malnutrition becomes a bigger problem during famine because most of the people do not get enough food, hence increasing the death rate.

Measurement means compare to a fix standard value. To measure something is to give a number to some property of the thing. Measuring something puts the amount of the thing into numbers. Measurement can be written using many different units. For example, if we want to compare two different sized container for holding a given quantity of liquid, we can ask: Are both containers the same size? Will they hold the same amount of liquid?

Many things can be measured. Some properties of things that can be measured:

Most  are measured using a number and a unit of measurement. The unit of measurement is a standard amount. The number compares the property to the standard amount.

There is an advanced branch of mathematics that is about measuring things with unusual s. This is called measure theory. This theory uses something called a "Lebesgue integral". This takes the area under the curve differently than the more common Riemann integral. It uses horizontal slabs instead of vertical ones.

Measurement can be the capacity, how long something is, or distance, etc.

The Meiji Restoration (明治維新) was a time of great change in Japan. In the Japanese language, Meiji-ishin is the term for the Meiji Restoration. The term describes a series of events that changed the shape of Japan’s political and social systems. These changes took place mainly in the three years from 1866 to 1869, at the beginning of the Meiji period.

In 1866, the Tokugawa Shogunate was ruling Japan. In the year 1866, two domains, the local government at that time, came together under an alliance. The name of this alliance was the Sat-cho Alliance. This was an alliance between the Satsuma Domain and the Chōshū Domain, and a person named Sakamoto Ryoma brought the two domains together. These two domains supported the Emperor Meiji of Japan who, at the time, did not have much power. With their support the emperor could regain much of his power.

The Tokugawa Shogunate’s rule ended on 9th November 1867, but they still retained some authority and power.  In the Boshin War of 1868, an army from Satsuma Province and Choshu defeated the forces of the Tokugawa Shogunate.  This completely ended the power of the Tokugawa Shogunate.

After defeating the Tokugawa Shogunate, the leaders of the Meiji Restoration started to reform the system of the country. They acted in the name of Japan’s emperor, to restore (that is, to return) the emperor’s powers. But, the leaders also kept to themselves a number of powers. In fact, even after the Meiji Restoration, an oligarchy, a small group, had the real power and ruled in the name of the emperor.

After the Meiji Restoration started, Japan’s progress was fast. The revolution included centralizing power, changing the tax system, starting the educational system, constructing factories and railways, etc.

Industrialization developed rapidly and within next three to four decades (by 1905) the Empire of Japan had become a military power, comparable to the great powers of the time.

Marilyn Monroe (born Norma Jeane Mortenson; June 1, 1926– August 4, 1962) was an American actress, writer, model, singer and filmmaker. Famous for playing comic "blonde bombshell" characters, she became one of the most popular sex symbols of the 1950s.

Between 1946 and 1962, she made 44 movies. Although she was a top-billed actress for only a decade, her films grossed $200 million by the time of her unexpected death in 1962.

Norma Jeane Mortenson was born on June 1, 1926 at LAC+USC Medical Center in Los Angeles, California, United States. Her father was not known until 2022, when DNA testing revealed he was Charles Stanley Gifford, whom her mother had had an affair with. Her mother, Gladys (Monroe) Baker Mortenson, was mentally unstable and unable to care for her daughter, so when Norma Jeane was about two weeks old, she was sent to live with Ida and Albert Bolender, a devout Christian couple who raised her alongside their adopted son Lester. The Bolenders wanted to legally adopt Norma Jeane, but Gladys refused. Gladys often visited, but Norma Jeane never knew she was her mother. On one occasion, Gladys tried to smuggle her out of the house in a duffel bag, only to be stopped by Ida.

In 1933, Gladys was deemed stable enough to care for Norma Jeane herself. However, after several personal and financial troubles, Gladys had a mental breakdown in front of Norma Jeane, who was forced to watch her flailing and screaming on the floor until the police arrived. Gladys was hospitalized after being diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia, a severe mental condition. After this, Norma Jeane went to live with her mother’s friend, Grace McKee Goddard, and her husband, Erwin “Doc” Goddard. In 1935, Grace sent her to live in the Los Angeles Orphans’ Home Society, though she took her back later. As an adult, Norma Jeane would claim that Doc sexually abused her, or at least tried to. She was sent to live with Olive Monroe, Gladys’s aunt, then around 1939, she went to live with Grace’s aunt, Ana Lower, whom Norma Jeane called “Aunt Ana.” Living with her was a stable environment for Norma Jeane, who was finally loved unconditionally.

After Norma Jeane's sixteenth birthday, her foster parents had to move from California. To avoid an orphanage or a new foster home, Norma chose to get married. On June 19, 1942, Norma married James Dougherty, her next-door-neighbor. The marriage was strained when he joined the U.S. Merchant Marines during World War II. Norma Jeane began modeling after being spotted by a photographer while working at the Radioplane Company. Dougherty and his family disapproved of her ambitions. When Monroe wanted to become an actress, the contract stated that she needed to be unmarried, so she divorced him in 1946. She offered to continue the relationship unmarried, but he refused.

To enhance her image, she dyed her naturally brown hair blonde and changed her name from Norma Jeane Dougherty to Marilyn Monroe. Monroe began her career with small, supporting parts in movies and as a pin-up model. She gained more attention with roles in All About Eve and The Asphalt Jungle, which both came out in the early 1950s. In 1949, she posed nude for photographers. At first, she hid this from the public for fear of damaging her image, but when the news got out, people became more interested in her. She had a more dramatic role in 1952’s Don't Bother to Knock. Critics liked her performance in this film. She became very famous in 1953 when she had lead roles in the movies Niagara, Gentlemen Prefer Blondes, and How to Marry a Millionaire.

In 1954, she acted in two films: River of No Return and There’s No Business Like Show Business. At the end of the year, she established her own production company, Marilyn Monroe Productions. This was a very new and radical thing for a woman to do at the time. In 1955 she acted in The Seven Year Itch. For this movie, she filmed a very controversial scene which showed her standing on a subway grate while the wind from the subway blows up her dress, showing her underwear. Her performance in this movie earned her a nomination for the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Actress.

The next year, she received more praise for her role in Bus Stop, earning a nomination for Golden Globe Award for Best Actress — Musical or Comedy. In 1957, she acted in The Prince and the Showgirl alongside Laurence Olivier. The film was not a very big success and she and Olivier did not get along well. In 1959, she acted in Some Like It Hot, in which she played a band singer named Sugar Kane Kowalczyk. Her performance in this film is widely considered to be one of, if not the best performance she has ever done. While Sugar Kane was written to be sultry and a stereotypical “dumb blonde”, Monroe brought depth to the role by putting humor and sadness behind it. On set, she arrived late a lot of the time and fought with the director Billy Wilder about how she was going to play Sugar Kane. Tony Curtis, who played her love interest, said that kissing her was like “kissing Hitler.” She was nominated again for the Golden Globe, but this time she won. Many expected her to be nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance, but she was not, even though the movie received 6 other nominations. Today, the Academy’s refusal to nominate her is considered one of the biggest Oscar snubs of all time.

In 1960, she acted in Let’s Make Love, which did not do very well. Her final film was in 1961’s The Misfits. It failed upon release but had been well-regarded in the 21st century. She started filming another movie, Something’s Got to Give, but it was never completed.

In 1962, she sang "Happy Birthday" to President John F. Kennedy. It turned out to be one of her last appearances.

Monroe married the baseball star Joe DiMaggio on January 14, 1954. The marriage lasted for nine months. She had met DiMaggio on a blind date, during the filming of the movie Monkey Business in 1952. The marriage was closely followed by the public. DiMaggio retired from baseball, and Monroe became very famous. DiMaggio was sad that his career as a baseball star was ending, and was jealous of Monroe for being admired. He spent most of his time watching television and Monroe found it boring. They separated on October 31, 1954. From 1961, they became friends again. After she died, DiMaggio was very sad and sent roses to her grave every week for 20 years.

Marilyn married Arthur Miller on June 29, 1956. To marry him, she converted to Judaism. She had met him during the filming of As Young As You Feel in 1951. She was very happy with him and they tried to have children together. Marilyn had three miscarriages, because of her endometriosis. Miller wrote the screenplay for the movie The Misfits. The filming caused many problems between Marilyn and Arthur and they divorced in 1961.

She died early from an overdose of barbiturates on August 4, 1962 in Brentwood, Los Angeles, California, U.S. at 36 years old.

Logarithms or logs are a part of mathematics. They are related to exponential functions. A logarithm tells what exponent (or power) is needed to make a certain number, so logarithms are one of the inverse operations of exponentiation (the other one being roots). Historically, they were useful in multiplying or dividing large numbers.

An example of a logarithm is . In this logarithm, the base is 2, the power is 8 and the answer is 3. In this case, the exponentiation function would be:

The most common types of logarithms are common logarithms, where the base is 10, binary logarithms, where the base is 2, and natural logarithms, where the base is  .

Logarithms were first used in India in the 2nd century BCE. The first to use logarithms in modern times was the German mathematician Michael Stifel (around 14871567). In 1544, he wrote down the following equations:  and . This is the basis for understanding logarithms. For Stifel,  and  had to be whole numbers. John Napier (1550–1617) did not want this restriction, and wanted a range for the exponents.

According to Napier, logarithms express ratios:  has the same ratio to , as  to  if the difference of their logarithms matches. Mathematically: . At first, base  was used (even though the number had not been named yet). Henry Briggs proposed to use 10 as a base for logarithms, as such logarithms are very useful in astronomy.

A logarithm tells what exponent is needed to make a certain number, so logarithms are one of the inverse operations of exponentiation.

Just as an exponential function has three parts, a logarithm has three parts as well: a base, a power (also called exponent) and an argument (sometimes called the answer).

In this function, the base is 2, the power is 3 and the answer is 8.

This exponential equation has an inverse, its logarithmic equation:

In this equation, the base is 2, the power is 3 and the answer is 8.

Addition has one inverse operation: subtraction. Also, multiplication has one inverse operation: division. However, exponentiation actually has two inverse operations: the root and the logarithm. The reason why this is the case has to do with the fact that exponentiation is not commutative.

This is because  usually is not the same as  (for example,  but ).

Logarithms can make multiplication and division of large numbers easier, because adding logarithms is the same as multiplying, and subtracting logarithms is the same as dividing.

Before calculators became popular and common, people used logarithm tables in books to multiply and divide. The same information in a logarithm table was available on a slide rule, a tool with logarithms written on it.

Aside from computations, logarithm also has many other real-life applications:

Base 10 Logarithms are called common logarithms. They are usually written without the base. For example:

Logarithms to base  are called natural logarithms. The number  is nearly 2.71828, and is also called the Eulerian constant after the mathematician Leonhard Euler.

The natural logarithms can take the symbols  or, more commonly, . Some authors prefer the use of natural logarithms as , (and usually mention it on preface pages). There is no single standard of what "" means, so it is important to see how each author defines it.

This property is straight from the definition of a logarithm:

The logarithm to base  of a number , is the same as the logarithm of  divided by the logarithm of . That is,

For example, let  be 6 and  be 2. With calculators we can show that this is true (or at least very close):

The results above had a small error, but this was due to the rounding of numbers.

Since it is hard to picture the natural logarithm, we find that, in terms of a base ten logarithm:

Logarithms which multiply inside their power can be changed as follows:

Similarly, logarithm which divides inside the argument can be turned into a difference of logarithm (because it is the inverse operation of multiplication):

Before electronic computers, logarithms were used every day by scientists. Logarithms helped scientists and engineers in many fields such as astronomy.

Before computers, the table of logarithms was an important tool. In 1617, Henry Briggs printed the first logarithm table. This was soon after Napier's basic invention. Later, people made tables with better scope and precision. These tables listed the values of  and  for any number  in a certain range, at a certain precision, for a certain base  (usually ). For example, Briggs' first table contained the common logarithms of all integers in the range 1–1000, with a precision of 8 digits.

Since the function  is the inverse function of , it has been called the antilogarithm. People used these tables to multiply and divide numbers. For example, a user looked up the logarithm in the table for each of two positive numbers. Adding the numbers from the table would give the logarithm of the product. The antilogarithm feature of the table would then find the product based on its logarithm.

For manual calculations that need precision, performing the lookups of the two logarithms, calculating their sum or difference, and looking up the antilogarithm is much faster than performing the multiplication by earlier ways.

Many logarithm tables give logarithms by separately providing the characteristic and mantissa of , that is to say, the integer part and the fractional part of . The characteristic of  is one plus the characteristic of , and their significands are the same. This extends the scope of logarithm tables: given a table listing  for all integers  ranging from 1 to 1000, the logarithm of 3542 is approximated by

Another critical application was the slide rule, a pair of logarithmically divided scales used for calculation, as illustrated here:

Numbers are marked on sliding scales at distances proportional to the differences between their logarithms. Sliding the upper scale appropriately amounts to mechanically adding logarithms. For example, adding the distance from 1 to 2 on the lower scale to the distance from 1 to 3 on the upper scale yields a product of 6, which is read off at the lower part. Many engineers and scientists used slide rules until the 1970s. Scientists can work faster using a slide rule than using a logarithm table.

Marie Salomée Skłodowska, Madame Pierre Curie (  ) was a Polish-born French physicist and chemist. She did research on radioactivity. She was also the first woman to win a Nobel Prize. ,which she went on to win twice. She was the first female professor at the University of Paris. She was the first person to win two Nobel Prizes. She received a Nobel Prize in physics for her research on uncontrolled radiation, which was discovered by Henri Becquerel.

She died because of too much exposure to radiation in her laboratory. She had no protection against the effects of radiation. Its effects were not understood at that time.

Maria Salomea Skłodowska was born on 7 November 1867 in Warsaw, Congress Poland, Russian Empire. She lived there until she was 22. Her original name was Maria. She was the fifth child in her family. At the age of 10, her sister Zofia died. Her mother died one year later. Her father was a math teacher. As a young girl, she was interested in physics. She was top of her high school class. She graduated at 15. Maria became a teacher so she could earn money to go to school in Paris, France. She also went to an unaccredited college in Poland.

Eventually, she left Poland and went to France under the name “Marie" after one of her big sisters gave her the chance. In  Paris, she earned higher degrees and did her important scientific work. She founded the Curie Institutes in Paris and Warsaw.

Marie Skłodowska-Curie and her husband created a theory of radioactivity. This was a term made by her husband Pierre Curie. They found different ways to separate radioactive isotopes and discovered two new elements: polonium, 400 times more radioactive than uranium, and radium, 5000 times more radioactive than polonium. The term polonium was named after Poland, her home country; radium named after the Greek word for ray.  Radium gave rise to radiology. She used her own studies in radioactivity to develop a new treatment for cancer. These treatments use the radioactive isotopes. She was the first woman to win the Nobel Prize and the first person to win two Nobel Prizes.

Marie Skłodowska-Curie discovered radium. It is one of the most radioactive and dangerous metals. She shared this discovery with Pierre Curie and Gustave Bemont. The three found radium in 1898. They discovered it when using a uranium ore. It gave off a lot of radiation. They decided that it was coming from more than uranium. The group found radium in the uranium. Radium is now used for many different things. For example, doctors used to use it to kill cancer cells. Radium was found in paint and watches. Many workers who made radium-containing products developed bone cancer.

Even though Skłodowska-Curie became a French citizen, Skłodowska-Curie never lost her Polish identity. She graduated first in her class in 1893. One year later she earned a master's degree in mathematics. Later, she met her husband, Pierre, at the Municipal School of Industrial Physics and Chemistry. They were married in July 1895 after only one year. They also started to work together on scientific discoveries. Maria and Pierre had their first daughter, Irene, in 1897. Their second daughter, Eve, was born in 1904. Pierre died on April 19, 1906, after he was hit by a horse-drawn wagon.

After the war, Maria started to raise money for a hospital. The hospital raised money for radiation research. She was invited to tour the United States to recommend and speed up her project. She sailed for the United States in 1921. She collected enough money and equipment for a new laboratory. She then started speaking at meetings to raise more money and became a celebrity. She also supported world peace by serving on the council of the League of Nations.

Near the 1920s, Skłodowska-Curie and many of her colleagues began to suffer from symptoms of cancer. Skłodowska-Curie began to lose her sight. Cataract surgeries to try to bring back her sight did not help. Skłodowska-Curie knew that the element (radium) she discovered might have been causing the symptoms, but she did not want to admit it to herself or others. In the early 1930s, Skłodowska-Curie’s health started to quickly get worse. Doctors diagnosed her with pernicious anemia. Pernicious anemia is a blood anemia that happens when someone is overly exposed to radiation. The doctors didn't tell the public or Skłodowska-Curie herself what was going on. On July 4, 1934, at 66 years old, she died in a Sanitorium at the French Alps. She was then buried next to her husband in Sceaux, France. Maria Skłodowska-Curie was a physicist and chemist best known for her work on radioactivity; however, she also discovered the elements polonium and radium. She was awarded two Nobel Prizes — one in physics which she won jointly with her husband and Henri Becquerel, and another in chemistry — and was the first person to win two Nobel Prizes. She is still one of only four people (along with Linus Pauling, John Bardeen and Frederick Sanger) to accomplish that feat. Skłodowska-Curie is responsible for establishing the theory of radioactivity, but unfortunately she unwittingly also discovered the fatal effect radioactivity can have on your health; she died on July 4, 1934, of aplastic anemia caused by radiation exposure.

Marlene Dietrich ; (27 December 1901 – 6 May 1992) was a German-American actress, singer and entertainer. She was thought to have been the first German actress to become successful in Hollywood.

In her long career, starting as a cabaret singer, chorus girl and movie actress in Berlin in the 1920s. She became a Hollywood movie star in the 1930s. She was a World War II entertainer at the front of war during the 1940s. Her final job was as an international theatre show performer from the 1950s to the 1970s. Dietrich became one of the most important movie icons of the 20th century. The American Film Institute ranked Dietrich No. 9 amongst the Greatest Female Stars of All Time.

Dietrich was bisexual. She became an American citizen in 1937.

A mathematical proof is a way to show that a mathematical theorem is true. To prove a theorem is to show that theorem holds in all cases (where it claims to hold). To prove a statement, one can either use axioms, or theorems which have already been shown to be true. Many techniques for proving a statements exist, and these include proof by induction, proof by contradiction and proof by cases.

One type of proof is called proof by induction. This is usually used to prove that a theorem holds for all numbers (or all numbers from some point onwards). There are 4 steps in a proof by induction.

1. State that the proof will be by induction, and state which variable will be used in the induction step.

3. Assume that for some value n = n0, the statement is true and has all of the properties listed in the statement. This is called the induction step.

Once that is shown, it would mean that for any value of n that is picked, the next one is true. Since it is true for some beginning case (usually n=1), it's true for the next one (n=2). And since it is true for 2, it must be true for 3. And since it is true for 3, it must be true for 4, etc. Induction shows that it is always true, precisely because it is true for whatever comes after any given number.

Prove that for all natural numbers n, 2(1+2+3+....+n-1+n)=n(n+1).

Proof: First, the statement can be written as "For all natural numbers n, 2=n(n+1)."

Next, assume that for some n=n0 the statement is true. That is, 2 = n0(n0+1).

So 2(n0+1) + 2n0(n0+1)= 2(n0+1)(n0 + 2), which completes the proof.

Proof by contradiction is a way of proving a mathematical theorem by showing that if the statement were false, then there would be a logical contradiction involved. That is, if one of the results of the theorem is assumed to be false, then there would be some inconsistency with the logic.

When proving a theorem by way of contradiction, it is important to note that in the beginning of the proof. This is usually abbreviated BWOC. When the contradiction appears in the proof, there is usually a ⨳ symbol involved.

Mass media is media that can reach many people. Examples include radio, television, internet and newspapers. Television and internet is most used. We can see and hear news from around the world. Radio also brings music and news. Books supply older information, but use more detailed material. The internet is also important. We can search for all the news and information. Websites like Wikipedia and about.com give information about many things. Libraries are also important. In libraries, we can read books and listen to music.

The term became popular in the 1920s with the arrival of nationwide radio networks, mass-circulation newspapers and magazines. However, things like books and manuscripts were present centuries before the term became common.

Marcel Valentin Louis Eugène Georges Proust (10 July 1871 – 18 November 1922) was a French writer. People say his name like "mar-SEL proost".

Proust is best known for one very long novel called À la recherche du temps perdu. In English the title is In Search of Lost Time. An older English title is Remembrance of Things Past. The novel has seven parts. They came out between 1913 and 1927. The last three parts came out after his death.

Many readers and critics think this novel is one of the greatest books of the 20th century. It is also one of the longest novels ever written. In English it fills about 3,300 pages.

Proust was often sick. He had asthma, an illness that makes breathing very hard. For the last part of his life he stayed mostly in bed, in a quiet room in Paris. He slept in the day and worked at night. In that room he wrote his huge book, almost until the hour of his death.

His best-known passage is about a small cake called a . The taste of the cake, dipped in tea, suddenly brings back the narrator's whole childhood. This idea is called involuntary memory. Today, in French, a "madeleine de Proust" means any small thing that brings back the past.

His full name was Valentin Louis Georges Eugène Marcel Proust, but everybody called him Marcel. In French his family name sounds close to the English word "proost" (one syllable).

Marcel's father was Adrien Proust (1834–1903). He came from Illiers, a small town near Chartres, south-west of Paris. His family was Catholic and not rich. Adrien worked hard and became a famous doctor in Paris.

Adrien Proust studied hygiene, the science of keeping people healthy. From 1885 he held the chair of hygiene at the Paris school of medicine. He worked on ways to stop cholera and other diseases from moving from country to country. He traveled far for this work, and he wrote many medical books. In 1869, before Marcel was born, he crossed Russia, Persia, and Egypt, on horseback and by camel, to map the roads by which cholera moved toward Europe. He helped to build the idea of the "cordon sanitaire": a chain of countries working together, with strict controls at the borders, to stop a disease on its way.

Marcel's mother was Jeanne Weil (1849–1905). Her family was Jewish. The Weils were makers of faience and porcelain (fine pottery). They had come to Paris from the east, from Alsace and Lorraine, and further back from Württemberg in Germany. Jeanne's grandfather, Baruch Weil, ran a porcelain factory in Paris at the start of the 19th century. Her father, Nathé Weil, made his money in finance and lived on it. Her great-uncle was Adolphe Crémieux, a famous lawyer and minister who gave French nationality to the Jews of Algeria and helped to end slavery in the French colonies. Jeanne herself was gentle, clever, and very well read.

Jeanne's mother, Adèle, had grown up in the salon of her aunt, Madame Crémieux, where writers like Lamartine and Victor Hugo were guests. She loved the letters of Madame de Sévigné, a great writer of the 17th century, and she passed this love to her daughter and her grandsons. This grandmother later became the model for the narrator's grandmother, one of the most loved figures of the novel.

Adrien and Jeanne married on 3 September 1870. Adolphe Crémieux was one of the witnesses. Jeanne promised that her children would be baptized, but she refused to change her own religion. So Marcel grew up between two worlds: a Catholic world from his father and a Jewish world from his mother. This mixed family background remained important in his life and in his book.

Marcel was born in a terrible time for France. The country had just lost the Franco-Prussian War against Germany. Paris had been hungry and cold during a long siege. Then came the fighting of the Paris Commune in the spring of 1871.

Because of the danger, Adrien Proust took his pregnant wife out of the city center. They went to Auteuil, a green area at the edge of Paris. There, in the house and garden that Jeanne's uncle Louis Weil had bought in 1857, at 96 rue La Fontaine, Marcel was born at eleven in the evening of 10 July 1871.

The baby was very weak. For a while the family feared he would die. He lived, and on 5 August 1871 he was baptized in the church of Saint-Louis-d'Antin in Paris.

His only brother, Robert, was born on 24 May 1873. Robert was strong and healthy. Later he became a famous surgeon, like their father. The family moved to a large flat at 9 boulevard Malesherbes in Paris.

Marcel's childhood had two happy places outside the flat in Paris. Both were gardens, and both entered his novel.

The first was Auteuil. Every spring and summer the family stayed in the big house and park of great-uncle Louis Weil, where Marcel was born. Three generations of the family met there, around the joking old uncle and the grandmother full of stories. In the garden grew chestnut trees, lilacs, and hawthorns, the flowering bushes that fill the most poetic pages of the novel. In the summer of 1881 the grandmother even took the young Marcel, alone with her, to the seaside town of Cabourg.

The second was Illiers, his father's home town. From the time Marcel was six, the family went there at Easter. Marcel stayed in the house of his aunt and uncle, Élisabeth and Jules Amiot. He read for hours in the garden. He walked by the small river and in a park called the Pré Catelan.

Later, in his novel, Proust mixed Illiers and Auteuil together. From them he made an imaginary town called Combray. It is the town of the narrator's childhood. In 1971, a hundred years after Proust's birth, the real town formally changed its name to Illiers-Combray, in honor of the book.

When Marcel was nine years old, something happened that changed his life. In the spring of 1881 he was coming home from a family walk in the Bois de Boulogne. Suddenly he could not breathe. He was choking so badly that his parents thought he was dying.

It was his first big attack of asthma. His father, a great doctor, could do little. Another doctor was called and gave the boy an injection of morphine, without any effect. That night, the story says, they had to sit the boy up straight in bed, held by piles of heavy medical books.

From then on, Marcel was a fragile child. Flowers, dust, smoke, and country air could start an attack. The Easter stays in Illiers had to stop. His mother watched over him all the time. This deep love between the sick boy and his worried mother became a key part of his novel.

The most famous scene of the novel draws on this childhood. The little narrator cannot sleep until his mother comes upstairs to kiss him goodnight. One evening she does not come, because there is a guest. The boy waits on the stairs, sick with sadness. This "goodnight kiss" scene opens the whole book.

In the autumn of 1882, at eleven, Marcel entered a well-known school in Paris, then called the Lycée Fontanes. Soon afterwards it took back its old name, Condorcet. He often missed class because of his asthma. Still, he read a great deal and wrote very well.

At school he found close friends: Jacques Bizet, son of the composer of Carmen, whom he had already met in primary school; Daniel Halévy; Robert Dreyfus; and others. With them he talked endlessly about books. Together they also made little class magazines, copied by hand, with names like Le Lundi and La Revue lilas.

After class the boys played in the gardens of the Champs-Élysées. There Marcel fell in love, in a child's way, with a Russian girl named Marie de Benardaky. He never forgot her. She later gave some traits to Gilberte, the narrator's first love in the novel.

In his last school year, Marcel had a philosophy teacher named Alphonse Darlu. Marcel admired him greatly. After only two days of class, he wrote Darlu a long, strange letter about his own divided mind. Darlu made him love philosophy for life. Years later, Proust went back to him for private lessons while studying for his degree.

In November 1889, at eighteen, Proust joined the army as a one-year volunteer. On 11 November he signed up. Four days later he joined the 76th infantry regiment in the city of Orléans.

Everyone expected the worst for this fragile, dreamy young man. In fact the year went well. He was allowed to sleep in a rented room in town, and his officers were kind to him. At a dinner given by the prefect of the region, in February 1890, he met another young volunteer serving in Orléans, Robert de Billy, who stayed a friend for life. During this army year he also suffered a serious loss: in January 1890 his beloved grandmother Adèle died of uremia, the same illness that would later kill his mother. His slow, delayed sorrow for her already looked like what the novel would one day call the "intermittences of the heart".

Proust even kept a happy memory of the army. Years later, in a friend's question album, he was asked which military act he admired most. He answered: his own year of service. Question albums like this one were a fashion of the time. One of them later became famous as the "Proust Questionnaire".

His captain, Count Walewski, came from the family of Napoleon. Proust watched him with delight. This officer later helped to inspire the captain de Borodino in the novel.

Back in Paris in November 1890, Proust signed up to study law. He also joined the École libre des sciences politiques, a famous school of politics, where he found his friend Robert de Billy again.

He was not a bad student. In 1892 he passed his oral exams in politics with good marks. Later he also got his degree in law. Then, at the end of 1893, he began a degree in philosophy, partly at the Sorbonne and partly through private lessons. He followed the courses of the philosophers Émile Boutroux and Paul Janet, and received his degree on 30 March 1895, ranked twenty-third among the 118 candidates.

But he did not want any of the jobs his father hoped for. He tried two weeks in a lawyer's office and hated it. He said no to diplomacy, no to the courts, no to business.

In 1895 he sat a small exam for an unpaid post at the Mazarine, a great library in Paris. He ranked third among the three successful candidates. There were three posts. He almost never went to work. He asked for leave again and again. On 1 March 1900 the administration finally counted him as having resigned.

To his father this looked like a wasted life. In truth, the young man had already chosen his real work: watching people, and writing.

In the Paris of that time, rich families opened their homes on fixed days. Guests came to talk, to hear music, and to meet famous people. Such a meeting, and the room it happened in, was called a salon.

Proust loved the salons. From the age of seventeen he went from one to another. People laughed at him a little and called him a snob, a person who runs after grand names. But he was also studying this world, like a scientist studies insects.

He was welcomed by Geneviève Straus, a woman of famous wit who had first been married to the composer Georges Bizet. He met the writer Anatole France in the salon of Madame Arman de Caillavet. At Madeleine Lemaire's, a painter of flowers, he heard the best musicians of Paris.

In April 1893, at Madeleine Lemaire's, he met Count Robert de Montesquiou, a proud poet and dandy with a sharp tongue. Through him Proust reached the oldest French nobility, including the beautiful Countess Greffulhe. Montesquiou later gave many traits to the Baron de Charlus, one of the great characters of the novel.

At the start of 1892 a group of young men, most of them old Condorcet friends, decided to start a small magazine: the poet Fernand Gregh, Daniel Halévy, Robert Dreyfus, Louis de La Salle and others. Jacques Bizet brought Proust to the first meeting. They called the review Le Banquet ("The Banquet"), after a book by the Greek philosopher Plato, and in honor of the teaching of their master Darlu. The first issue appeared in March 1892, printed in four hundred copies; Gregh soon became its editor. There were eight issues in all, until March 1893.

Proust wrote short pieces for it: portraits, little stories, thoughts about love and fashion. When Le Banquet died, he wrote for a bigger magazine, La Revue blanche. There his texts appeared next to those of famous writers such as Mallarmé and André Gide.

In those same weeks, Proust's path crossed the path of a man he would often be compared to. On 7 January 1892 his mother's cousin Louise Neuburger married the philosopher Henri Bergson, and Marcel was one of the attendants at the wedding. Bergson also wrote about time and memory, and many readers later looked for his ideas behind the novel. But the two cousins never became close, and in the long interview he gave when Swann's Way came out, Proust said plainly that his book was not a "Bergsonian novel".

On 22 May 1894, at an evening in the Paris salon of Madeleine Lemaire, Proust met a young musician named Reynaldo Hahn. He was still a teenager, born in Caracas, in Venezuela, and already a brilliant composer and singer. Hahn sang his own songs for Marcel, above all his settings of poems by Verlaine, in a soft voice that all Paris praised.

On 18 August of that year, Madeleine Lemaire invited them both for a month to Réveillon, her castle east of Paris. There the friendship of the two young men turned into love. Their romance lasted about two years. After it ended, they stayed the closest of friends for the rest of Proust's life.

Some pains of this love entered the novel. One evening Hahn refused to ride home with Proust after a party. Proust turned this small wound into a famous scene: Odette going home in the Verdurins' carriage instead of Swann's.

Hahn was one of the very few people allowed into Proust's room during his last illness in 1922.

On 12 June 1896 Proust published his first book, Les Plaisirs et les Jours (Pleasures and Days). It collected his short stories, portraits, and poems.

It was a luxury book, printed in only 1,500 copies. Anatole France wrote the preface. Madeleine Lemaire painted flowers for it. Reynaldo Hahn wrote four piano pieces for the poems. It cost 13 francs 50, at a time when a normal book cost 3 francs 50.

The book sold very badly: in twenty-two years, only 329 copies left the publisher's stock. Critics saw only a gifted rich young man playing at literature. Even his friends teased him. In the winter of 1897, in a private show of shadow puppets, they played a sketch laughing at the price of the book, adding up the famous names inside it franc by franc.

Today readers see the book differently. Its themes, time, memory, sadness, and forgetting, already point toward the great novel to come.

On 3 February 1897 the writer Jean Lorrain attacked Pleasures and Days in a newspaper. Worse, he hinted in an ugly way at Proust's private life and his friendship with young Lucien Daudet.

Proust answered in the way of the time: he challenged Lorrain to a duel. A duel was a formal fight, with strict rules, to defend one's honor.

The two men met on 6 February 1897 in the woods of Meudon, near Paris, with pistols, at twenty-five paces. Proust's witnesses were the painter Jean Béraud and a famous duellist, Gustave de Borda; Reynaldo Hahn came too. Both men fired, and neither was hurt. The matter ended there. Proust's friends were surprised by his calm courage that day.

In 1894 a Jewish army officer, Alfred Dreyfus, was wrongly found guilty of selling secrets to Germany. The fight over his case, called the Dreyfus affair, split France in two for years.

On 13 January 1898 the novelist Émile Zola published his famous open letter J'accuse...! ("I accuse...!") in the newspaper L'Aurore, defending Dreyfus.

Proust and his friends had already been at work for weeks. They were collecting signatures from writers and thinkers for a protest text asking for a new trial. It appeared in L'Aurore just after Zola's letter. Anatole France signed. Proust later said, with some pride, that he had been the first "Dreyfusard".

His own father refused to sign. Adrien Proust, like most of official France, believed Dreyfus was guilty. After his sons put their names to the protest, he did not speak to them for a week.

Proust went to the court every day during Zola's trial in February 1898, arriving in the morning with sandwiches and a small flask of coffee and staying until five in the afternoon. He watched the faces, the lies, the courage of Colonel Picquart. He wrote these scenes into his early novel Jean Santeuil. Much later, the Dreyfus affair became one of the great subjects of In Search of Lost Time. It shows how the affair broke friendships and changed the salons.

From 1895 Proust worked in secret on a long novel about a young man named Jean Santeuil. He began it during a seaside holiday at Beg-Meil, in Brittany, with Reynaldo Hahn. The novel drew heavily on his own life: his childhood, his mother, his life in society, the Dreyfus affair. But it already changed and combined real events.

He wrote hundreds and hundreds of pages. But the manuscript stayed unfinished and loosely organized. Around 1899 he gave it up, unhappy.

The pages stayed in boxes for half a century. Jean Santeuil was finally published in 1952, thirty years after Proust's death. Readers found in it many first drafts of the great novel.

In 1897, in a French magazine article, Proust discovered a new master: the English art critic John Ruskin, who had taught people how to look at cathedrals, at paintings, at nature. In December 1899 he wrote to a young English friend, Marie Nordlinger, that he was now at work on something quite new for him, about Ruskin and certain cathedrals.

Ruskin died on 20 January 1900. Within days Proust published articles about him. Then he set out on "Ruskin pilgrimages": trips to see the cathedrals Ruskin had loved, at Rouen, Amiens, and elsewhere.

In May 1900 Proust went to Venice with his mother, following Ruskin's books about the city. Reynaldo Hahn and Marie Nordlinger were waiting for them there. He went back alone in October of the same year. Venice stayed in his memory as a dream of stone and water. It later fills some beautiful chapters of the novel. That same October the family left boulevard Malesherbes for a new flat at 45 rue de Courcelles.

Proust's English was limited. Even so, he decided to translate Ruskin into French. His mother wrote out first drafts for him. Marie Nordlinger checked the details.

His translation of Ruskin's The Bible of Amiens (La Bible d'Amiens) came out in February 1904. His translation of Sesame and Lilies (Sésame et les lys) followed in 1906. For it he wrote a long and important preface about reading, first printed in the review La Renaissance latine on 15 June 1905 as "Sur la lecture" ("On Reading") and later called Journées de lecture ("Days of Reading"). The scholar Adam Watt sees this preface as a seed of the whole novel: the child reading in a garden, and the hours of reading as time both lost and saved, are already there.

These years of patient work were his real school. Translating Ruskin taught him to build long sentences and to think about art, memory, and time.

On 24 November 1903 Adrien Proust was struck by a brain hemorrhage at the medical school, where he had gone to lead a doctoral exam. He never woke again. He died on 26 November 1903.

A huge crowd of doctors and officials followed his coffin to Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. Marcel dedicated his translation of The Bible of Amiens to his father's memory.

Two years later he lost his mother. At the very start of September 1905 Jeanne Proust traveled with Marcel to the spa town of Évian. As soon as they arrived she was struck by violent attacks of uremia, a poisoning of the blood from failing kidneys, the same illness that had killed her own mother. She was brought back to Paris and refused most food and care. She died on 26 September 1905.

She had never left the Jewish faith of her parents, so there was no church service. Her burial at Père Lachaise, on 28 September, was a civil one.

The loss overwhelmed him. He had lived with his mother for thirty-four years. She had been his nurse, his first reader, his closest friend. In December 1905 he entered a clinic at Boulogne-sur-Seine, near Paris, run by Doctor Sollier, to treat his nerves. The cure did little, and he left after about six weeks.

His grief, and the memory of his mother, later became central to his writing: the dead mother, and the pain of losing her, stand at the heart of In Search of Lost Time.

At the end of 1906, after months spent in a hotel at Versailles, Proust moved into a flat at 102 boulevard Haussmann in Paris. He was installed there on 27 December 1906. The flat had belonged to his great-uncle Louis Weil, the same uncle in whose Auteuil house he was born; Proust and his brother each now owned a quarter of the building. His mother had often dined there, and Proust chose as his bedroom the very room where the old uncle had died. He said he could not bear to live in a home his mother had never known, even though the noisy street was bad for his asthma.

To protect himself from noise, in 1910 he had the walls of his bedroom covered with plates of cork, a soft bark that stops sound. His housekeeper said that entering the room felt like walking into the inside of a giant bottle cork.

In this brown, silent room he lived the other way round. He slept by day. He woke in the late afternoon. He worked all night, in bed, by the light of one small lamp.

He loved music but could rarely go out to hear it. So, from early 1911, he paid for the "théâtrophone", a service that sent live opera down the telephone line. Lying in bed, he listened this way to whole operas, among them Debussy's Pelléas et Mélisande.

From 1907 Proust spent his summers at the Grand Hôtel of Cabourg, a seaside town in Normandy. Proust believed the sea air was good for his chest. From his room, and in the dining hall, he watched the rich guests, the young girls on the beach, the waiters, the little dramas of hotel life.

All this became Balbec, the seaside town of the novel, with its Grand Hotel and its "little band" of girls on the sea front.

To visit friends along the coast, Proust hired motor taxis from a company run by his old school friend Jacques Bizet. One of the drivers was Alfred Agostinelli, a nineteen-year-old born in Monaco to an Italian family, who drove a red taxi. Proust liked him at once.

In November 1907 Proust published an article in Le Figaro about these car trips, called "Impressions de route en automobile". In it, the church towers of Caen seem to dance and change places as the car turns. This moving picture later became the famous page about the three steeples of Martinville in the novel.

The years 1908 and 1909 changed everything. Slowly, out of many small projects, the great novel took shape.

First came the pastiches. A pastiche is a text written on purpose in the style of another writer. In early 1908, in Le Figaro, Proust retold a small news story, the Lemoine diamond fraud, in the styles of Balzac, Flaubert, and other great authors. Readers loved these games. They showed his perfect ear for style.

In May 1908 he listed his projects in a letter to a friend: a study on the French nobility, a Paris novel, an essay on the critic Sainte-Beuve and on Flaubert, an essay on women, an essay on homosexuality, studies on stained-glass windows and on tombstones. All these pieces were about to melt into one single work.

That same year he filled about seventy-five very large sheets of paper with scenes drawn from his own past: the evenings at Combray, the two family walks, the young girls by the sea, Venice. All these scenes later entered the novel. The sheets, known today as the "Soixante-quinze feuillets" ("Seventy-five sheets"), then disappeared into private hands for decades; they were only published in 2021. They are the oldest large piece of In Search of Lost Time that we have.

Then came the plan of an essay against Sainte-Beuve. Sainte-Beuve had judged books by the life of the author: his friends, his manners, his talk. Proust believed the opposite. A book comes from a deeper self, another "I", that friends never meet. This essay, Contre Sainte-Beuve ("Against Sainte-Beuve"), was written in 1908 and 1909 but never finished. It was only published in 1954.

In the draft opening of this essay, Proust presented an episode as something that had happened to him. One cold day his cook offered him a cup of tea, a drink he never took. By chance she brought some slices of dry toast with it. He dipped a piece of toast in the tea, and at the first taste, without warning, the summers of his childhood came back to him, whole and alive. Here, in the shape of a piece of toast, is the first version of the madeleine. Michael Wood points out how much Proust insists on chance in this scene: such a resurrection of the past can never be planned, only given.

In a notebook of 1908 he also wrote about the uneven stones of the floor of Saint Mark's in Venice, another memory of this kind. And he asked himself, in writing, whether he should make a novel or a philosophy book, and whether he was a novelist at all.

The answer came in 1909. The essay turned into a story. The story grew. By the end of the year, Proust was writing the childhood chapters of Combray.

From 1909 to 1912 Proust wrote without rest. He filled school notebooks with his fast, hard-to-read handwriting. He glued extra strips of paper into the pages when there was no room left.

At first he thought the novel would make one book of 800 or 900 pages. Soon it passed 1,200 pages, and it kept growing.

He tried different titles. For a time he thought of calling the whole work Les Intermittences du cœur ("The Intermittences of the Heart"), that is, the stops and starts of feeling. In the end he chose À la recherche du temps perdu, "in search of lost time".

Finding a publisher was long and painful. Between 1912 and 1913, the biggest houses of Paris all said no.

The publisher Fasquelle asked a reader for a report on the manuscript. The reader wrote that after more than seven hundred pages he still had no idea what the book was about or where it was going. Fasquelle refused.

The young Nouvelle Revue Française (NRF), the house of André Gide and Gaston Gallimard, said no on 23 December 1912; Fasquelle's refusal arrived the very next day. Gide had barely looked at the manuscript. He remembered Proust as a society snob, and he was put off by a few odd sentences.

The publisher Ollendorff refused too. Its director wrote to a friend that he could not understand why a man needed thirty pages to describe how he turns over in bed before falling asleep.

At last a young, new publisher, Bernard Grasset, agreed to print the book. But there was a condition: Proust himself had to pay all the costs. He accepted at once. He only wanted the book to exist.

The first volume was called Du côté de chez Swann (Swann's Way). Proust corrected the proofs so heavily, rewriting whole pages in the margins, that the printers had to set much of the book twice. He paid extra for this too.

He dedicated the book to Gaston Calmette, the director of Le Figaro, who had long supported him. A few months later, in March 1914, Calmette was shot dead in his own office by the wife of the minister Joseph Caillaux, in one of the great scandals of the age.

Just before publication, the newspaper Le Temps printed a long interview with Proust. In it he explained his ideas about time, memory, and the many selves inside one person. He also warned that the narrator who says "I" in the book is not himself.

Swann's Way went on sale on 14 November 1913. A young woman named Céleste Albaret, the new wife of Proust's taxi driver, carried signed copies across Paris to his friends and to the newspapers. She did not yet know that she would spend the next nine years at his side.

The reviews were mixed. Some critics praised the new voice. Others were lost. Henri Ghéon, in the NRF's own magazine, called the book the work of a man with too much free time, and compared its sentences to a huge net dragging everything up from the sea floor.

Then, in January 1914, André Gide read the book at last. He wrote Proust a letter of apology that became famous. Refusing this novel, he said, was the worst mistake the NRF had ever made, and one of the great regrets of his life. The NRF now begged to publish the next volumes.

In May 1913 Alfred Agostinelli, the young driver from Cabourg, had come back into Proust's life. He had no work. Proust took him in as a secretary, to type the novel. Agostinelli moved into the flat with his companion, Anna.

Proust fell deeply in love with him. It was a painful, jealous, impossible love. Agostinelli, a free spirit who dreamed of flying machines, felt like a prisoner in the dark flat.

On 1 December 1913, two weeks after Swann's Way appeared, Agostinelli ran away with Anna to the south of France. Proust was desperate. He sent a friend, Albert Nahmias, to Monaco with money and secret offers for Agostinelli's father, to bring the young man back. The mission failed. According to Jean-Yves Tadié, Agostinelli probably did return to Paris for a few weeks at the start of 1914, brought back this time by the driver Odilon Albaret, before leaving again for good in April.

In the south, Agostinelli joined a flying school near Antibes. As a pilot he took a new name: "Marcel Swann", from his old master and his old master's book. Proust, half forgiving, ordered a huge gift for him without telling him: an airplane worth 27,000 francs, and probably a Rolls-Royce car as well. Agostinelli refused the gifts. Proust even dreamed of having lines by his beloved poet Mallarmé painted on the machine.

On 30 May 1914, on only his second flight alone, Agostinelli flew out over the sea against his teacher's orders. The plane fell into the water off Antibes. He could not swim. He drowned before help came. His last letter to Proust, full of joy about his flying, arrived after his death. Proust helped pay for divers to search for the body, which was found on 7 June, wearing a gold ring with the young man's initials, and he sent a large wreath of flowers for the grave.

This death changed the novel. Proust's love for Agostinelli, and his grief after the young man's death, fed into the story of Albertine: the girl the narrator keeps almost as a prisoner, who runs away, and who dies in an accident. He even copied into the novel, almost word for word, a letter he had written to Agostinelli on the last morning of his life, about the plane and the car. It is the only letter between them that survives, found much later by the scholar Philip Kolb.

Two months after Agostinelli's death, World War I began. Printing stopped. The second volume, already in proofs at Grasset, could not appear; the house of Grasset itself closed, its staff gone to the army.

His brother Robert served as an army surgeon near the front. Close friends died in the fighting. Bertrand de Fénelon, whom Proust had deeply loved, was killed in battle on 17 December 1914, shot while leading his men; Proust only had sure news of it in March 1915. Gaston de Caillavet, the friend of his youth, died of illness in January of the same year. In the novel, the death of Saint-Loup at the front owes much to Fénelon. Proust himself, though far too sick for service, still had to appear before army medical boards, and was only declared unfit for good in 1916. He stayed in Paris through the air raids.

He used the long, dark years to make the novel much bigger. Behind the cork walls he added many new characters, episodes, and themes, and the book grew from three planned volumes toward seven.

In 1916 he finally moved from Grasset to the NRF, the house of Gaston Gallimard, which had once refused him and now wanted him badly. Gallimard's firm published all the rest of his work.

During the war Proust also explored the hidden Paris of the night. He knew Albert Le Cuziat, who in 1917 opened a secret hotel for men at 11 rue de l'Arcade. Le Cuziat later gave some traits to Jupien in the novel. Céleste Albaret, in her memories, defended Proust against the darker stories told about these visits. She denied that he had given money to start the place, though she admitted that he had let Le Cuziat take a few pieces of old family furniture from storage.

From 1913 Céleste Albaret, the driver's young wife, ran errands for Proust; from 1914, with the war emptying the household, she lived and worked in the flat as his housekeeper. For nine years, until his death, she was his cook, his nurse, his messenger, and his night-time listener.

She learned his strange rules. Only one kind of coffee, from one shop, made drop by drop in a special filter. A croissant on a fixed saucer, brought only when he rang twice. Smoking powders burned in the room against his asthma, filling it with thick fumes. No perfume, no flowers, no noise, ever.

She also kept his papers in order: the old notebooks, the new notebooks, the loose slips of paper covered with sudden ideas. She later told that during the war, on his orders, she burned thirty-two old black notebooks in the kitchen stove. It is one of the great losses of modern literature; some scholars think these notebooks may have held an early version of the later parts of the novel.

Proust put pieces of Céleste into Françoise, the servant of the novel, together with two earlier servants, Félicie and Céline. Céleste herself said, half joking, that she had well deserved the title of his book The Captive.

Fifty years later, in 1973, the old lady told her memories in a book, Monsieur Proust. It is one of the main sources about his daily life.

In 1919 the building on boulevard Haussmann was sold, and Proust had to leave his cork-lined room. Before going, he burned old letters, private papers, and photographs he did not want to leave behind. He camped for some months in a furnished flat belonging to the actress Réjane, on the fourth floor of 8 bis rue Laurent-Pichat. Then, on 1 October 1919, he moved to his last home: a plain furnished flat on the fifth floor of 44 rue Hamelin. It was meant to be temporary. He died there.

In June 1919 Gallimard published three of his books at the same time: the second volume of the novel, À l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs (Within a Budding Grove); a new edition of Swann's Way; and a collection called Pastiches et Mélanges. Slowly, talk of genius began to fill the salons and the papers.

On 10 December 1919 the Prix Goncourt, the most famous book prize in France, went to Proust for À l'ombre des jeunes filles en fleurs. He won on the third round of voting, by six votes to four, against Roland Dorgelès, whose Les Croix de bois told the life of the soldiers in the trenches. Inside the small Goncourt academy, the writer Léon Daudet had led the campaign for Proust.

Part of the press strongly attacked the choice. How could the prize go to a rich, sick society man of forty-eight, against a book about the war? Old soldiers protested. The socialist paper L'Humanité ran the headline "Place aux vieux !" ("Make way for the old!"), and another paper wrote about "electoral cooking". The young poet Louis Aragon called Proust a hard-working snob.

The publisher of Dorgelès even printed a band around his book with the words "PRIX GONCOURT" in big letters and "four votes out of ten" in tiny ones. Gallimard took him to court and won.

Jacques Rivière, the young editor of the NRF magazine, defended Proust in print. He argued that a revolution in art can also look backward, toward the classic study of the human heart.

The scandal made Proust famous. On the evening of the prize, the men of the NRF, Gaston Gallimard and Jacques Rivière among them, were received in the bedroom of the rue Hamelin. In 1920 the French state gave him the Legion of Honour. Visitors, young writers, and translators now found their way up to the little flat of the rue Hamelin.

Sick as he was, Proust now worked urgently to finish and publish his book.

Le Côté de Guermantes I (The Guermantes Way I) came out at the end of October 1920. Le Côté de Guermantes II appeared together with Sodome et Gomorrhe I in one volume on 2 May 1921, printed in 8,000 copies. Sodome et Gomorrhe II followed on 29 April 1922, in three small volumes.

Sodome et Gomorrhe spoke openly about homosexual love, both between men and between women. Some readers of the old world were shocked. André Gide, who wanted a prouder, more open way of writing about the subject, came several times to the rue Hamelin to argue about it through the fumes of the smoking powders.

Gallimard also sold the rights for translations into English, German, and Spanish.

In the spring of 1921 a Paris museum, the Jeu de Paume, opened a show of Dutch paintings. It included the View of Delft by Johannes Vermeer, which Proust had seen at The Hague in October 1902, during a journey with Bertrand de Fénelon, and had called the most beautiful painting in the world.

One morning in May 1921, after a night without sleep, Proust asked the writer Jean-Louis Vaudoyer, whose articles on Vermeer he had admired, to take him there on his arm. That day the sick man saw the Vermeer, went on to a second exhibition, of paintings by Ingres, and even lunched at the Ritz. On the terrace beside the museum, someone photographed him in the sunlight; these are the last photographs of Proust.

Proust told that he had felt a frightening dizziness on the stairs before going out. He gave that dizziness, and the painting, to a character in the novel: the old writer Bergotte rises from his sickbed to see the View of Delft, fixes his eyes on a little patch of yellow wall, tells himself that he should have written like that, and dies in front of the painting. It became one of the most famous death scenes in literature. Tadié warns, though, against the legend that Proust himself almost fainted before the Vermeer, a story spread later by his brother: Proust had invented Bergotte's illness weeks before the visit, and after the museum he calmly acted out his whole day for Céleste, with shining eyes. Proust had written Bergotte's death before that day; afterward he went back to the page and made it richer with what he had just felt.

One day in the spring of 1922 Proust rang for Céleste. She saw at once that something had happened. He said to her: « Cette nuit, j'ai mis le mot "fin". » ("Last night, I wrote the word 'end'.")

He added that now he could die. The book existed, from its first word to its last. Céleste placed this scene in the spring of 1922. His biographer William C. Carter thinks it may have happened years earlier, perhaps already in 1916, when Proust told his publisher that the whole novel was now written from beginning to end. In any case he went on correcting and adding until his last hours. But the frame of the book was now complete.

On 18 May 1922 Proust went to a grand supper at the Hôtel Majestic, given by his English friends Sydney and Violet Schiff after the first night of Stravinsky's ballet Renard. Around the table sat Picasso, Stravinsky, the ballet director Diaghilev, and the Irish writer James Joyce, author of Ulysses. That same day, by a bad mistake, Proust had swallowed a dose of pure, undiluted adrenaline, which burned his throat and stomach; he went to the party all the same. For weeks afterward he could take almost nothing but ice cream and iced beer brought from the Ritz.

Proust and Joyce then shared a taxi home. It did not go well. Joyce lit a cigarette and opened the window, both bad for Proust's lungs. Proust said politely that he had not read Joyce. Joyce answered that he had never read Proust. Céleste said the meeting left no mark at all on Proust; he never even mentioned Joyce's name at home.

In early October 1922 Proust caught cold after going out to a party. The cold was followed by bronchitis, an inflammation of the airways in the lungs.

He refused almost all treatment. He would not rest, would not eat, would not let anyone change the way of life he had built. His brother Robert, the great surgeon, begged him to enter a clinic. Proust angrily sent him away.

He worked on. On 8 November Jacques Rivière came to collect the corrected text of La Prisonnière (The Captive) for the printer. In his last days, eating almost nothing, drinking only iced beer brought from the Ritz hotel, Proust was still revising Albertine disparue.

The bronchitis turned into pneumonia, a deadly infection of the lungs themselves.

In the night of 17 to 18 November 1922, Proust called Céleste to his bed. He told her that if he lived through this night, he would prove the doctors wrong.

Together they worked on corrections and additions to the novel. He dictated; she wrote. The sentences he dictated that night were for the death of Bergotte, the dying writer of his own book. When her frozen fingers could no longer follow, he took the pen back and went on alone. At half past three in the morning he stopped, too tired, and asked her to stay near him.

At dawn he asked for coffee, then for the iced beer. When told it had not yet come, he said quietly that the beer, like everything else, would arrive too late. At ten in the morning his doctor came; then his brother Robert. Nothing more could be done.

Marcel Proust died that afternoon, Saturday 18 November 1922, at the age of fifty-one, with Céleste and Robert beside him. When Céleste wanted to fold the dead man's hands, Robert gently stopped her: he had died at work, he said, and his hands should stay free.

The funeral took place on 22 November 1922 at the church of Saint-Pierre-de-Chaillot. Instead of the usual church music, the organ played Ravel's Pavane pour une infante défunte. A huge and very mixed crowd came: dukes, writers, artists, and simple readers.

He received military honors, as a knight of the Legion of Honour. Coming out of the church, the writer Maurice Barrès, who had never taken Proust quite seriously, said: "So that's the end of our young man." In the crowd, unnoticed by Proust's friends, stood James Joyce, who had come to salute him.

Proust was buried in the family grave at Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris, with his father and mother. His black marble tomb is visited every day by readers from all over the world.

Proust died with three parts of the novel still unpublished. They were printed from his manuscripts and typed copies in the following years: La Prisonnière (The Captive) in 1923, Albertine disparue (The Fugitive) in 1925, and Le Temps retrouvé (Time Regained) in 1927.

Proust himself had prepared this ending. In February 1922 he had hired a young typist, Yvonne Albaret, a niece of Odilon, to type the last part of the novel, and in 1922 he had chosen himself to cut it into two volumes called La Prisonnière and La Fugitive. Because he died in the middle of this work, the text of these volumes still gives problems to scholars. In 1986 a typed copy of Albertine disparue corrected by Proust was found; it is less than half the length of the text printed in 1925. This is why modern editions of this volume differ, and why it goes under two different titles.

In January 1923 the NRF magazine published a special number in his honor. Writers from many countries took part, among them Ernst Robert Curtius from Germany and José Ortega y Gasset from Spain. In England, a book of tributes appeared the same year, with texts by Joseph Conrad and Arnold Bennett.

Within a few years, Proust had become an internationally recognized writer, and his novel was becoming a modern classic.

In this section, the word "narrator" means the person who tells the story inside the novel. The narrator says "I". He is close to Proust, but he is not exactly Proust.

À la recherche du temps perdu is not a series of separate books. Proust always thought of it as one single novel, built like a cathedral, where the last stone answers the first; he said the cuts between volumes existed only because so long a book could not be printed as one. The final shape of seven parts also grew with time: the war stopped publication for years, the text kept growing, and the last three parts appeared only after his death.

In Terence Kilmartin's English edition it runs to about 3,300 pages. It has hundreds of characters. A special guidebook, with four indexes of its characters, real people, places, and themes, was made just to help readers find their way in it.

The dates and English titles follow the standard English edition. The last three parts came out after Proust's death.

The novel is the life story of the narrator, told by himself. It begins with one of the most famous first sentences in French literature: « Longtemps, je me suis couché de bonne heure. » ("For a long time I used to go to bed early.")

As a child in Combray, he waits every night for his mother's goodnight kiss. He walks with his family along two paths: "Swann's way", past the house of their friend Charles Swann, and the "Guermantes way", toward the castle of the noble Guermantes family.

A long middle section, "Un amour de Swann" ("Swann in Love"), goes back in time. It tells how the fine, clever Swann fell in love with Odette, a courtesan (a woman paid to be the companion of rich men), and how jealousy poisoned him.

The narrator grows up. He loves Swann's daughter Gilberte, then loses interest. At the seaside town of Balbec he meets a group of young girls, among them Albertine. In Paris he enters the glittering world of the Guermantes and watches the strange Baron de Charlus.

He takes Albertine to live with him in Paris, watching her like a prisoner because he is jealous. She runs away. She dies in a riding accident. Slowly he forgets her, and this forgetting hurts almost more than the loss.

Years pass, and the war passes. At a last great party, the narrator sees all the people of his life grown old, like actors wearing white wigs. Then several small accidents of memory, one after another, bring his whole past back to him. He understands at last what his life was for: to write the book of it. Many readers understand that planned book as the very novel they have just read, though critics do not all agree.

The story is told in the first person: the narrator always says "I". He has no clear family name. Only once or twice does the text suggest that his first name might be Marcel.

He is very close to Proust: same childhood places, similar poor health, same world. But he is not Proust. Proust himself warned readers, in his 1913 interview, that the "I" of the book was not him. For example, the narrator is not Jewish, while Proust's mother came from a Jewish family. The narrator also presents himself as attracted to women, while Proust himself had relationships with men; though many critics find the novel's treatment of desire more complex than this simple contrast. The critic Leo Bersani gave a whole chapter to this puzzle of "Marcel the character and Proust the author": the narrator, he shows, is not a portrait of the author but the author's experiment, a self freed from facts so that it can find laws.

Céleste Albaret laughed at readers who took the novel as a simple diary of Proust's life. That, she said, was to forget how much imagination he had.

The novel has hundreds of characters. Here are the most important ones.

Charles Swann is a rich, elegant friend of the family, a lover of art. His unhappy love for Odette opens the way for all the loves of the book. Odette becomes his wife; their daughter is Gilberte, the narrator's first love.

The narrator's mother and grandmother are the two great loving figures of his life. The slow death of the grandmother, and the pain that returns long after it, fill some of the deepest pages of the novel.

Françoise is the family's servant: hard-working, proud, full of old country wisdom and old country cruelty. Many readers find her one of the funniest characters in the book.

The Baron de Charlus is a proud nobleman of the Guermantes family, brilliant, insulting, and secretly homosexual. His rise and fall run through the whole second half of the novel.

Oriane, Duchess of Guermantes, is the queen of Paris society, famous for her wit. The narrator worships her from afar before he sees the emptiness behind the shine.

Albertine is the girl of Balbec whom the narrator loves, keeps, loses, and mourns.

Three invented artists appear through the book: Bergotte the writer, Elstir the painter, and Vinteuil the composer. A short melody by Vinteuil, the "little phrase", becomes the secret music of Swann's love and of the whole novel.

The Verdurins are a rich couple who run a "little clan" of guests. Madame Verdurin, half comic and half frightening, climbs through the whole book, from her small salon to the very top of society.

Readers in Proust's own time loved to hunt for the "keys" of the book, the real people behind the characters. Proust always answered that a character is made from many models, not one.

Still, some models are clear. Illiers and Auteuil, mixed together, made Combray. Cabourg and its Grand Hôtel made Balbec. The proud Count Robert de Montesquiou gave much of himself to the Baron de Charlus; to protect himself, Proust pretended in public that the model was another man, the Baron Doazan.

The Duchess Oriane de Guermantes mixes three real women: the bird-like profile of the Countess de Chevigné, the bearing and the famous eyes of the Countess Greffulhe, and the sharp wit of Madame Straus. The Countess Greffulhe gave even more of herself to the Princess de Guermantes, and her husband, Count Greffulhe, a rich and terrible man nicknamed "thundering Jupiter", gave much to the Duke.

Laure Hayman, a famous beauty whom young Proust had courted, lent much to Odette, above all to the "lady in pink" of the narrator's childhood. Madame Verdurin, the terrible hostess, was built from several real hostesses of Proust's youth, among them Madeleine Lemaire and Madame Arman de Caillavet. The old Anatole France lent many traits to the writer Bergotte. The old diplomat Norpois owes much to Camille Barrère, a French ambassador who was a friend of Proust's father. Proust himself said that Vinteuil's "little phrase" began with a passage from a violin sonata by Saint-Saëns, mixed with other music he loved. Alfred Agostinelli was one of the main sources of Albertine. And Céleste Albaret, with two other servants, gave life to Françoise.

The most famous pages of the novel tell a very small event. The adult narrator, tired and sad, drinks a spoonful of tea in which he has softened a piece of madeleine, a little shell-shaped cake. Suddenly a strange joy fills him. He searches inside himself. And all at once his whole childhood in Combray rises out of the cup: the house, the garden, the town, the people.

Proust explained the idea himself when the book came out. Voluntary memory, the memory we call up on purpose, gives us only dry facts about the past. But a taste or a smell, met again by chance, can bring back a whole piece of lost time, alive and complete. He called such memories involuntary, because we cannot call them up at will; they come to us.

In the early draft of 1908–1909, it is not a madeleine but a piece of toast dipped in tea, brought by a cook on a cold day, that plays this part. In the finished novel the humble toast became the more poetic madeleine.

The novel is full of such moments: a napkin, a spoon striking a plate, the uneven paving stones of a courtyard that suddenly give back Venice. Roger Shattuck, in his guide to the novel, even drew up a full table of these "moments bienheureux" ("blessed moments"), from the madeleine to the final chain of memories, to show how carefully they are placed across the seven parts. The critic Jean-Pierre Richard noticed a telling detail: the madeleine only works once it is broken and half melted in the tea. The past hides in matter, and matter must open for the past to come out. The flash alone does not make the book: the narrator must still search his joy, understand it, and turn it into sentences through long work. Critics like Leo Bersani have stressed this second step.

Time is the deepest subject of the novel: it is in the title, in the first sentence, and in the last word of the book, which is « Temps » ("Time").

Time destroys. It changes faces, kills loves, empties salons. At the final party the narrator sees his old friends as if disguised as old people, and at first does not recognize them.

But time can also be found again. Involuntary memory joins a moment of the past to a moment of the present. For a second, the narrator stands outside time. Art can fix this miracle on paper. That is why the last part is called Time Regained. Michael Wood measures the size of this circle: near the end, the narrator returns to the evening of the goodnight kiss, now some 3,000 pages away, in the French text, from its first telling.

The critic Antoine Compagnon pointed to another idea, even deeper for Proust: the "intermittences of the heart". Our feelings do not flow smoothly; they stop and start. The narrator only truly feels his grandmother's death a year later, when he bends down to take off his boots in the hotel where she once helped him. For a while Proust even wanted to call the whole novel The Intermittences of the Heart.

For Proust, art is the most serious thing in the world. The scholar Richard Bales writes that probably no other great novel gives the arts so central a place. Life passes and lies to us. Only art can catch the truth of a moment and keep it.

Near the end of the novel the narrator says that real life, life at last discovered and made clear, is literature. Every reader of Proust, he adds, reads first of all inside himself. Reading is itself one of the novel's great subjects: Adam Watt has shown how the boy's readings in the garden of Combray, down to the old novel his grandmother gives him, already carry the whole program of the book.

The three invented artists of the book show three arts: Bergotte for writing, Elstir for painting, Vinteuil for music. Their works teach the narrator, step by step, what he must do. For Leo Bersani, this is the real point of involuntary memory: the blessed moments matter less for the past they return than for the lesson they give about what a work of art must be. Bergotte's death in front of Vermeer's little patch of yellow wall says it plainly: his own books fall short of the perfection he sees in the painting.

Love, in Proust, is not a happy meeting of two people. It is something that happens inside one person's head. We do not love the real other; we love a picture we have made of them.

That is why jealousy matters so much. The jealous lover, Swann with Odette, the narrator with Albertine, wants to know everything, and can never know everything. The other person always keeps a hidden life. Jealousy is painful, but for Proust it is also the moment when the jealous lover thinks and searches hardest. Leo Bersani devoted a chapter to this "anguish and inspiration of jealousy": in Proust, he argues, the tortured questions of the jealous lover are the training school of the future novelist, who will spend his life imagining the hidden lives of others.

The novel also says something sadder: we are cured of love by forgetting, and forgetting is a small death of the self who loved.

Half of the novel is a huge, funny, cruel picture of Paris society between about 1880 and 1920, the world of the Belle Époque and after.

Proust paints the small clan of the Verdurins, who pretend to find the great nobles "boring". He paints the noble Guermantes, whose politeness is a fine art and whose hearts are often dry. He shows how the Dreyfus affair, and then the war, break and remake this world. At the end, Madame Verdurin has become Princess of Guermantes: society has changed from top to bottom.

A snob is a person who values people only by their rank. Proust was called a snob all his life. In the novel he studies snobbery in great detail, showing its every move from the inside.

Proust gave male and female homosexuality an unusually large place in a major novel of his time. The volume Sodome et Gomorrhe (1921–1922) takes its title from two cities of the Bible and treats the subject on a grand scale.

The Baron de Charlus is the center of this theme: a great nobleman whose desires must stay secret, and whose pride, jealousy, and social position slowly break down. Proust shows the fear, the codes, and the secret society of men like Charlus with a mix of comedy and deep pity. His picture belongs to its own time: it joins sympathy and humor to medical ideas of the 1900s, and readers still discuss it today.

Proust himself had relationships with men, and did not hide it from close friends such as André Gide. The narrator, in contrast, usually presents himself as attracted to women and observes this world from outside, though his relation to it is more complex than it first appears. Gide thought this reserve was a lack of courage, and the two writers argued about it in Proust's smoky bedroom.

Proust's sentences are famous for their length. Some run for half a page or more. They open, turn, add a thought inside a thought, and close far from where they began.

This is not carelessness. A Proust sentence follows the real movement of a mind: a feeling, then a doubt about the feeling, then a memory that the doubt wakes up. Readers who accept its slow rhythm often compare it to music.

Not everyone accepted it at first. In 1914 the critic Henri Ghéon compared Proust's sentence to a huge fishing net, endlessly long, that drags the bottom of the sea and brings up everything at once. He meant it as blame. Today it reads almost as praise.

A metaphor is a picture in words: saying one thing through another. For Proust, metaphor was the heart of style, because it does what involuntary memory does: it joins two different things and strikes a truth from them.

In his pages, church towers become flowers, then golden pivots, then shy girls. A steeple looks like a golden cake. The sea and the land trade their colors. Jean-Pierre Richard showed that a Proust metaphor is rarely a single flash; it unfolds step by step, like a walk through a landscape of images. Roger Shattuck went one step further and made the double image the key to the whole book. Like our two eyes, which see one thing from two slightly different places, Proust always shows a person or a feeling twice, at two moments of time, and truth appears in the space between the two pictures. Shattuck called this "Proust's binoculars".

Richard's whole book, Proust et le monde sensible ("Proust and the World of the Senses"), maps the novel through the body: tastes, smells, textures, light.

He shows a writer in love with matter: soft things and hard things, velvet and silk, foam of the sea, melting ices, the smell of a closed room that suddenly makes the narrator deeply happy. In Proust, thinking always begins in the body. The famous madeleine is only the best-known example of this.

People who have not read Proust often expect only sadness and long sentences. In fact the novel is very funny.

Françoise's kitchen speeches, the village priest's endless talk about his church, the fake modesty of Legrandin, the wars of the Verdurin salon: these are famous comic scenes. Proust also kept his gift for pastiche. Inside the novel he placed a long fake page of the Goncourt brothers' diary, so perfect that it fools the narrator himself.

For his first forty years, literary Paris saw Proust as a society amateur: a rich, sick young man who wrote pretty pages between two parties. The luxury edition of Pleasures and Days, with its famous preface, only fixed this picture.

Swann's Way surprised everyone. Some early readers, in France and even in England, felt at once that something new had arrived; the Times Literary Supplement noticed the book already in December 1913. Others, like Ghéon, saw only endless sentences about nothing.

The Goncourt Prize of 1919 turned Proust into a public question. The left-wing press attacked the choice; the NRF and Jacques Rivière defended it. As new volumes appeared, more critics began to praise his work. In May 1921 André Gide himself, in the NRF, wrote at length in his praise.

His death in November 1922 was front-page news even in London. The tributes of 1923, in France, Germany, Spain, and England, placed him among the greatest. Early studies by other important writers helped to fix his place: Walter Benjamin wrote a famous essay on him in 1929, and the young Samuel Beckett a small book, Proust, in 1931. Since then, each generation has found new things in him: philosophers, psychologists, historians of society, and simple lovers of stories. At the start of the 21st century, a scholar could write that his fame was still growing.

The critic Antoine Compagnon described Proust with a striking formula: the last writer of the 19th century and the first writer of the 20th.

When the novel appeared after the war, it looked to many like a monument from a lost world, strangely landed in the modern 1920s. Its salons, its duchesses, its slow time belonged to before 1914.

But its way of writing belonged to the future. Its broken time, its many selves inside one person, its trust in the hidden part of the mind, all this opened the door of the modern novel. Proust read the old masters deeply: Racine's tragedies and the poems of Charles Baudelaire live everywhere in his pages. He did not run forward with the most modern artists of his day, and he did not stay behind. Compagnon says he crossed the doorway of the new century walking backward, eyes fixed on the past.

Almost everything we know about Proust's daily habits comes from the memories of Céleste Albaret, written down fifty years later. They are the memories of one devoted witness, not an official record; but they let us follow one of his strange days, hour by hour.

He wakes in the late afternoon. First, always, the fumigation: he burns a special anti-asthma powder in a saucer, and the room fills with thick, bitter smoke.

Then he rings twice. Céleste brings the silver tray: coffee and one croissant. The coffee must be one exact brand, bought in one exact shop, and made drop by drop over a slow flame. Often this coffee is his only food of the day.

Piles of fine handkerchiefs wait by the bed, used once and dropped. Woolen jumpers hang on a chair, to be pulled on when the fire dies. Nothing may smell of anything.

Then work begins. Proust writes in bed, propped on pillows, the notebook against his raised knees. Around him lie the tools of the book: old notebooks, new notebooks, notebooks of notes, and loose slips of paper covered with sudden ideas, later called his "paperoles".

Some evenings he dresses, wraps himself in his fur coat, and goes out to a salon or to the Ritz, where he leaves enormous tips. He comes home at two or three in the morning. Then the best hours begin: he calls Céleste, and while Paris sleeps, he talks. He replays the whole evening for her, imitating every guest, sometimes until dawn.

Then Céleste goes to bed, and he goes on writing, alone, into the day.

The Scottish translator C. K. Scott Moncrieff began putting the novel into English in Proust's own lifetime. His version of Swann's Way appeared in September 1922, only weeks before Proust died. Scott Moncrieff gave the whole work an English title taken from a line of Shakespeare: Remembrance of Things Past. Proust lived just long enough to react: in October 1922 he wrote to thank his translator, but he was unhappy with this general title, because the "lost time" of the French title, found again at the very end of the book, had disappeared from it.

Scott Moncrieff died in 1930 before finishing the last part. In the early 1980s Terence Kilmartin revised the whole translation, using the corrected French text. Later editions use the more exact title In Search of Lost Time. In 2002 a completely new English version appeared, made by a team with a different translator for each volume. Through these translations, Proust became a central author for readers of English, praised early on by writers such as Joseph Conrad and Arnold Bennett.

In Illiers-Combray, the house of "Aunt Léonie" where the child Marcel spent his Easters is now a Marcel Proust museum. The town added "Combray" to its name in 1971, to mark the hundredth anniversary of his birth.

In Paris, the Carnavalet museum shows his last bedroom: the small brass bed, darkened by years of fumigations, in which he revised and completed the later parts of his novel, and in which he died. His grave is at Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

Proust gave the French language an everyday expression. A "madeleine de Proust" now means any taste, smell, or small object that suddenly brings back one's past.

Artists of many kinds have tried to bring the novel to the screen and the stage. The British playwright Harold Pinter wrote a complete film script of the whole novel in 1972, The Proust Screenplay; the film was never made, but the screenplay was adapted for the London stage in 2000. Volker Schlöndorff filmed Swann in Love in 1984, Raoul Ruiz Time Regained in 1999, and Chantal Akerman La Captive in 2000, each taking one part of the novel. Since 1998 the French artist Stéphane Heuet has been retelling In Search of Lost Time as a series of comic-book albums.

As a teenager and again as a young man, Proust filled in printed question albums, a game much loved in the salons of the time, with questions such as "What is your idea of happiness?". The oldest known album, a small book called Mes confidences ("My confessions"), is dated 25 June 1887, a few days before his sixteenth birthday; it stayed unknown for more than a century, and Jean-Yves Tadié has given it a whole study. The answers of a second album, filled in when he was about twenty-one, became famous later under the name "Proust Questionnaire". Magazines and television shows have used versions of it ever since to interview famous people.

Maximilian Carl Emil Weber (pronounced: maks ˈveːbɐ) (21 April 1864 – 14 June 1920) was a German political economist and sociologist who was considered one of the founders of the modern study of sociology and public administration.

He began his career at the University of Berlin, and later worked at Freiburg University, University of Heidelberg, University of Vienna and University of Munich. He had influence on German politics of his time, because he was an advisor to Germany's  at the Treaty of Versailles and to the commission that drafted the Weimar Constitution.

Weber is known for his work in the sociology of religion. His most famous work is his essay The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.

He disagreed with Karl Marx's view that class structure was the way to view how society worked. He believed that human values affected how people acted throughout history.

Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein ( in German) (April 26, 1889 – April 29, 1951) was an Austrian philosopher. He worked mainly in the basics of logic, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of mind, and the philosophy of language. He is regarded as one of the most important philosophers of the twentieth century.

Before his death at the age of 62, the only book Wittgenstein had published was the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. His second book Philosophical Investigations was published shortly after he died. Both of these works are regarded as very important for analytic philosophy.

Ludwig Wittgenstein was born in Vienna on 26 April 1889, to Karl and Leopoldine Wittgenstein. He was the youngest of eight children and was born into one of the most prominent and wealthy families in the Austro-Hungarian empire. His father's parents, Hermann Christian and Fanny Wittgenstein, were born into Jewish families but later converted to Protestantism, and after they moved from Saxony to Vienna in the 1850s, were part of the Viennese Protestant professional classes. Ludwig's father became an industrialist and went on to make a fortune in iron and steel. Ludwig's mother Leopoldine, born Kalmus, was an aunt of the Nobel Prize laureate Friedrich von Hayek. Despite Karl's Protestantism, and the fact that Leopoldine's father was Jewish, the Wittgenstein children were baptized as Roman Catholics — the faith of their maternal grandmother — and Ludwig was given a Roman Catholic burial upon his death.

He began studying mechanical engineering. During his research he became interested in the foundations of mathematics, particularly after reading Bertrand Russell's Principles of Mathematics and Gottlob Frege's Grundgesetze. In 1911 Wittgenstein visited Frege and Russell and discussed philosophy with them at great length. He made a great impression on Russell and started to work on the foundations of logic and mathematical logic. Russell saw Wittgenstein as a successor who would carry on his work.

During the First World War, Wittgenstein served in the army and developed his logic. He included ethical aspects. In the summer of 1918 he learned that his friend David Pinsent had been killed in an airplane accident. Wittgenstein became depressed and thought of suicide. He went to stay with his uncle Paul where he was able to complete the Tractatus. No publisher accepted it, but Russell realised it was a philosophically important work and wrote an introduction. Wittgenstein did not like it because he thought that Russell had not understood the book.  Wilhelm Ostwald's journal Annalen der Naturphilosophie printed a German edition in 1921, and Routledge's Kegan Paul printed a bilingual edition with Russell's introduction in 1922.

Since Wittgenstein thought that the Tractatus had solved all the problems of philosophy, he left philosophy and returned to Austria to train as a primary school teacher. Wittgenstein had unrealistic expectations of the rural children he taught, and had little patience with those children who had no gift for mathematics. But he had good results with children that were interested, especially boys. His severe disciplinary methods led to disagreement with some of his students' parents, and eventually he resigned his position and returned to Vienna, feeling that he had failed as a school teacher.

After abandoning his work as a school teacher, Wittgenstein worked as a gardener's assistant in a monastery near Vienna and then he worked with the architect, Paul Engelmann. This intellectual work did much to restore Wittgenstein's spirits. Between 1925 and 1928, he joined his sister Margaret in Vienna, where she was having a house built. Wittgenstein and the architect Paul Engelmann built it together, and though they never lived in it, 'Haus Wittgenstein' is still standing in Vienna today. Toward the end of this work, Wittgenstein was contacted by Moritz Schlick, one of the leading figures of the newly formed Vienna Circle. This contact stimulated Wittgenstein intellectually and revived his interest in philosophy.

In 1929 he decided to return to Cambridge. He was met at the railway station by a crowd of England's greatest intellectuals. He found out to his horror that he was one of the most famous philosophers in the world now. In 1939 Wittgenstein was appointed to the chair in Philosophy at Cambridge.

During World War II he left Cambridge and volunteered as a hospital porter in Guy's Hospital in London and as a laboratory assistant in Newcastle upon Tyne's Royal Victoria Infirmary.

Wittgenstein resigned his position at Cambridge in 1947 to concentrate on his writing. When in 1949, he found out that he had prostate cancer, he had written most of the material that would be published after his death as Philosophische Untersuchungen (Philosophical Investigations), which might be his most important work. He died of prostate cancer in Cambridge.

The Milky Way is our home galaxy. It contains around 400 billion stars, including our Sun.

The Milky Way has a diameter of  as measured using the D25isophote, and is a barred spiral galaxy. The idea that the Milky Way is made of stars goes back to the Ancient Greek philosopher Democritus.

The Milky Way has three main parts: a disk, where the Solar System is, a bulge at the core, and an outer halo all around it. Although the word "disk" suggests it is flat, the Milky Way is actually not quite flat. It is slightly warped and twisted.

This galaxy belongs to the Local Group of three large galaxies and over 50 smaller galaxies. The Milky Way is one of the largest galaxies in the group, second to the Andromeda Galaxy. Its closest neighbour is the Canis Major Dwarf Galaxy, which is about 25,000 light years away from the Earth. The Andromeda Galaxy is moving towards the Milky Way Galaxy and will collide with it in about 3.75 billion years. The Andromeda Galaxy moves with a speed of about 1,800 kilometres per minute.

Origin: "Two of the Milky Way's earliest building blocks" are known; Shakti and Shiva seem "to be (left-overs or) remnants of two galaxies that (were joined or) merged ... with an early version of the Milky Way"; That seems to have happened "between 12 and 13 billion years ago";.

The stellar disk of the Milky Way Galaxy is about 200,000 light-years (9×1017 km) in diameter, and is considered to be, on average, about 1000 light years thick.

It is estimated to contain at least 100 billion stars, and possibly up to 400 billion stars. The figure depends on the number of very low-mass, or dwarf stars, which are hard to detect, especially more than 300 light years from our sun. Therefore, present estimates of the total number are uncertain. This can be compared to the one trillion (1012) stars of the neighbouring Andromeda Galaxy.

The stellar disc of the Milky Way does not have a sharp edge, a radius beyond which there are no stars. Rather, the number of stars drops smoothly with distance from the centre of the Galaxy. Beyond a radius of about 40,000 light years, the number of stars drops much faster, for reasons that are not understood.

Extending beyond the stellar disk is a much thicker disk of gas. Observations indicate that the gaseous disk of the Milky Way has a thickness of around 12000 light years–twice the previously accepted value.

At 220 kilometers per second it takes the Solar System about 240 million years to complete one orbit of the Galaxy (a galactic year).

The Galactic halo extends outward but is limited in size by the orbits of two Milky Way satellites, the Large and the Small Magellanic Clouds, whose closest approach is at about 180,000 light years. At this distance or beyond, the orbits of most halo objects would be disrupted by the Magellanic Clouds, and the objects would likely be ejected from the vicinity of the Milky Way.

As a guide to the relative physical scale of the Milky Way, if the Solar System out to the orbit of Pluto were reduced to the size of a US quarter (about an inch or 25 mm in diameter), the Milky Way would have a diameter of 2,000 kilometers.

The galactic disc, which bulges outward at the galactic center, has a diameter of 170–200,000 light years.

The exact distance from the Sun to the galactic center is debated. The latest estimates give distances to the Galactic center of 25–28,000 light years.

The movement of material around the galactic center shows that it has a compact object of very large mass. The intense radio source named Sagittarius A*, thought to mark the center of the Milky Way, is now confirmed to be a supermassive black hole. Most galaxies are believed to have a supermassive black hole at their center.

Most galaxies have a central bar-shaped structure composed of stars. The nature of the Milky Way's bar is actively debated, with estimates for its half-length and orientation spanning from 3,300 to 16,000 light years (short or a long bar) and 10–50 degrees. Viewed from the Andromeda Galaxy, it would be the brightest feature of our own galaxy.

In Greek mythology, Zeus places his son (the baby Heracles) whose mother was a  woman on Hera's breast while she is sleeping so that the baby will drink her divine milk and become immortal. However, Hera wakes up while she is breastfeeding the baby and realizes she is nursing a baby she does not know. According to Greek mythology, she then pushes the baby away and a stream of her milk sprays the night sky, making a  band of light known as the Milky Way.

Metabolism is the chemical reactions which keep us alive. It happens in the cells of living organisms.

The chemical reactions are catalyzed by enzymes. Metabolism allows organisms to grow, reproduce, maintain their structures, and respond to their environments. The word ‘metabolism’ can also refer to digestion and the transport of substances into and between different cells.

The chemical reactions of metabolism are organized into metabolic pathways, or cycles, like the Krebs cycle. One chemical is transformed through a series of steps into another chemical by a series of enzymes.

The metabolic system of an organism decides which substances it finds nutritious and which poisonous. For example, some prokaryotes use hydrogen sulfide as a nutrient, yet this gas is poisonous to animals. The speed of metabolism, called the metabolic rate, influences how much food an organism will need, and how it is able to get that food.

A striking feature of metabolism is the similarity of the basic metabolic pathways and components between even vastly different species. For example, the set of carboxylic acids that are best known as the intermediates in the citric acid cycle are present in all known organisms, being found in species as diverse as the unicellular bacterium Escherichia coli and huge multicellular organisms like elephants. These striking similarities in metabolic pathways are likely due to their early appearance in the evolution of life, and kept because of their efficiency.

The metre (British spelling) or meter (American spelling) (symbol: m) is the basic unit of length in the SI measurement system. The symbol for the metre is m. The first meaning (in the French Revolution) was one ten-millionth of the distance between the Earth's equator and the North Pole along the Paris meridian. The metre is now defined as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second.

In the imperial system of measurement, one yard is 0.9144 metres (after international agreement in 1959), so a metre is very near to 39.37 inches: about 3.281 feet, or 1.0936 yards.

A molecule is the smallest amount of a chemical substance that can exist. If a molecule were split into smaller pieces, it would be a different substance.

Molecules are made up of atoms that are stuck together in a particular shape or form.  Not all combinations of atoms are equally possible; atoms make certain shapes in preference to others.  Also, they have different valency.   For example, oxygen atoms always have two bonds with other atoms, carbon atoms always have four bonds with other atoms, and nitrogen atoms always have three bonds with other atoms.

In the kinetic theory of gases, the term molecule is often used for any gaseous particle regardless of its composition. According to this definition, noble gas atoms are considered molecules as they are in fact monoatomic molecules.

In gases like air, the molecules are just flying around. In liquids like water, the molecules are stuck together but they can still move. In solids like sugar, the molecules can only vibrate.  In the fourth state of matter known as plasma, the atoms are ionized and cannot form molecules.

With a molecular formula, you can write down the numbers of all atoms in a molecule. For example, the molecular formula of glucose is C6H12O6. That means that one molecule of glucose is made up of six carbon atoms, twelve hydrogen atoms and six oxygen atoms.

For a molecule to exist, atoms have to stick together. This happens when two atoms share electrons. Instead of circling just one atom, the electron now circles around two. This is called a covalent bond.  Sometimes, more than one electron is shared. The more electrons are shared, the stronger the bond gets and the stronger the atoms stick together.

Bonds can also be broken apart. Since most bonds require energy to form, they also give off energy when they are broken. But before most bonds break, the molecule has to be heated. Then the atoms start to move, and when they move too much, the bond breaks. Molecules that require less energy to break than they give off when broken are called fuels. For example, a candle will just sit there and nothing happens. But when you use a match to light it, it will burn for a long time. The match brings the energy to break the first bonds, which release enough energy to break the bonds below them, until the candle has burned down. There are also ionic bonds.

The words nature and natural are used for all the things that are normally not made by humans. The word comes from the Latin natura meaning "birth". Nature includes many things like weather, organisms, landforms, celestial bodies. Scientists study the way the parts of nature work. Things that have been made by people are said to be man-made or called artifacts.

There are natural sciences that study different parts of nature, for example the science of ecology is about plants and animals as a whole, while biology studies every type of living thing.

From one point of view, humans are a prime example of nature, and are the most widely studied natural inhabitants of the planet earth. Humans interact with each other in their natural environment on a day-to-day basis. Every part of nature  everything from the air outside to the dirt on the ground  is interdependent. Medicine studies humans in health and sickness.

From another point of view, humans and nature can be said to be in conflict. People always use natural resources. They cut down trees, mine ores, grow crops and manufacture things from natural material. Fires, cars, and factories make a lot of smoke and harm many places. People who like to leave nature unharmed and those who feel they need to use more of nature often fight about what they should do. In the modern world, with many more people and many big cities, these problems are becoming more serious.

Nature, in the broadest sense, means the physical world as a whole. This is the meaning that physics, the study of nature (etymologically), takes.

Mexico, officially the United Mexican States, is a country in North America. It borders the United States to the north, and Guatemala and Belize to the southeast; while having maritime boundaries with the Pacific Ocean to the west, the Caribbean Sea to the southeast, and the Gulf of Mexico to the east.

Mexico is the thirteenth-largest country in the world by land area. With a population exceeding 130 million, Mexico is the tenth-most populous country in the world. Mexico City is the capital and largest city, which ranks among the most populous metropolitan areas in the world.

Before the Europeans came, many Native American cultures existed in Mexico. The earliest was the Olmec culture in the south. The Olmecs are famous for the large stone heads they made. On the Yucatán Peninsula lived the Mayans. The Mayans lived in city states ruled by kings. The Mayans were most powerful between 200 and 900 A.D. Another powerful empire belonged to Teotihuacan. Teotihuacan was a very large city, one of the largest at that time. After Teotihuacan declined the Toltecs became powerful. Things made by the Toltecs have been found from the southern parts of the U.S. all the way to Costa Rica. A famous Toltec god is Quetzalcoatl. The Toltec culture declined too, and it was succeeded by the Aztecs. The Aztecs called their own empire Mexico. A famous Aztec king was Moctezuma II.

In 1519 the Spanish explorer Hernán Cortés came to Mexico. The Aztecs thought he was the returned Quetzalcoatl, so they did not want to fight against him. Cortes allied himself with the enemies of the Aztecs. In 1521 they conquered the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan. The Aztec Empire became part of Spain. It was called New Spain.

In 1810 the Mexican priest Miguel Hidalgo started the Mexican war of independence. In 1821 the Spanish finally retreated and Mexico became independent. The first leader of independent Mexico was Agustin de Iturbide. He set up the First Mexican Empire and became emperor. But the Mexicans were not happy with him, and in 1823 the country became a republic.

A man who was very important in Mexico in the early 19th century was Antonio López de Santa Anna. He was the president of Mexico 11 times. When he became a dictator, Texas declared independence (1836). The Battle of the Alamo was part of this Texas Revolution. Between 1846 and 1848 there was war between Mexico and the United States. In this war Mexico lost its large northern areas, which became the southwestern United States. After this war Santa Anna was sent away to Venezuela.

Between 1858 and 1861 there was war again, between liberals and conservatives. The liberal Benito Juárez won the war and became president afterwards. Juarez stayed president until France invaded Mexico and made Maximilian of Habsburg emperor of the Second Mexican Empire. But Maximilian was very unpopular. After more war he was executed in 1867, and Juarez became president again.

Conservatives thought Juarez had too much power. In 1876 they ousted him, and made Porfirio Díaz, a general who had won a battle against the French, president. Porfirio Díaz made the country wealthier, but the poor people became poorer. Franciso I. Madero started the Mexican Revolution in 1910.

The next 10 years the country was in chaos. There were many presidents who ruled for a short time and all kinds of people fought against each other. Famous people from this period are Emiliano Zapata, Pancho Villa and Francisco I. Madero. When Álvaro Obregón became president in 1920 the fighting calmed down.

In 1929 President Plutarco Elías Calles founded the National Mexican Party, PNM. The party was later renamed Institutional Revolutionary Party, PRI. The party would rule for a very long time. Most PRI presidents were not popular, it was said that they were only president to become richer themselves. An exception was president Lázaro Cárdenas. He was president between 1934 and 1940.

After several decades more and more people became unhappy with the PRI. In 1968 security forces shot at protesters, this caused several hundred deaths and became known as the Tlatelolco massacre. Another uprising was in 1994 when Zapatistas rebelled in the province Chiapas.

Mainly through election fraud, the PRI managed to stay into power until 2000, when Vicente Fox of the National Action Party, PAN, was elected president. In total the PRI had governed Mexico for 71 years.

Mexico is a constitutional federal democracy ruled by a president. The president is elected every 6 years. The current president is Claudia Sheinbaum. Parliament has a Senate and House of Deputies.

Mexico is in the southern part of North America. It is roughly shaped like a triangle. Mexico is more than  long from northwest to southeast. Mexico is between two large seas: the Pacific Ocean in the West and the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea in the East. Mexico has two large peninsulas. Baja California in the northwest, and Yucatán in the southeast. In central and western Mexico are the Sierra Madre mountains. In the Sierra Madre is the Pico de Orizaba, the highest mountain of Mexico. In central Mexico there are also a few volcanoes like the Popocatépetl and the Iztaccíhuatl. The Pico de Orizaba is also a volcano. In the north of Mexico are deserts. In the south are tropical rainforests. Some rivers in Mexico are the Río Bravo (known in the US as the Rio Grande), the Río Balsas, the Río Pánuco, and the Río Yaqui.

Mexico is the most populous Spanish-speaking country in the world. It is also the second most populous country in Latin America (after Brazil). 60% of Mexicans have Native American and Spanish forefathers (mostly Native American); these are called mestizos. Almost 30% of Mexicans are pure Native American and 10% are pure Spanish. Most Mexicans (90%) speak Spanish. 10% of the Mexicans speak a Native American language, like Nahuatl, the language of the Aztecs, Maya or Zapotec. Non-indigenous ethnic groups in Mexico speak another foreign language such as Arabic or Japanese.  Most people in Mexico are Catholic (89%) Christians and the vast majority of Mexicans are religious and strongly believe in the Catholic Christian faith.

Moscow ( , US chiefly  ; ) is the capital and most populous city of Russia. The city is on the Moskva River in Central Russia. It has a population of around 13 million people in the city limits, over 17 million people in the urban area, and over 20 million people in the metropolitan area. The city has an area of . Moscow's urban area has an area of ,. Its metropolitan area has an area of over . Moscow is one of the world's largest cities. It is the most populous city that is only in Europe, when Istanbul spans Europe and Asia. It is also the largest urban and metropolitan area in Europe and the largest city by land area on the European continent.

It was first wrote about in 1147. Moscow grew to become a powerful city that was the capital of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. Moscow stayed the political and economic center of the country when the Tsardom of Russia was made. When the Tsardom turned into the Russian Empire, the capital was moved from Moscow to Saint Petersburg which lowered the influence of the city. The capital was  moved back to Moscow after the October Revolution. This brought the city back as the political center of the Russian SFSR and then the Soviet Union. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Moscow stayed the capital city of the new Russian Federation.

Moscow is the northernmost and coldest megacity in the world. It has a history that goes through eight centuries. Moscow is a federal city of Russia since 1993 that is the political, economic, cultural, and scientific center of Russia and Eastern Europe. Moscow has one of the world's largest urban economies as an alpha world city. The city is one of the fastest-growing tourist destinations in the world, and it is one of Europe's most visited cities. Moscow is home to the seventh-highest number of billionaires of any city in the world.  The Moscow International Business Center is one of the largest financial centers in Europe and the world. Moscow has most of Europe's tallest skyscrapers. Moscow was the host city of the 1980 Summer Olympics, and one of the host cities of the 2018 FIFA World Cup.

Moscow is the home of many Russian artists, scientists, and sportspeople. The city also has  UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Moscow is well known for its Russian architecture. This includes its historic Red Square, and buildings such as the Saint Basil's Cathedral and the Moscow Kremlin. The Moscow Kremlin is the seat of power of the Government of Russia. Moscow is home to many Russian companies in different industries. It has a large transit network, which includes four international airports, ten railway terminals, a tram system, a monorail system, and the Moscow Metro. The Moscow Metro is the busiest metro system in Europe. It is one of the largest rapid transit systems in the world. The city has over 40 percent of its land covered by greenery. This makes it one of the greenest cities in Europe and the world.

A person from Moscow is called a "" (moskvich) for male or "ка" (moskvichka) for female. In English, people from Moscow are called Muscovites.

It is by the Moskva River in the Moscow Oblast, in the European part of Russia. Moscow sits on the center of three parts of Earth's crust. It was once the capital of the Soviet Union (1918-1991), Russian Empire, Tsardom of Russia and the Grand Duchy of Moscow (1480-1703). It is the place of the Moscow Kremlin, one of the World Heritage Sites in the city, which is the home of the President of Russia. The Russian parliament (the State Duma and the Federation Council of Russia (Federation Council) and the Government of Russia also are in Moscow.

The city has a humid continental climate. The winter (usually cold) is lasting from mid-November to the end of March. The average temperature in winter is about −10 °C (−14 °F). The summer is usually warm or even hot with  temperature ranging from 15 to 35 °C (50 to 95 °F) .

Moscow has a large economic infrastructure. It is home to the most billionaires in the world. In 2008 Moscow was named the world's most expensive city for non-Russian workers for the third year in a row. In 2009, however, Moscow went down to third after Tokyo and Osaka came in first and second.

The city is named after the river (old , which means "the city next to the Moskva River"). The beginning of the name is not known, but some people have a few ideas. One is that the name might be from a very old Finnic language, in which it means "dark" and "cloudy". In 12th century tribes of Vyatichi and Krivichs lived on that land. The first Russian reference to Moscow is from 1147 when Yuri Dolgoruki called upon the prince of Novgorod-Severski to "come to me, brother, to Moscow."

Nine years later, in 1156, Prince Yuri Dolgoruki ordered the building of a wooden wall, which had to be redone many times, to go around the growing city. After the attack of 1237–1238, when the Mongols burned the city to the ground and killed its people living there, Moscow grew back and became the capital of the Vladimir-Suzdal principality (an amount of land ruled by a prince) in 1327. Its good place on the start of the Volga River helped the city to grow slowly bigger and bigger. Moscow turned into a peaceful and rich principality, known as the Grand Duchy of Moscow, for many years and a large number of people from across Russia moved to live there.

Under Ivan I the city replaced Tver as a political center of Vladimir-Suzdal and became the only collector of taxes for the Mongol-Tatar rulers. By paying high taxes, Ivan worked out an important deal with the Khan. Unlike other principalities, Moscow was not divided among his sons but was passed whole to his oldest. However, Moscow did not like the Mongol rule. In 1380, prince Dmitry Donskoy of Moscow led a Russian army to an important victory over the Tatars in the Battle of Kulikovo. Only two years later Moscow was raided by the Khan Tokhtamysh. In 1480, Ivan III finally broke the Russians free from Tatar control, allowing Moscow to become the center of power in Russia. Under Ivan III the city became the capital of an empire that would eventually include all of  Russia and other countries.

In 1571, the Crimean Tatars raided Moscow, burning everything but the Kremlin.

In 1609 the Swedish army, led by Count Jacob De la Gardie and Evert Horn, marched from Veliky Novgorod toward Moscow to help Tsar Vasili Shuiski. They entered Moscow in 1610 and stopped the revolution against the Tsar, but left early in 1611. After that the Polish invaded. During the Polish–Muscovite War (1605–1618) hetman (army commander) Stanisław Żółkiewski entered Moscow after he defeated the Russians in the Battle of Klushino. The 17th century had lots of revolutions, such as the Salt Riot (1648), the Copper Riot (1662), and the Moscow Uprising of 1682.

The plague of 1654–1656 killed half the population of Moscow. The city stopped being Russia’s capital in 1712, after the building of Saint Petersburg by Peter the Great near the Baltic coast in 1703. The Plague of 1771 was the last big plague in central Russia, killing 100,000 people in Moscow alone. During the French invasion of Russia in 1812, the Muscovites burned the city and ran away, as Napoleon’s army was coming near to the city on 14 September. Napoleon’s army, which was very hungry and cold, had to leave and was nearly destroyed by the freezing Russian winter and some attacks by the army.

In January 1905, Alexander Adrianov became Moscow’s first mayor. After the Russian Revolution of 1917, on 12 March 1918 Moscow became the capital of the Soviet Union. During World War II (known in Russia as the Great Patriotic War), after the German invasion of the USSR, the Soviet State Defense Group and commanders of the Red Army were placed in Moscow.

In 1941, 16 groups of national volunteers (more than 160,000 people), twenty-five battalions (18,500 people) and four engineering regiments were created among the Muscovites. That November, the German Army was stopped at the edge of the city and then driven off in the Battle of Moscow. Many factories were moved away, and much of the government was too, and from 20 October the city was declared to be under siege. Its people who stayed built and used anti-tank defences, and the city was bombed from the air. Joseph Stalin (the leader of Russia) did not leave the city, so the general staff remained in the city as well. Even with a siege going on, the construction of the Moscow Metro system continued through the war, and by the end of the war a few new metro lines were open.

On 1 May 1944, a medal For the defence of Moscow and in 1947 another medal In memory of the 800th year of Moscow were given to Moscow. In commemoration of the 20th anniversary of the victory over Nazi Germany, on 8 May 1965, Moscow became one of twelve Soviet cities awarded the title of Hero City.

In 1980, Moscow hosted the Summer Olympic Games, which the United States and several other countries did not go to because of the Soviet Union's war in Afghanistan in the end of 1979. In 1991, Moscow was the scene of a failed overthrow attempt by government members opposed to Mikhail Gorbachev. When the USSR ended in the same year, Moscow continued to be the capital of Russia.

Since then, the beginning of a market economy in Moscow has caused an explosion of Western-style stores, services, architecture, and lifestyles. In 1998, it hosted the first World Youth Games.

Moscow metro is one of the largest and the beautiful ones in the World. It was opened for passengers in 1935.

The Moscow trolley system was the largest in the World before ending of 2010s. In 2020 it was closed.

Some chemical elements are called metals. Most elements in the periodic table are metals. These elements usually have the following traits:

Most metals are solid at room temperature, but this does not have to be the case. Mercury is liquid. Alloys are mixtures, where at least one part of the mixture is a metal. Examples of metals are aluminium, copper, iron, tin, gold, lead, silver, titanium, uranium, and zinc. Well-known alloys include bronze and steel.

Most metals are hard, shiny, they feel heavy and they melt only when they are heated at very high temperatures. Lumps of metal will make a bell-like sound when they are hit with something heavy (they are sonorous).

Heat and electricity can easily pass through a metal (it is conductive). A lump of metal can be forged into a thin sheet (it is malleable) or can be pulled into thin wires (it is ductile). Metal is hard to pull apart (it has a high tensile strength) or smash (it has a high compressive strength). If you push on a long, thin piece of metal, it will bend, not break (it is elastic). Except for cesium, copper, and gold, metals have a neutral, silvery color.

Not all metals have these properties. Mercury, for instance, is liquid at room temperature, lead is very soft, and heat and electricity do not pass through iron as well as they do through copper.

Metals are very useful to people. They are used to make tools because they can be strong and easy to shape. Iron and steel have been used to make bridges, buildings, or ships.

Some metals are used to make items like coins because they are hard and will not wear away quickly. For example, copper (which is shiny and red in color), aluminium (which is shiny and white), gold (which is yellow and shiny), and silver and nickel (also white and shiny).

Some metals, like steel, can be made sharp and stay sharp, so they can be used to make knives, axes or razors.

Rare metals with high value, like gold, silver and platinum are often used to make jewellery. Metals are also used to make fasteners and screws. Pots used for cooking can be made from copper, aluminium, steel or iron. Lead is very heavy and dense and can be used as ballast in boats to stop them from turning over, or to protect people from ionizing radiation. Some metals (like Sodium, Silver, etc.) are even used to make amalgams.

Many things that are made of metals may, in fact, be made of mixtures of at least one metal with either other metals, or with non-metals. These mixtures are called alloys. Some common alloys are:

People first began making things from metal over 9000 years ago, when they discovered how to get copper from its ore. They then learned how to make a harder alloy, bronze, by adding tin to the copper. About 3000 years ago, they discovered iron. By adding small amounts of carbon to iron, they found that they could make a particularly useful alloy – steel.

In metallic and physical chemistry, metal is a word for a group of chemical elements that have certain properties. It is easy for the atoms of a metal to lose an electron and become positive ions, or cations. In this way, metals are not like the other two kinds of elements - the nonmetals and the metalloids. Most elements on the periodic table are metals.

On the periodic table, we can draw a zigzag line from the element boron (symbol B) to the element polonium (symbol Po). The elements that this line passes through are the metalloids. The elements that are above and to the right of this line are the nonmetals. The rest of the elements are the metals.

Most of the properties of metals are due to the fact that the atoms in the metal do not hold onto their electrons very tightly. Each atom is separated from the others by a thin layer of valence electrons.

However, some metals are different. An example is the metal sodium. It is , melts at a low temperature, and is so light, it s on water. People should not try this though, because another property of sodium is that it explodes when it touches water.

Most metals are chemically stable, and do not react easily, but some do. The reactive ones are the alkali metals like sodium (symbol Na) and the alkaline earth metals like calcium (symbol Ca). When metals do react, they often react with oxygen. The oxides of metals are basic. The oxides of nonmetals are acidic.

Compounds, which have metal atoms combined with other atoms to make molecules, are probably the most common substances on Earth. For example, common salt is a compound of sodium.

The use of metals is said to be one of the things that makes people different from animals. Before they used metals, people made tools from stones, wood, and animal bones. This is now called the Stone Age.

No-one knows when the first metal was found and used. It was probably what is called native copper, which is sometimes found in large lumps on the ground. People learned to make this into copper tools and other things, although, for a metal, it is quite soft. They learned smelting to get copper from common ores. When copper was melted over fire, people learned how to make an alloy called bronze, which is much harder and  than copper. People made knives and weapons from bronze. This time in human history, after about 3300 BC is often called the Bronze Age, that is, the time of bronze tools and weapons.

Around the year 1200 BC some people learned to make iron tools and weapons. These were even harder and stronger than bronze and this was an advantage in war. The time of iron tools and weapons is now called the Iron Age

Metals have been very important in human history and civilization. Iron and steel were important in the making of machines. Gold and silver were used as money in order to allow people to trade, that is, exchange goods and services over long distances.

In astronomy, a metal is any element other than hydrogen or helium. This is because these two elements (and sometimes lithium) are the only ones that form outside stars. In the sky, a spectrometer can see the signs of metals and show the astronomer the metals in a star.

In humans, some metals are essential nutrients like iron, cobalt, and zinc. Some metals can be harmless such as ruthenium, silver, and indium. Some metals can be toxic in large amounts. Other metals such as cadmium, mercury, and lead, are very poisonous. Sources of metal poisoning include mining, tailings, industrial wastes, agricultural runoff, occupational exposure, paints and treated timber.

The Mississippi River is a river in the United States. It is the 11th longest river in the world. Its largest city is Memphis, Tennessee.

The name "Mississippi" comes from a Native American name that means "big river". The source of the Mississippi is Lake Itasca in Minnesota, near the border with Canada. The Mississippi flows south through the middle of the United States. It flows through the states of Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, Illinois, Missouri, Kentucky, Tennessee, Arkansas, and Mississippi. The mouth of the Mississippi is in the state of Louisiana, south of the city of New Orleans. The Mississippi flows into the Gulf of Mexico.

At the end of the Mississippi there is a  in the Gulf of Mexico where very few animals can survive comfortably because of the fertilizer and other chemicals that run off of farms into the river and its tributaries. The rivers then carry them into the gulf.

The Mississippi has been very important for transportation in the history of the United States. In the 1800s, many steamboats traveled on the Mississippi River. St. Louis, Missouri, Memphis, Tennessee, and New Orleans were important port cities.

The Mississippi has many large tributaries, or rivers that flow into it. The watershed of the Mississippi covers much of the United States. This means that the Mississippi and its tributaries drain much of the United States.

Some important tributaries of the Mississippi are (listed from the source to the mouth of the river):

The Mississippi River is the primary setting for the book Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain. Twain also wrote a book called Life on the Mississippi, which had some stories about how he used to work on a steamboat.

A myth is a story about the remote past which is considered true within the society in which it is told. Creation myths take place long ago, during the first existing period of time: the primordial age.

Legend refers to the collected myths of a group of peopletheir body of stories which they tell to explain nature, history, and customs. It can also refer to the study of such myths.

Myths are often associated with religion or spirituality and can be very important to those who believe in them.

Mythological characters are normally non-human; they can be gods, demigods, and other supernatural figures. Some myths are used to explain how a particular reality came into existence, how a society works, and why it is structured the way it is.

Myths are different from folktales and legends. The definitions of these are not agreed upon, but myths are generally understood to be true, about the remote past, and containing non-human characters. In contrast, legends usually feature human characters and folktales are understood as fiction.

The word myth is often used to mean false. For this reason, some religious people object to their beliefs being called myths and some scholars choose to avoid it in favour of other terms. Other scholars choose to call all religious stories myths in order to avoid treating one religion as more important or true than another.

All cultures have developed their own mythology over time. Mythology includes the legends of their history, their religions, their heroes, and their stories of how the world was created. These stories have a great symbolic power, and this may be a major reason why they survive as long as they do, sometimes for thousands of years.

The main characters in myths are usually gods, demigods, or supernatural humans, while legends generally feature humans as their main characters. Many exceptions or combinations exist, as in Turkic mythology such as Tengrism.

Myths are often endorsed by rulers and priests, and they can be closely linked to religion or spirituality. In fact, many societies group their myths, legends, and history together, considering myths to be true accounts of their remote past.

Often, myths explain how a society's customs, institutions and taboos were established and sanctified. Folktales are different: the people who tell them know they're fiction. As stories spread to other cultures or as faiths change, however, myths can come to be considered folktales. Sometimes myths and legends get merged. Their divine characters get recast as humans or as demihumans (such as giants, elves, and faeries).

Creation myths take place in some early primordial age when the world had not reached its present form.

Creation myths describe the "official" belief as to how world was created. These myths differ greatly between societies, as any collection of myths clearly shows. Over the last three centuries, the power of myths over the minds of people has been challenged by the growth of science.

Many historians think myths are about actual events that have become connected with strong symbolic meaning.

One way of thinking about this process is to imagine 'myths' as lying at the far end of an imaginary line. At one end of the line is 'dispassionate [unemotional] account', and 'legendary occurrence' or 'mythical status' is near the other end.

As an event progresses toward the 'mythical' end of this line or continuum, the way people think, feel and talk about the event changes. It may gain greater historical significance while the 'facts' become less important. By the time one arrives at the mythical end of the line, the story has "taken on a life of its own" and the facts of the original event have become almost unimportant.

Military forces (often called the military when specific to a certain group) are groups of people that are given power to defend a country or territory with weapons. They are armed, so they are called the armed forces. The military protects its country by defending it from the armed forces of enemies, if there is a war. The military can also be ordered by the government of the country to attack another country. The word "military" comes from Latin miles, warrior.

There are many jobs people do in a military. Some jobs are for fighting and some are for other work to support the military. Some things people do in the military include the use of weapons, driving and operating vehicles, and repairing weapons. Other people in the military learn how to fly specialized aircraft, be a pilot on ships, or repair machines. Or provide medical support. People in the military usually wear clothes called a uniform. In some places, especially where there may be combat, a uniform often has a camouflage pattern which is designed to make the person hard to see in the forest or desert.

There are two ways to join the military. In many countries, people join the military because they want to. In other countries, there are laws that say some people have to be in the military, even if they do not want to be. This is called the draft or conscription. It usually depends on age and physical fitness. Old military people or former military people are called "veterans". Some are members of a military reserve force.

The military of a country has different branches or organizations which do different kinds of work. Usually they include:

Some countries even have small units which perform special actions which are difficult. They are called special forces.

There are also mercenaries, soldiers who fight just for pay and have little loyalty to whomever might hire them, and private military contractors (PMC), which are under the command of a company (civilian company). The Medieval Italian condottieri were a historical example of PMCs. A warlord may have a private army, which are often no more trustworthy than common gangsters or criminals.

In many countries of the world, young men and (in a few countries) women between 17 and 18 and of good health may be forced by the government of their country to join the military and have military training. This is called "conscription". The countries that do not have conscription include Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, France, Hungary, India, Italy, Japan, Malta, New Zealand, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, and the United Kingdom. In some countries, such as Argentina and United States, conscription is legal but has not been used in decades.

When a person wants to join the military as a volunteer, they "enlist". (This means simply that they put their name on a list.) They have to be above a certain age, 17 or 18 in most countries. They have to pass physical fitness tests to show that they are well enough to do the jobs that they will have to do. They must also have good enough hearing, to hear orders, and good enough sight to use a rifle.

New people in the military are often called “recruits”. They have training at a special camp, sometimes called “boot camp" or "basic training". During this training, the recruits usually have very little free time. They learn to understand the "orders" or "commands" that are given by the officers to the "troops". (The troops are the military people in a group.) They learn the right ways to obey the orders. They do a lot of exercise to improve their fitness and strength. They learn about weapons, first aid, and their uniforms and "kit" (their equipment). Recruits also learn how to march. (This is the way to walk together, keeping "in step".) Learning to march is sometimes called “drill”. By the time soldiers finish "boot camp", they should know enough to be a helpful person in their group. The camp usually finishes with a parade in which the newly trained recruits show off their marching and other skills they have learned in front of important visitors. Once the recruits are fully trained, they are ready to defend (protect) their country from attack, or to go to war if necessary.

Mohandas Karmchand Gandhi (2 October 1869– 30 January 1948) was a leader of nationalism in British-ruled India. He is more commonly called Mahatma Gandhi. mahatma is an honorific meaning "great-soul" or "venerable" in Sanskrit. He was first called this in 1914 in Africa

Gandhi on Mahabharata said he wished to live his life like Karna lived Like he sorrows life gave them and how they reacted upon them. You would be able to achieve what human history had never imagined."  Gandhi was the Martyr of the Nation since 1948. Rabindranath Tagore gave him the title of 'Mahatma'.

Gandhi was one of the most important people involved in the movement for the independence of India. He was a non-violent activist, who led the independence movement through a non-violent protest.

Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi was born on 2 October 1869 in Porbander, India.  Several members of his family worked for the government of the state.  When Gandhi was 18 years old, he went to study law in England.  After he became a lawyer, he went to the British colony of South Africa where he experienced laws that said people with  dark  skin had fewer rights than people with light skin. In 1897, Gandhi was attacked by a group of people in Durban Harbor, South Africa when he was going to work. He went to South Africa because he could not find work in India. When traveling through South Africa, Gandhi was also kicked out of a first class train because of his skin color. Then Gandhi started protesting against segregation. He decided then to become a political activist, so he could help change these unfair laws.  He created a powerful, non-violent movement. During Gandhi's life, India was a colony of the British Empire, but wanted independence.  He was a huge leader during that era and his thoughts helped catalyze the Indian independence movement.

Gandhi was a vegetarian almost all his life, because he believed in non-violence (ahimsa).

On 9 January 1915 when Gandhi returned to India, he decided to again lead a march against a law called the Rowlatt Act. But then the protest turned violent and people started to kill the protesters.

When he returned to India, he helped cause India's independence from British rule, inspiring other colonial people to work for their independence, break up the British Empire, and replace it with the Commonwealth.

People of many different religions and ethnic groups lived in British India. Many people thought the country should break into separate countries so different groups could have their own countries. In particular, many people thought that Hindus and Muslims should have separate countries. Gandhi was a Hindu, but he liked ideas from many religions including Islam, Judaism, and Christianity, and he thought that people of all religions should have the same rights, and could live together peacefully in the same country.

In 1938, Gandhi resigned from Congress. He said he could no longer work through Congress to unite the divisions in caste and religion. He also felt that he had little to offer to the political process.

On 15 August 1947, the British Indian Empire split into India and Pakistan. Gandhi wanted independence but did not want the former Raj to split into two different countries. Instead of celebrating independence day, he was crying over the end of British India.

Gandhi's principle of satyagraha, often translated as "way of truth" or "pursuit of truth", has inspired other democratic and anti-racist activists like Martin Luther King, Jr. and Nelson Mandela. Gandhi often said that his values were simple, based upon traditional Hindu beliefs: truth (Satya), and non-violence (ahimsa).

On 30 January 1948, he was shot to death by a Brahman activist Nathuram Godse, because Godse thought that Gandhi was too respectful to the Muslims. Godse was tried and executed by Indian officials.

A monarchy is a kind of government where a monarch, a kind of hereditary ruler (someone who inherits their office), is the head of state. Monarchs usually rule until they die or pass down (when a monarch resigns it is called abdication). Most monarchies are hereditary, but some are elected. The most famous elected monarch is the Pope of the Roman Catholic Church. Some well known titles for monarchs are King, Queen, Emperor, Empress, Czar, Kaiser, Shah, Emir, Khan and Sultan.

In less formal societies, the leader was often chosen by fighting. That was the way of warrior societies like the Zulu. Kings of England and Scotland were sometimes decided by battle. Warfare has been very frequent between human societies. "Wars of succession" is the general term for warfare caused by two or more individuals claiming the right of successor to a dead or deposed monarch.

Many people who study government think a country should not have a monarchy. They argue that rulers ought to be elected, or that monarchs are often corrupt.  Aristotle’s “Politics” compares the different forms of government which a state may have. He claims monarchy to be one of the worst regimes because one leader may be easily corrupted, even if they were selected as the most wise and deserving ruler of an entire group.

Many people in countries such as the UK want to keep their royal family as they have remained a traditional icon and source of income for the country. However, in the UK their influence in the rule of the country is very small, leaving government to the governing political party elected by the people. This is because in a constitutional monarchy the monarch has only the power of head of state.

Monarchy is one of the oldest kinds of government. Most historians agree that the first monarchies were tribes or small groups of people who decided to let a war-chief or other leader pass on their office to their children. This created a dynasty. Over time, the rules for deciding who got to become the next monarch became more complicated. Primogeniture is usually the oldest son or, in some countries, daughter, becomes the next monarch when the old one dies. Akkad and Sumer were the first recorded monarchies.

Kings and other kinds of monarchs have ruled for many thousands of years; for example, many kings are mentioned in the Bible and in ancient historical records. Three of the oldest countries with monarchs that still hold office are the United Kingdom, which has had the same British Royal Family for nearly 1,000 years, Denmark where the royal line has remained unbroken for almost 1,200 years, and Japan, which has records showing a line of Emperors dating back even farther.

Many monarchs today perform mostly the ceremonial jobs of a head of state, while the head of government, who is usually elected, passes and enforces laws. It is also very important  in other parts of the country.

In an absolute monarchy the monarch is the only source of all laws.  The monarch has total power to make any law just by deciding it.  Any other institution in the country cannot make laws that affect the monarch, unless the monarch decides to allow it. Sometimes the monarch is also the head of the state religion and makes religious laws also. All land and property in the country can be taken or given away by the monarch at any time for any reason. The army and navy is under the personal control of the monarch and can be used for any purpose at any time. The monarch can also pick who gets to be the next monarch and can change the rules at any time. There is usually no elected government or Parliament, and if there is one, it has no real power. This kind of government is very rare today.  The people do not have a lot of power in it.

Countries that are examples of an absolute monarchy are Vatican City, Brunei, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Oman and Swaziland.

A constitutional monarchy is a form of government that is usually a democracy and has a constitution, with the monarch as head of state.  Either the monarch has to obey the laws like everyone else, or there are special laws that say what the monarch can and cannot do.  The monarch usually can not decide their special laws on their own.  There may be laws about whom the monarch's children can marry, for example, that are passed by the Parliament.  For example, in the Netherlands, if a member of the royal family marries without the permission of Parliament, they cannot become king or queen themselves.  The army and navy may swear an oath to the monarch, but the real control is given to the elected government.  There are laws about property and the order of succession (who gets to be the next monarch) that can only be changed by the elected government.  Usually the monarch must sign laws into effect, but is required to follow the will of the elected government.

A constitutional monarchy usually has separation of powers, and the monarch often has only ceremonial duties, such as representing the country while traveling or acting as a symbol for the whole country (not for a particular political party). Constitutional monarchs usually do not vote, even when it is legal for them to do so. Voting would mean that they picked a side in political arguments and then could not claim to represent everyone in the country. Some constitutional monarchies give the power to veto laws to the monarch, but in most countries where this is the case it is a power that is very rarely used. In countries where the monarch can dismiss or appoint governments, this is usually only done to make sure that the democratic process is respected, without taking sides in politics. Appointments to public office made by constitutional monarchs are generally approved by the democratically elected government beforehand.

Examples of Constitutional monarchies are the United Kingdom, most members of the Commonwealth of Nations, Australia, The Netherlands, Norway, Denmark, Sweden, Belgium, Japan and Spain. Thailand has a monarch who sometimes take part in politics to influence the government unlike in other constitutional monarchies, but he/she still is subject to law.

Today, there are three basic forms how to choose a new monarch, after the death of the old one; or because the old monarch left power:

Of these three, the order of succession is the most common case.

While most monarchies are hereditary (meaning that the title passes on through inheritance), there have been cases where a monarch has been elected. This was especially common in the Holy Roman Empire, where the Emperor and many other rulers within the empire were elected to the position.

Countries, where the monarchs are elected include Malaysia, Samoa, Cambodia, United Arab Emirates, Andorra, and Vatican City.

The Middle East is a large area of land in the eastern hemisphere. The lands of the Arabian Peninsula and some of the lands of the eastern Mediterranean are part of the Middle East. The Middle East's population is mostly Muslim. The name of the Middle East comes from its position to the east of Europe and to the west of the Far East.

The modern countries of Arabia (Saudi Arabia, Oman, Yemen, Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates) are usually counted with the modern countries of  Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Cyprus, and Palestine (the State of Palestine and Israel) as part of the Middle East.

The name "Middle East" does not always have the same meaning, and the size of the area is not always the same. When the name Middle East started to be common, it was the name for the lands in between the Near East and the Far East. The Indian subcontinent was part of the Middle East at that time. Now, parts of south-west Asia and northern Africa can count as the Middle East. The land between Egypt and Iran is a common definition. Many countries in the Middle East today are also part of the Near East. Sometimes, people name countries that are far away from these countries as countries in the Middle East. These countries can be in North Africa (like Morocco) and the Indian subcontinent (like Pakistan). This area also has the name Greater Middle East.

Many ancient civilizations began in the Fertile Crescent in the Middle East. These were Sumer, Babylonia and Assyria in the area called Mesopotamia. The Abrahamic religions that believe in one God also originated in the Middle East. (Judaism and Christianity began in ancient Palestine and Islam began in Arabia.) Today, the Middle East is the homeland of Arabs, Turks, Persians, Kurds, and Jews, among many other ethnic groups. Islam is the most common religion in the Middle East.  Islam came from the Arabian Peninsula to most of the Middle East's lands in the 7th century AD, during the first Muslim conquests of the Sasanian Empire and parts of the Byzantine Empire. There are also significant historic Christian communities present in almost every Middle Eastern country. Other minority faiths include the Yazidis, Alevis, Druze and Alawites among others.

Today, the Middle East is very important because much of the petroleum that other countries use comes from here. There are also many arguments and wars, such as the conflict between Sunni and Shia, the Israeli–Palestinian conflict, and the Syrian civil war.

Michelangelo di Lodovico Buonarroti Simoni (6 March 1475 – 18 February 1564), known as Michelangelo, was an Italian Renaissance painter, sculptor, architect, poet, and engineer. Along with Leonardo da Vinci, he is often called a "Renaissance Man" which means that he had great talent in many areas.

Michelangelo lived an extremely busy life, creating a great number of artworks. Some of Michelangelo's works are among the most famous that have ever been made. They include two very famous marble statues, the Pieta in Saint Peter's Basilica and David which once stood in a plazza in Florence but is now in the Accademia Gallery.  His most famous paintings are huge frescos, the Sistine Chapel Ceiling and the Last Judgement. His most famous work of architecture is the east end and dome of Saint Peter's Basilica.

A lot is known about Michelangelo's life because he left many letters, poems and journals. Because he was so famous, he became the very first artist to have his biography (story of his life) published while he was still living. His biographer, Giorgio Vasari, said that he was the greatest artist of the Renaissance. He was sometimes called Il Divino ("the divine one").

Other artists said that he had terribilità, (his works were so grand and full of strong emotion that they were scary). Many other artists who saw his work tried to have the same emotional quality. From this idea of terribilità came a style of art called Mannerism.

Michelangelo was born on 6 March 1475 in Caprese near Arezzo, Tuscany. His father was Lodovico di Leonardo di Buonarroti di Simoni, and his mother was Francesca di Neri del Miniato di Siena. The Buonarrottis were a banking family from Florence. They claimed they were descended from the noble Countess Matilda of Canossa. Michelangelo's father had lost most of the bank’s money, so he worked for the local government in the town of Chiusi. When Michelangelo was a baby, the family moved back to Florence. As he was sickly, Michelangelo was sent to live on a small farm with a stonecutter and his wife and family. The stonecutter worked at a marble quarry owned by Michelangelo's father. Many years later Michelangelo said that the two things that had helped him to be a good artist were being born in the gentle countryside of Arezzo and being raised in a house where, along with his nurse's milk, he was given the training to use a chisel and hammer. His mother died when he was only six.

Michelangelo’s father then brought him back to Florence and sent him to study with a tutor, Francesco da Urbino. Michelangelo was not interested in his school lessons. He explored the great churches of the city and drew copies of the frescos that he saw there. When he was thirteen, he was apprenticed to the painter Domenico Ghirlandaio. Ghirlandaio had a large busy studio. He had rich patrons who worked for the Medici.  He painted frescos in their family chapels. Michelangelo was able to learn the art of fresco painting very well, from Ghirlandaio.  In a large workshop such as Ghirlandaio’s, artists would have been working in all sorts of different media, including sculpture, metalwork and painting altarpieces. Michelangelo would have learned about all these things. When Michelangelo was only fourteen, his father persuaded Ghirlandaio to pay his apprentice as an artist, which was highly unusual at the time.

The richest, most powerful family in Florence were the Medici. They had an academy where some of the most famous philosophers, poets, and artists met to share their ideas. The Medici family were important patrons of the arts.  In 1489, Lorenzo de' Medici, the head of the family, asked Ghirlandaio to send his two best pupils to the academy. Michelangelo was one of the students chosen and he attended the academy from 1490 to 1492. He heard the teaching and discussion of Marsilio Ficino, Pico della Mirandola and Angelo Poliziano. The philosophy that they taught was called Humanism. It was based on the philosophy of the ancient Greek Plato. Michelangelo’s ideas and his art were influenced by these teachings.

Michelangelo and another young sculptor called Pietro Torrigiano studied sculpture under Bertoldo di Giovanni.  Michelangelo had an argument with Torrigiano, who punched him on the nose so that it was badly broken and spoilt his appearance for the rest of his life. Michelangelo sculpted some reliefs (flat panels with raised figures on them). One was ‘’the Battle of the Centaurs’’ which was made for Lorenzo de' Medici.

In 1492, Michelangelo’s patron, Lorenzo de' Medici died. This brought about a big change in Michelangelo’s life.  He went back to live at his father’s house. Michelangelo asked the prior at the Church of Santo Spirito to allow him to study the anatomy of the bodies of people who had died at the church’s hospital. In 1493, as a “thank-you” gift to the prior, Michelangelo carved a large wooden Crucifix which still hangs in the church. In January 1494, there were very heavy snowfalls.  Lorenzo de' Medici’s son, Piero de Medici commissioned Michelangelo to make a snow statue. So Michelangelo began to work for the Medici again.

In 1494, a new leader rose up in Florence. He was a Dominican friar called Savonarola. His strong preaching caused people to burn their books, throw away their jewellery and chase the rich families out of the city. The Medici had to go. For Michelangelo, it was a good time to travel. He stayed for a while in Venice, then moved to Bologna. In Bologna he soon got work sculpting three figures for the big marble Shrine of Saint Dominic. When things calmed down in Florence, Michelangelo returned and worked for another member of the Medici family,  Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco de' Medici.

Michelangelo made a marble statue of Cupid asleep. Lorenzo di Pierfrancesco told Michelangelo that it looked just like a real  Ancient Roman statue and said that if he made it dirty and knocked a few chips off, someone would pay a lot of money for it. Lorenzo sold it to a Cardinal who discovered that it was a fraud.  He thought that Michelangelo’s work was so good that he told the pope about it. The pope then invited Michelangelo to go to Rome and work for him.

Michelangelo arrived in Rome 25 June 1496 at the age of 21.  He lived near the Church of Santa Maria di Loreto on the Gianicolo hill.

In 1496 he got an important “commission” (he was given a paid job) from Cardinal Raffaele Riario. The Cardinal wanted Michelangelo to make a marble statue, larger than life-size,  of Bacchus, the Ancient Roman God of wine. Michelangelo worked hard at the statue. He carved Bacchus as a young man who was quite drunk and looked as if he was staggering as he raised his cup to make a toast. The cardinal did not like the drunken Bacchus and would not pay for it. A banker called Jacopo Galli bought it for his garden.

Michelangelo’s next important commission was from the French Ambassador who asked him to make a statue of the Virgin Mary mourning over the dead body of her son Jesus. This type of artwork, either a painting or a statue, is called by the Italian name “Pieta” (say: “Pe-ay-ta”). Michelangelo’s Pieta is the most famous Pieta that has ever been made. It is now in Saint Peter's Basilica and is visited by thousands of people every day. Giorgio Vasari  wrote: "It is a miracle that a shapeless block of stone could have been carved away to make something so perfect that even nature could hardly have made it better, using real human flesh."

In 1499 Michelangelo returned to Florence.  The priest Savonarola had made so many people angry that he had been put to death in 1498. Life in Florence started to return to normal. Many years earlier the Guild of Woolworkers had commissioned some artists to make statues of the heroes of the city. A sculptor called Agostino di Duccio had started carving a huge statue of  David, the hero of the Bible story of David and Goliath. For 40 years the Guild of Woolworkers owned the huge block of marble, with the statue hardly begun. In 1501 they commissioned the young Michelangelo to carve it. It took him three years to complete.

Once again Michelangelo made a statue that became world-famous. The statue shows a young man, naked in the way that statues of ancient gods were made, just pausing for a moment and looking with fierce eyes at the huge soldier Goliath that he is about to kill. The statue is 5.17 meter (17 ft) tall. It was placed in the piazza (public square) outside the Palazzo Vecchio where the town council met. After many years, the statue was put into an art gallery, the Accademia. A copy now stands in the piazza. People still go great distances to see the statue that he made.

In 1505 Michelangelo was invited to Rome by the newly elected Pope Julius II. Pope Julius was an old man. He wanted Michelangelo to design a grand tomb. It was to stand inside a church and have many carved figures which were to include several slaves to hold up part of the tomb and Old Testament prophets to sit in niches (openings in the walls). Michelangelo started work. He made a magnificent statue of Moses  which is now in the Church of San Pietro in Vincoli (St. Peter in Chains) in Rome. Many people go to look at this statue. The slaves were only partly carved. Four of them are now in the Accademia in Florence. The rest of the great plan was unfinished.

The main reason that Pope Julius' tomb was not finished was that the Pope had an idea for another artwork. The Sistine Chapel near St. Peter's Basilica had its walls painted by some famous artists from Florence. The Pope decided that Michelangelo should paint the ceiling. Michelangelo did not want to. He said that he was not a painter. But the Pope bullied Michelangelo until he agreed to do it. He told the Pope that he would do it "for God" and that he would only do it if the Pope let him paint it "in his own way".

The chapel was long and wide. Its curved ceiling was held up by twelve fan-shaped pieces of wall called "pendentives". Pope Julius told Michelangelo to paint one of the twelve apostles of Jesus on each pendentive. Michelangelo started to do this. Then he got a different idea and scraped off the work that he had done. Instead of apostles, he painted twelve prophets. Seven of them were men from the Old Testament but the other five were women and did not come from the Bible. They were five prophets from the Classical world. Like the prophets in the Bible, they had all told people about the birth of Jesus.

On the middle of the ceiling, instead of painting a starry sky, Michelangelo painted scenes from the Bible telling the story of Creation and the downfall of humanity. The most famous scene is the picture of God creating Adam.  The ceiling was so famous that many artists tried to copy the way that Michelangelo had arranged and painted the figures.

In 1513 Pope Julius II died. The next pope was Pope Leo X, a member of the Medici family. He gave Michelangelo several jobs in Florence, including designing the Medici Chapel to hold the tombs of his family members.  Although not all the tombs were built, Michelangelo finished seven large statues including a "Madonna and Child". His pupils later completed the chapel.

In 1527, the people of Florence became angry at the Medici for acting like princes. That was not the right way for a family to act, in a city that was a republic. The people threw the Medici out, but the Medici came back with an army and took over the city. Michelangelo was so upset at the behaviour of the Medici that he left his beloved city and never went back.

Pope Clement VII called Michelangelo back to the Sistine Chapel to paint the wall behind the altar with a huge scene of The Last Judgement.  He worked on it from 1534 to 1541. At the centre it shows Jesus, surrounded by saints, sitting in judgement over the people of the Earth. To the left, people are rising from their graves and many are welcomed into Heaven. To the right, other people are being sent to Hell where they are dragged down by demons. It is a huge painting with many figures in it.

Like Adam and Eve on the ceiling, all the figures were shown naked. Some of the cardinals in the church said that it was wicked to paint saints, including the Virgin Mary, with no clothes on. They called Michelangelo "the painter of rude bits". There was a long argument about this because some people said that God had created everyone naked, so clothes would not be needed in Heaven.  After Michelangelo's death another artist, Daniele da Volterra was called in to paint drapes on the figures. For the rest of his life, he was known as "the painter of pants".

In 1546, when Michelangelo was in his seventies, he was given one of his most important jobs. The old St. Peter's Basilica had been partly demolished and a new one designed by Bramante. But many architects had worked on it and it was still just at the beginning stages. Michelangelo was made the architect. He immediately improved the plan, had important parts made much stronger, and designed a huge dome, taller than any other domes in the world. He died before it was completed, but he left drawings and models so that the next architect, Giacomo della Porta, could finish what he had started. The dome of St. Peter's Basilica still stands as one of the greatest monuments of Christianity, and as a symbol of the city of Rome.

When Michelangelo died, his body was taken back to Florence and buried in the Basilica of Santa Croce (Church of the Holy Cross). On his tomb sit three mourning figures who symbolize Architecture, Painting and Sculpture.

Minerals are substances that are formed naturally in the Earth. Minerals vary in composition, from pure elements and simple salts to very complex silicates with thousands of known forms. In , a rock sample is a random  of minerals and/or mineraloids, and has no specific chemical composition. Most of the rocks of the Earth's crust have quartz (crystalline SiO2), feldspar, mica, chlorite, kaolin, calcite, epidote, olivine, augite, hornblende, magnetite, hematite, limonite and a few other minerals. Some minerals, like quartz, mica or feldspar are common, while others have been found in only a few places in the world. The largest group of minerals by far is the silicates (most rocks are ≥95% silicates), which are made largely of silicon and oxygen, also with ions of aluminium, magnesium, iron, calcium and other metals.

Rocks are made of minerals. Minerals are usually solid, inorganic, have a crystal structure, and form naturally by geological processes.

A mineral can be made of single chemical element or more usually a compound. There are over 4,000 types of known minerals. Two common minerals are quartz and feldspar.

Alternatively, a mineral is one listed as such by the International Mineralogical Association.

Minerals are different from rocks. A mineral is a chemical compound with a given composition and a defined crystal structure. A rock is a mixture of one or several minerals, in varying proportions.

A rock has only two of the characteristics minerals have–it is a solid and it forms naturally. A rock usually contains two or more types of minerals. Two samples of the same type of rock may have different kinds of minerals in them. Minerals are always made up of the same materials in nearly the same proportions. A ruby is a mineral. Therefore, a ruby found in India has similar makeup as a ruby found in Australia.

Minerals are formed by natural processes. A few substances with the same chemical composition as minerals can be produced by living creatures as part of their shells or bones. The shells of molluscs are composed of either calcite or aragonite, or both.

Traditionally, chemicals produced by living things are not considered minerals. However, it is difficult to see why an organic substance should not be called a mineral if its chemical nature and its crystalline structure is identical with its inorganic twin. This issue is now under debate: see Railsback part II.

Minerals form in many ways. The mineral halite, which is used as table salt, forms when water evaporates in a hot, shallow part of the ocean, leaving behind the salt it contained. Many types of minerals are made when molten rock, or magma cools and turns into a solid. Talc, a mineral that can be used to make baby powder, forms deep in Earth as high pressure and temperature causes changes in solid rock.

The extraordinary thing is, that most minerals owe their formation to life, or at least to the Great Oxygenation Event. "Sturdy minerals rather than fragile organic remains may provide the most robust and lasting signs of biology".

A mineral is a solid—that is, it has a definite volume and a rough shape. Volume refers to the amount of space an object takes up. For example, a golf ball has a smaller volume than a baseball, and a baseball has a smaller volume than a basketball.

A substance that is a liquid or a gas is not a mineral. However, in some cases its solid form is a mineral. For instance, liquid water is not a mineral, but ice is.

Each mineral has a definite chemical makeup: it consists of a specific combination of atoms of certain elements. An element is a substance that contains only one type of atom.

Scientists can classify minerals into groups on the basis of their chemical makeup. Though there are thousands of different minerals, only about 30 are common in Earth's crust. These 30 minerals make up most rocks in the crust. For that reason, they are called rock-forming minerals.

People use minerals for many everyday purposes. Every time people turn on a microwave oven or a TV, minerals are being used. The copper in the wires that carry electricity to the machine is made from a mineral. Table salt or halite, is another mineral that people use in their everyday life.

Metallurgy is the study of metals. Alloys (mixtures of metals) are also studied.  There are two main branches of Metallurgy. They are physical and chemical metallurgy. A Metallurgist is individual who researches, manufactures and develops metal items that range from car parts to semiconductors.

Metallurgists and Metallurgical Engineers often work for consulting engineering firms;  mining and manufacturing companies; and in government and universities. Many metallurgists hold a Bachelor of Engineering or similar 4- year degree.

Chemical Metallurgy is the study of extracting and refining metals through chemical reactions. This field also commonly involves corrosion prevention and surface treatment of metals. Scientific concepts such as thermodynamics, the study of heat flow and kinetics, the study of the speed of reactions are very central to chemical metallurgy.

Metallurgists are very interested in the chemical reactions that occur with different elements. Chemical reactions are carried out on a large scale to obtain a useful product.

For example, the production of steel in a blast furnace involves turning different Iron and oxide compounds into pure Iron.

Physical metallurgy is the science of making useful properties out of metals. This field focus on the physical property of metals and alloys such as strength and hardness. Properties of metals might be electrical, magnetic and physical in nature. These properties can be changed by alloying or heat treatment.

There are many ways to make things from metals. For example, large parts may be created by pouring liquid metal into a large cast. This is called casting.

Important factors in physical metallurgy include time and temperature in which the metal is made and cooled. Metals undergo different phase changes, the particular position and type of crystal structure inside the metal will determine if a metal is brittle or flexible.

Ores are rocks that have a chemical compound of a metal with oxygen, called an oxide. Separating the oxygen from the metal is called smelting. This is done with chemistry or electricity, usually at very high temperatures.  This is the first step in metallurgy. A rock containing enough metal to be profitable is called ore.

An alloy is a combination of a metal with one or more elements. The metal mixture must be a solid  to be called as an alloy. A  common way to combine metals into an alloy is by melting them, mixing and then allowing them to solidify by cooling at room temperature. Alloys have been known since 50,000 BCE and have been continuously studied and improved.

Another part of metallurgy is making parts from metals. These parts must be made so they will not break when they are used. Metallurgists look to make metal that meets the needs of the process it will be used in. Sometimes the metal must be lightweight or low in density. Other times it must be tough (not easily broken). The metallurgist must follow directions when making the part to know what metal to use. the process of metal selection is known as the materials selection process. Metallurgists use mathematical  equations to determine what are the most important  physical features of the metal. Common desired characteristics include ductility, toughness, corrosion resistance, and strength. Different metals and their associated features are often graphed on Ashby plots.

A metal starts as a block, called an ingot. Metallurgists must know how to make a metal part from an ingot. Parts are made from ingots different ways. When a big hammer is used, it is called forging. To make thin metals, a metal is put between two rolls and moved, called rolling.

Making metal hot makes it easier to change the shape of a metal part. For this reason, most metal parts are made using hot metal. This is hot work.

Two metal parts can be put together with much heat. This is called welding. Iron is easy to weld.

Metallurgists use many tools to  determine the characterizes of metal using a technique called metallography. One of the most useful tools is the Scanning Electron Microscope. To use an SEM a metal sample is polished and hit with electrons to produce a clear image of the metal. This permits for the metal microstructure to be seen.  A  microstructure is what the metal looks like when zoomed in very closely. There are many types of microstructure such as pearlite and ferrite.

Metals are sometimes pulled until they break using a tensiometer. This is the tension test. Information such as plastic and elastic deformation can be determined from these tests.

It is also common for metallurgists to use computer simulations to predict heat flow or the cost of making a particular product. Common software used in metallurgy include ABAQUS and ANSYS.

Mumbai is a natural harbour on the west coast of India, and is the capital city of Maharashtra state.

Mumbai is India's largest city, and one of the world's most populous cities. It is the financial capital of India and a global city.  Many billionaires live there. The city is the second most-populous in the world. It has about 13 million people. Along with the neighbouring cities of Navi Mumbai and Thane, it forms the world's 4th largest urban agglomeration. They have around 19.1 million people

The seven islands that form Bombay were home to fishing colonies. The islands were ruled by successive kingdoms and indigenous empires before Portuguese settlers took it. Then, it went to the British East India Company. During the mid-18th century, Bombay became a major trading town. It became a strong place for the Indian independence movement during the early 20th century. When India became independent in 1947, the city was put into Bombay State. In 1960, following the Samyukta Maharashtra movement, a new state of Maharashtra was created with Bombay as the capital. It was renamed Mumbai in 1996.

Mumbai generates more than 6% of India's GDP. It accounts for 25% of industrial output, 40% of sea trade, and 70% of capital transactions to India's economy. The Reserve Bank of India, the Bombay Stock Exchange, the National Stock Exchange of India and many Indian companies and multinational corporations are in the city. It also has the Hindi film and television industry, known as Bollywood.

The Brihanmumbai Electric Supply and Transport is Mumbai's public transport service.

Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī (, ) was a Persian mathematician and astronomer. He was believed to have been born around 800 AD and died in 850 AD during the Abbasid Empire.

Al-Khwarizmi was known for the book he wrote about algebra, Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing. He also wrote a book which taught the Western world about Hindu numerals and how to use them. This book was later titled the Hindu Art of Reckoning. With his books, al-Khwarizmi authored astronomical tables- tables designed to calculate the position of planets or eclipses.

His work changed the understanding and knowledge of mathematics in the Middle Ages and mathematicians in Europe read his book. They began to use these Hindu–Arabic numerals (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, ...) instead of the Roman numerals (I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, X, ...). The Arabic numeral system is easier to do mathematics with, as Roman numbers have no place values. This means that they can only deal with whole numbers and do simple equations. Roman numerals also have no number zero.

He wrote a book on algebra named Al-Jabr Wal' Muqibla. In this book, he introduced his own number system and also introduced Arabic numerals. His books were translated into Greek and Latin. They named his books "So said Algorizmi". The word "algorithm" is derived from the word Algorizmi. The word algebra comes from the word al-jabr that is at the beginning of the title of the book.

Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi worked at the House of Wisdom, where people worked on translating scientific works.

The Middle Ages were a period of about 1000 years in European history. They took place between the end of the Western Roman Empire in 476 CE when Romulus Augustulus was deposed, and the beginning of the Renaissance around 1400 - 1500 CE. Because it occurred in the "middle" of these two events, this period was named the Middle Ages.

Historians do not agree about the exact dates when the Middle Ages began and ended. Some say the age of Classical antiquity ended and the Middle Ages began before the fall of Rome, when Constantine the Great became a Christian in 337. As for an end date, historians propose various events, including 1453, when the Byzantine Empire ended with the Fall of Constantinople; 1492, when Christopher Columbus arrived in the New World; and 1517, when Martin Luther posted his Ninety-Five Theses.

The period is often separated into the Early Middle Ages, the High Middle Ages, and the Late Middle Ages. Very few people during this period could read and write, so there are few records. For this reason, historians do not know as much about the Middle Ages as other periods in history.

People also use other names like the "Medieval Age” to describe the Middle Ages. Another term is “the Age of Faith” because Christianity and Islam became much more popular. The Early Middle Ages have also been called the “Dark Ages” because past scholars wrongly believed that there was very little culture, good literature, art, or progress during the period.

During the Middle Ages, many people’s lives were short, difficult, and poor. The fall of the Western Roman Empire and the invasions of barbarian tribes devastated Europe. The Romans had made progress in science, technology, engineering, medicine and literature, but during the Middle Ages, much of their knowledge was lost. There were mass migrations, wars, and plagues. For around 300 years, there was continuous violence. Then, the development of feudalism decreased some of the violence.

In 800, Charlemagne became Emperor of the Romans. He promoted order, education, and civilization. Slowly, Europe began to regain what it had lost. Still, the Late Middle Ages were a difficult time. Wars and the bubonic plague killed millions of people in Europe and Asia.

Europe greatly changed during the Middle Ages. Independent unified nation-states formed across the old Western Roman Empire. The new nations included England, Scotland, Hungary, Spain, Portugal, Poland, Lithuania, Denmark, Norway, and France (which evolved from the realm of the Franks).

In 330 AD, Roman Emperor Constantine the Great created the Eastern Roman Empire (now called the Byzantine Empire) and made its capital city Constantinople (now Istanbul).

The Byzantine Empire controlled Asia Minor and Northern Africa. Briefly, it also controlled what are now southern Spain and southern Italy. However, its lands were slowly eaten away by enemies like the Ottomans and the Franks.

The Byzantine Empire survived the fall of the Western Roman Empire and lasted until 1453. Constantinople was a walled city on a peninsula, which made it difficult for invaders to take over. That year, the Ottoman Empire finally captured Constantinople, which was the end of the Byzantine Empire.

The fall of Constantinople to the Ottomans is sometimes considered to be the end of the Middle Ages.

The Islamic prophet Muhammad founded Islam in 610 CE. Soon after his death in 633, Islam split into two main branches: the Sunni and the Shi'a. This split has been compared to the East–West Schism of 1054 or the Protestant Reformation within Western Christianity starting in 1517. Today, around 85% of Muslims are Sunni, while most Shi'a live in Iran and Iraq.

After Muhammad’s death, Arab Muslims conquered many Christian territories and converted them to Islam. Over time, they took control of what are now Iraq, Syria, Egypt, North Africa, and Spain. According to one source: Muslims consider[ed] their conquest [to be] the liberation of subjugated people, since in most instances they were under oppressive rule. France and other Western European countries stayed under Christian rule. However, eventually the Ottoman Empire also conquered parts of Eastern Europe. Many Muslim states held of vast areas of land, which made them superpowers in the Middle Ages.

Islam spread along the major trade routes of the Old World. Many traders and travelers became Muslim.

The Middle Ages were a golden age of knowledge in Muslim territories. Europe struggled greatly, but the Islamic world made great progress in the arts, agriculture, economics, industry, law, literature, navigation, philosophy, sciences, and technology.

Many Muslim caliphs and Sultans gathered the ancient texts of great classical empires. (For example, the caliphs of Andalusia, based in Cordoba, gathered ancient Roman texts.) During the Islamic Golden Age, Al-Khwarizmi, a Persian Muslim mathematician, helped to develop algebra, which was named after him.

The Golden Age of Islam ended with the Mongol invasions in the mid-13th century.

During the Middle Ages, trade between countries became much more common. Most trade ran along the Silk Road, a trade route that connected Europe to the Middle East and to East Asia. Arab traders brought things back and forth along the Silk Road.

Items that were light, easy to carry, and valuable traveled the farthest. During the High Middle Ages, wealth began to return, and consumers began to demand luxuries again. Traders brought silk, porcelain, spices, incense, gold, and gems thousands of miles across deserts, mountains and plains to reach Europe. They also brought glass from Europe to Asia.

Not all items traveled along the entire Silk Road. Traders carrying heavier or less valuable items would travel shorter distances. Food, for example, would usually travel only within a few villages.

Trade was greatly interrupted several times by the Crusades (1095-1291), Mongol invasions, wars between Muslims and Christians, and the Black Plague. Historians think the Mongols brought the plague with them from Asia. The disease killed almost a third of the world's population between 1347-1351, but the Americas were not affected.

Buddhism is a nontheistic religion; its followers do not believe in a god. It is based on philosophy and began in India. However, Muslim invaders started killing Buddhists in India, which forced them to flee east. There are now very few Buddhists in India, but Buddhism eventually took up strong roots in China.

During the Middle Ages, the Mongols created the world's largest-ever contiguous empire. Under the leadership of Genghis Khan, the Mongols took over territories in much of Asia, the Middle East, and far Eastern Europe. Because the Mongol Empire was so large and powerful, there was little war within the empire, so the period is now called the Pax Mongolica (Latin for “Mongolian peace”).  Like the earlier Pax Romana ("Roman Peace"), the Pax Mongolica was a time of relative peace and stability. That made it possible for trade, technology, and ideas to travel safely throughout Eurasia and for international trade and diplomacy along the Silk Road to expand greatly.

Around the time of his death in 1227, Genghis Khan’s empire had gotten too large to survive. It collapsed under its own size as Alexander the Great's had in Ancient Greece. The former Mongol Empire was split four ways, which allowed China to become the dominant power in the Far East once again. Later, under the Yuan dynasty, the Chinese also retook control of northern China.

Around 1405, a Chinese admiral, Zheng He, went to explore the world. His fleet of 300 treasure ships explored great areas of the Eastern world. The ships were many times larger than anything the Europeans had built. A treasure ship was wider than Columbus' ship Santa Maria was long.

The Late Middle Ages were the last two centuries of the Middle Ages, from around 1291 (when the Crusades ended) to 1492 (when Columbus traveled to the New World). The gun was invented during this period and changed the way that wars were fought. Aristocracy and feudalism became less important.

Before the Late Middle Ages, armies were formed only when there was a war. Now states began to create permanent standing armies. Technology, economy, and science developed. New cities were founded, and existing cities grew larger and richer.

During the Late Middle Ages, France and England fought the Hundred Years' War. China regained its independence from the Mongol Empire. The Grand Duchy of Moscow, which became the most important state in Eastern Europe, also became independent from the Mongols and later grew to become Russia.

In 1453, the Ottoman Empire conquered the Byzantine Empire. That cut off the Silk Road, so Europeans had to find new trade routes. That triggered the Age of Discovery during the Renaissance. In turn, the Christian states drove the Muslims out of Spain in 1492.

Neil Alden Armstrong (August 5, 1930 – August 25, 2012) was an American astronaut, and engineer, and is known as the first person to walk on the moon. On July 20, 1969, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the moon in a small spacecraft that had been sent to the moon using the Saturn V rocket. The mission was called Apollo 11. They both walked on the moon, and millions of people watched and heard this event on live television.

He earned a BSc degree in Aeronautical Engineering from the Purdue University and a MSc degree in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Southern California. In 1970 he received an Honorary Doctorate of Engineering from the Purdue University. In 1971 he became professor of aerospace engineering at the University of Cincinnati. He joined the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, then known as the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, serving as a civilian test pilot at Edwards Air Force Base, Lancaster, Calif.

In 2005, he received the Honorary Doctorate of letters from the University of Southern California. The Houston Chronicle newspaper reported on October 1, 2006, that Australian computer programmer Peter Shann Ford found the missing "a" from Armstrong's famous first words on the Moon. Ford reported that he downloaded the audio recording from a NASA web site and analyzed it using editing software originally intended for use with hearing disabled people. Armstrong is said to have been pleased with Ford's finding of the missing "a".

Prior to being an astronaut, Armstrong was called to Pensacola Naval Air Station in Florida in 1949 before he could complete his degree. There he earned his pilots wings at 20 years of age, making him the youngest flyer in his squadron. While studying for his aeronautical engineering degree, the Korean War broke out in 1950, in which he flew 78 combat missions. His plane was shot down once and he was also awarded 3 Air Medals. Later, he became a skillful test pilot, flying right to the atmosphere’s edge,  at , in the experimental rocket powered aircraft the X-15. Armstrong went on his first mission into space on the 16th of March 1966, in the spacecraft Gemini 8, as the command pilot. He docked the Gemini 8 successfully with an Agena target craft that was in orbit already. Although the docking was smooth enough, while the spacecrafts orbited together, they started to roll and pitch. Armstrong then managed to undock the Gemini, and regained control of the spacecraft by using the retro rockets. However, this resulted in the astronauts having to make an emergency landing into the Pacific Ocean. Following the fatal explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in January 1986, Armstrong was appointed deputy chief of the presidential commission set up to investigate the disaster.

His most famous quote is: "That's one small step for (a) man, one giant leap for mankind. "

He spoke those words when he set his foot on the moon. He wanted to say "That's one small step for a man…", but for some reason the "a" was never spoken. Armstrong thought he had said it. Listening to the audio shows that the "for" runs on smoothly, giving no time for "a" to be spoken. Armstrong preferred written quotations to include the "a" in parentheses.

Armstrong married Janet Shearon from 1956. They had three children: Mark, Eric, and Karen. They divorced in 1994, and Armstrong married Carol Held Knight the same year; they remained married until Armstrong's death in 2012.

Some years after returning from the Moon, he visited the 2,000 year-old King Herod's Temple Mount in the city of Jerusalem. While he was there, Neil Armstrong said it was more exciting to step on the stone steps where Jesus Christ walked than even stepping on the Moon.

Armstrong died on the morning of August 25, 2012 from complications of a blocked coronary artery after surgery in a hospital in Cincinnati, Ohio. He was 82 years old. In July 2019, The New York Times reported that Armstong died from complications following a cardiac surgery. The removal of wires connected to his temporary pacemaker resulted in internal bleeding, causing a drop in blood pressure. The doctors were unable to perform surgery in time to save him.

Mount Everest is the highest mountain on Earth. Mount Everest is in the Himalayas, a tall mountain range in Asia. It is about  high and one of the Seven Summits. Everest is located in the Mahalangur Himal sub-range of the Himalayas in the Solukhumbu district of Nepal.

Mount Everest is on the line between two countries: Nepal and China. The top of the mountain is in the "death zone", where the air is too thin for a human to live. People need large bottles of oxygen to let them breathe; However, some people have been able to walk through the death zone without oxygen bottles; Some of those came to the top of the mountain, and survived going down. The first people to get to the top were Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay in 1953.

There are 18 ways (paths or routes) to get to the top, but most people use only two ways.

During the first week of October 2025, "At least 200 climbers [were] stranded on Mount Everest following blizzard", according to media. That happened on the Chinese side of the mountain.

The Sherpa people live near the base of Mount Everest. Mount Everest is important in their religion, and they call the mountain Chomolungma (mother of the earth).

In 1856, the British people made a map of India and measured the height of Mount Everest. They recorded the mountain at  and called it Peak XV (Peak Fifteen). In 1865, a group of people in England, the Royal Geographical Society, made a decision to name the mountain Mount Everest.

British people came to the area around Mount Everest in 1921. In 1922, the first group (expedition) tried to go up the mountain. In 1924, a famous Englishman named George Leigh Mallory and his partner, Andrew Irvine tried to get to the top of Mount Everest. They disappeared on June 8th and died. Their bodies were found in 1999.

In May 1953, the first people got to the top. They were a Sherpa man named Tenzing Norgay and a man from New Zealand named Edmund Hillary.

Now, many people go up the mountain every year. They start in China or Nepal. Sometimes, a country will stop people from going up the mountain. In 2020, Nepal stopped people from going up Mount Everest because people were getting ill from the coronavirus (during the 2019–20 coronavirus pandemic).

The Sherpa people live high in Nepal near the mountains. Because the mountain is important in their religion, a Sherpa person will give something to the gods before they go up the mountain.

Some Sherpas work to help other people go up the mountain. In the spring, they look for the safest way through the rock and ice to go to the top. They take things like food, water, and bottles of air (oxygen) up the mountain.

Base camps are at the bottom ("base") of the mountain. There are two base camps on opposite sides of the mountain: the South Base Camp in Nepal at  and the North Base Camp in Tibet, China at  high. The camps are simple places for people to rest, sleep, or eat when they go up and down the mountain. People often rest at the camps for about a week before they go up Mount Everest. Resting lets the body become comfortable with the thin air, so people do not become very ill with altitude sickness.

The base camps have supplies like food and water. People (usually Sherpas) or large animals like yaks take supplies to the South Base Camp in Nepal. There is a road to the North Base Camp in China, so automobiles can take supplies there in the summer.

The South Base Camp () is used when climbing up the southeast ridge. The North Base Camp () is used when climbing up the northeast ridge.

Mount Everest is very cold and snowy. Winds can be . The coldest month is January with a high of  and the warmest month is July with a high of . Because the Earth is getting warmer from climate change, the ice (glaciers) around Mount Everest may be gone by the year 2100.

In 2024, a climber, Kami Rita Sherpa became the first to get to the top of the mountain 30 times. Earlier (2023), Kami Rita became the first to get to the top of the mountain 27 times. Phunjo Lama is the women with "Fastest women to climb Mount Everest" record. She climbed Everest in 2024, May 22 in 24 hours and 26 minutes.

The first to climb to the top, without oxygen bottles (or supplemental oxygen), was Reinhold Messner (1978).

The first skiing down the mountain, without carrying oxygen while skiing, happened in 2025; The skier is Andrzej Bargiel. (related pages, breathing gas, and oxygen)

In 2024, a Nepal Army team, along with 18 Sherpas, launched a high-risk operation to retrieve five bodies from Mount Everest and neighboring peaks.The increasing melting of glaciers due to climate change has exposed more bodies, including that of British climber Andrew Irvine, who had been missing since 1924.Removing bodies from the "death zone" above 26,000 feet is extremely dangerous, requiring specialized equipment and costing up to $500,000 per recovery.Despite these efforts, many bodies remain on Everest, as the financial and logistical challenges often deter retrieval missions. Alongside body recoveries, teams are also working to remove tons of accumulated waste from the mountain to preserve its environment.

Most people say that Mount Everest is the highest mountain, because it is  high from sea level. But, two other mountains can be named the "highest" mountains.

One is Mauna Loa, which is a tall volcano on the Hawaiian Islands. Mauna Loa is  high from sea level. But the bottom of Mauna Loa is deep underwater, and from the bottom to the top it is about . Some people say that Mauna Loa is the "tallest" mountain, not the "highest" mountain.

Another is Mount Chimborazo, which is a tall mountain in South America. The top of Mount Chimbroazo is the farthest from the center of the Earth. This is because of the shape of the Earth: the Earth is wider at the Equator than at the poles (North Pole and South Pole).

The mind is a general term for the way a person thinks, reasons, perceives, wills, has ideas, and has emotion. For science, what others call the mind is entirely caused by workings of the brain. The philosopher Gilbert Ryle called mind the "Ghost in the Machine". He said the idea that it was separate from the brain was the mistaken "Official Doctrine". However, some think that mind is separate from the body and is called a soul (see dualism).

Many people argue about what makes up the mind. Some say that only reason and memory are part of the mind, because they are conscious. In this view the emotions like love, hate, fear and joy are different from the mind. Some people with this view say the emotions are part of the heart. Others argue that our  and emotional states cannot be separated and should all be part of what we call the mind.

People often use mind  to mean the same as thought: the way we talk to ourselves "inside our heads". This is where the sayings "make up our minds," "change our minds" and "of two minds" come from. One of the important things of the mind in this sense is that it is private. No one else can "know our mind."

The original meaning of the Old English gemynd was memory. This explains the sayings call to mind, come to mind, keep in mind, to have mind of, and so on. Old English had other words to express what we call "mind" today, such as hyge, meaning "mind, spirit".

The word mind gradually grew to mean all conscious thought over the 14th and 15th centuries.

Thought is when we absorb what happens around us so that we can deal with it effectively according to our plans and desires. Thinking is using information, like forming concepts, problem solving, reasoning and making choices.

Memory is when we store information in our minds, and can later  it.

Imagination is the ability to invent worlds inside the mind, complete or not. The mind makes these by drawing on experience in the shared world.

Consciousness is knowing that we exist and the world exists, and being able to understand what happens around us.

Just like the body, a mind can be healthy.  The measure of this is called mental health. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), there is not one way to measure mental health in all people, because there are many things in our environment that might make what is mentally healthy different from one person to another.  In general, most experts agree that "mental health" and "mental illness" are not opposites.  In other words, not having a mental illness does not mean you are in good mental health.

One way to study mental health is by looking at how well a person lives.  Signs of mental health include: feeling  and happy, being able to handle normal levels of stress, making and keeping friends, leading an independent life, and being able to  recover from difficult situations.

Philosophy of mind is the branch of philosophy that studies the nature of the mind and how it is linked to the body. The main problem is how the mind is related to the body, but there are also questions about the nature of the mind that do not talk about its relation to the physical body.

Dualism and monism are the two main ways people try to solve the mind-body problem. Dualism is when people believe that the mind and body are in some way separate from each other. It can be traced back to Plato, Aristotle, and the Samkhya and Yoga schools of Hindu philosophy, but it was most precisely formulated by René Descartes in the 17th century.

Monism is the belief that mind and body are not physiologically and ontologically distinct kinds of entities. This view was first seen in Western philosophy by  Parmenides in the 5th century BC and was later held by the 17th-century rationalist Baruch Spinoza. According to Spinoza, mind and body are two parts of a larger being.

Idealists think that the mind is all that exists and that the outside world is actually made up by the mind. Physicalists think that everything can be expressed by what is . Neutral monists believe that everything can be either  or physical depending how you see it. For example, a red spot on a wall is physical, because it is an actual thing depending on the physical wall, but it is mental because our brain responds to the colour.  The most common monisms in the 20th and 21st centuries have all been different kinds of physicalism, including  behaviorism.

Psychology is the study of the way we think, feel and act. It involves the scientific study of processes such as perception, cognition, feelings, personality, as well as things around us that might affect the way we think. From this study, psychologists try to form rules for why we act the way we do. Psychology also includes using this knowledge to help solve problems of everyday life and treat mental health problems.

Social psychology is the study of how we think, feel and act in groups of other people. Most people who study social psychology are either psychologists or sociologists.

The phrase Mind's eye refers to the ability to see things with the mind.

Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela (18 July 1918 – 5 December 2013) was a South African politician and civil rights activist. On 27 April 1994, he became the first President of South Africa, elected in a fully represented democratic election. He was also the first black South African head of state.

Mandela was born in Mvezo, South Africa to a Thembu royal family.

His government focused on throwing out the legacy of apartheid by ending racism, poverty, inequality and on improving racial understanding in South Africa. Politically a believer in socialism, he served as the President of the African National Congress (ANC) from 1991 to 1997 and adopted a new Constitution of South African in 1996 that prohibits all discrimination, regardless of if it is based on culture (including language), tribe, religion, disability and sexual orientation, not only race. Internationally, Mandela was the Secretary General of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1998 to 1999.

Mandela received more than 250 honors, including the 1993 Nobel Peace Prize, the US Presidential Medal of Freedom, and the Soviet Order of Lenin. He is often referred to by his Xhosa clan name, Madiba, or as Tata ("Father"). Mandela was described as a hero, and his actions gave thousands of people homes.

Mandela was sick  for several years during his retirement. He was hospitalized in late summer of 2013 from a continuous lung infection. Mandela died on 5 December 2013 in Houghton Estate, Johannesburg from a respiratory tract infection. He was 95 years old.

Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela was born on 18 July 1918 in Mvezo, Umtata (now Mthatha), Transkei, South Africa. He had thirteen siblings by the same father, and two mothers. His parents were Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa and Nosekeni Nonqaphi . His given name was Rolihlahla, a Xhosa name meaning pulling the branch of a tree or informally, troublemaker. He was a member of the Thembu royal family. On his first day of school, he was given the name Nelson by his teacher Miss Mdingane. Giving children in Africa English names was a custom among Africans during that period.

Mandela's father died when he was twelve. Mandela then lived with the local regent who sent him to school. He was the first member of his family to go to a school. He was expelled from Fort Hare University in 1941, because he led a group of students on political strike. After he was expelled, Nelson found a good job as a night watchman.

In 1944, Mandela helped start the African National Congress Youth League. He was soon a high-ranked leader of the group.

He wanted to liberate South Africa from apartheid without using violence, but the National Party-led government began assassinating, jailing, torturing and executing protesters. He then formed Umkhonto we Sizwe with Walter Sisulu and other people in the African National Congress that he admired, such as Mahatma Gandhi.

A trial was later held and became known as the Rivonia Trial. Mandela was on trial because of his involvement in terrorism and sabotage in 1962. He was given a life sentence, and was sent to Robben Island in 1964, but was transferred to Victor Verster Prison in 1988. In 1990, he was let out of Victor Verster Prison after 27 years of imprisonment. He left prison after de Klerk removed a ban on the African National Congress. He ordered Mandela's release. He then received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1993, with former State President of South Africa, Frederik Willem de Klerk.

Mandela won the general election in April 1994. His inauguration was in Pretoria on 10 May 1994. Many people around the world saw his inauguration on television. The event had 4000 guests, including world leaders from different backgrounds. Mandela was the first South African President elected in a completely democratic election.

As South Africa's first black President, Mandela became head of the Government of National Unity which was under controlled by the African National Congress (or ANC). The ANC had no knowledge in politics, but had representatives from the National Party and Inkatha. In keeping with earlier promises, de Klerk became first Deputy President, while Thabo Mbeki was chosen second.

Although Mbeki had not been his first choice for president, Mandela soon trusted Mbeki throughout his presidency. This allowed Mbeki to organize policy details. Mandela moved into the presidential office at Tuynhuys in Cape Town. He would settle into the nearby Westbrooke Manor. Westbrooke was renamed Genadendal. Preserving his Houghton home, he also had a house built in his home village of Qunu. He visited Qunu regularly, walking around the area, meeting with local people who lived there, and judging tribal problems.

He faced many illness at age 76. Although having energy, he felt left out and lonely. He often entertained celebrities, such as Michael Jackson, Whoopi Goldberg, and the Spice Girls. He became friends with a number of rich business people, like Harry Oppenheimer and British monarch Elizabeth II on her March 1995 state visit to South Africa. This resulted in strong judgment from ANC anti-capitalists. Despite his surroundings, Mandela lived simply, donating a third of his $552,000 wealth to the Nelson Mandela Children's Fund, which he had founded in 1995. In that same year, Mandela published his autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom.

Although in favor of freedom of the press, Mandela was important of much of the country's media because it was owned and run by many middle-class whites. Mandela became known for his use of Batik shirts, known as Madiba shirts, even on normal events. Mandela had never planned on serving a second term in office. Mandela gave his  speech on 29 March 1999, after which he retired. Mandela's term ended on 14 June 1999. Thabo Mbeki succeeded Mandela as President of South Africa.

He won the Nobel Peace Prize for his leadership for his anti-apartheid activism in 1993. After receiving the prize he said:

"We stand here today as nothing more than a representative of the millions of our people who dared to rise up against a social operation whose very essence is war, violence, racism, oppression, repression and the impoverishment of an entire people."

Mandela was married three times and has six children. He had seventeen grandchildren, and a growing number of great-grandchildren. Though physically non-emotional with his children, he could be stern and demanding.

Mandela married Evelyn Ntoko Mase in October 1944. They had two children. Mandela remained married to Evelyn until they divorced in 1957. Evelyn died in 2004. He then married Winnie Madikizela in 1958. They had two daughters. The couple filed for separation in 1992. They divorced in 1996. Mandela married again  to Graça Machel, on his 80th birthday in 1998. She was the widow of Samora Machel. Machel was the former Mozambican president and ANC ally who was killed in an air crash 12 years earlier.

Though publicly criticizing him on several events, Mandela liked United States President Bill Clinton. Mandela personally supported him during his impeachment trial in 1998.

In June 2004, Mandela announced that he was retiring from public life. Mandela said "Don't call me, I will call you". Although continuing to meet with close friends and family, the Nelson Mandela Foundation denied invitations for him to appear at public events and most interview requests.

On 27 March 2013, Mandela was hospitalized in Pretoria from a lung infection. It was reported on 28 March that he was responding well to treatment. Mandela was again hospitalized on 7 June from another lung infection, On 23 June, his condition was announced to be critical. On 26 June, it was announced that Mandela was put on life-support. On 4 July, Mandela's family announced that Mandela was under life-support and he was in a permanent persistent vegetative state. The next day, the South African government denied the fact that Mandela was in a vegetative state. Mandela was discharged from the hospital on 1 September 2013.

Many South Africans thought that Mandela died overnight on 26 June after he was removed from his life support. The South African government said that Mandela is still alive despite the rumor that he died. It was later reported that the rumor was just a death hoax. CNN also reported that Mandela died, but later fixed the report soon afterwards. Photos were taken with Mandela and First Lady Michelle Obama as proof that Mandela was still alive.

Mandela died on 5 December 2013 at his home at Houghton Estate, Johannesburg from complications of a respiratory tract infection, aged 95. He was surrounded by his family when he died. His death was announced by President Jacob Zuma.

On 6 December, Zuma announced a national mourning for ten days. An event for an official memorial service was held at the FNB Stadium in Johannesburg on Tuesday 10 December. He declared Sunday 8 December a national day of prayer: "We call upon all our people to gather in halls, churches, mosques, temples, synagogues and in their homes to pray and hold prayer services and meditation reflecting on the life of Madiba and his contribution to our country and the world."

Mandela's body lay in state from 11 to 13 December at the Union Buildings in Pretoria. A state funeral was held on Sunday 15 December in Qunu. David Cameron, Barack Obama, Raul Castro, Bill Gates, and Oprah Winfrey were there.

On 28 June Mandela's family were arguing about where to bury Mandela. On 29 June the South African  government announced that a memorial service for Mandela will be held 10 to 14 days after his death at Soccer City. On 1 July it was announced that if Mandela were to die he might become the first non-British person to be honored at Westminster Abbey. Queen Elizabeth II honored Mandela with a thanksgiving service at Westminster Abbey in early 2014. This made Mandela the first non-British person to be honored at Westminster Abbey. Mandela was buried in the village of Qunu in the Eastern Cape of South Africa. Qunu is where he grew up.

In South Africa, Mandela is sometimes called by his Xhosa clan name of Madiba.

Mandela has been portrayed in movies and television. In the 1997 movie, Mandela and de Klerk, Sidney Poitier plays Mandela. Dennis Haysbert plays Mandela in Goodbye Bafana (2007). In the 2009 BBC television movie, Mrs Mandela, Nelson Mandela is played by David Harewood. In 2009, Morgan Freeman plays Mandela in Invictus (2009). Terrence Howard also plays Mandela in the 2011 movie Winnie Mandela. Mandela appeared as himself in the 1992 American movie Malcolm X. In  he was played by Idris Elba.

By the time of his death, Mandela had come to be widely considered "the father of the nation" within South Africa. He is also seen as "the national liberator, the savior, its Washington and Lincoln rolled into one". Throughout his life, Mandela had also faced criticism. Margaret Thatcher attracted international attention for describing the ANC as "a typical terrorist organization" in 1987. She later made favors to release Mandela from prison. Mandela has also been criticized for his friendship with political leaders such as Fidel Castro, Muammar Gaddafi, Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, and Suharto. Mandela's imprisonment was often seen as "a symbol of oppression".

Molière (1622 – 17 February 1673) was a French actor, director and writer. His real name was Jean-Baptiste Poquelin, Molière was his stage name. He wrote some of the most important comedies in human history.

He was born in Paris where his father owned a carpet shop. As a young person, Molière decided to live an artist's life. At the age of 21, he founded a theatre company that soon went bankrupt. From 1645 to 1658, he toured France with some of his friends.

Later, King Louis XIV made Molière responsible for the entertainment at the court of Versailles near Paris.  Molière was happy to have the king among his friends, because he had many enemies, especially important people in the Roman Catholic church. Molière's comedies deal with human weaknesses: jealousy, meanness, hypocrisy, fear of death. By putting his characters in ridiculous situations, Molière wants to entertain and educate his audience.

One of his most important plays is Tartuffe, showing a bigoted man stealing his way into a rich family. Molière's last play was Le Malade Imaginaire, called in English The Hypochondriac. As in many of his comedies, Molière played the main role. He died due to pulmonary tuberculosis on stage during the fourth performance. Because of his problems with the church, he was not allowed to be buried in a church cemetery.

Moses (;  in both the Septuagint and the New Testament; , ) is a person in Abrahamic religions. He was a religious leader, lawgiver, and prophet according to the Hebrew Bible. Generally, he is also seen as the author of the Torah.

He is often called Moshe Rabbenu in Hebrew (, Lit. "Moses our Teacher/Rabbi") and seen as the most important prophet in Judaism. Christianity, Islam,  the Bahá'í Faith, and the Rastafari also see him as an important prophet.  Moses has also been an important symbol in American history, from the first settlers up until the present.

According to the Book of Exodus, Moses was born in a time when his people were increasing in number and the Egyptian Pharaoh was worried that they might help Egypt's enemies. Moses' Hebrew mother, Jochebed,  hid him when the Pharaoh ordered all newborn Hebrew boys to be killed, and he ended up being adopted into the Egyptian royal family. After killing an Egyptian slave-master, Moses ran away to Midian where worked as a Shepherd for Jethro, a priest of Midian on the slopes of Mt. Horeb. After the Ten Plagues were unleashed on Egypt, Moses led the Hebrew people out of Egypt, across the Red Sea, where they based themselves at Horeb and compassed the borders of Edom. It was at this time that Moses received the Ten Commandments. Despite living to the age of 120, Moses died before reaching the Land of Israel.

Moses was born of the Levi tribe. The new Pharaoh, afraid of the ever-growing Israelite population, ordered every new-born Hebrew boy to be thrown into the Nile River, but let every girl live. Moses' mother Jochebed gave birth and kept him hidden for three months from Pharaoh's soldiers. When she could no longer keep him hidden, she fashioned a basket lined with tar and pitch, and placed him in the reeds along the riverbank, while his sister Miriam kept watch from a distance.

A princess, one of pharaoh's daughters, went down to the Nile to bathe. There she discovered a crying baby and noticed he was a Hebrew child. Joining the attendants, Moses' sister offered to find a Hebrew woman to nurse the baby for the princess, who agreed. Bringing Moses' real mother, the princess asked her to be the baby's wet nurse, for which she was paid. When the child grew older, she took him to pharaoh's daughter, who named him Moses, saying, "I drew him out of the water."

Moses grew up a privileged member of the court. He was well educated academically and physically. He was taught hand-to-hand combat tactics and leadership.

Upon adulthood, he killed an Egyptian guard who was beating a Hebrew slave and had to leave Egypt because the Pharaoh tried to kill him.

Moses fled to Midian, where he married Jethro's daughter, Zipora. Zipora had two sons. The old Pharaoh died and the Israelites cried loudly. God heard him. One day Moses was tending his father-in-law, Jethro's, sheep and came to Mount Horeb. God's angel made a bush burn with fire, but it did not burn up. When he came nearer, God spoke to him and ordered him to remove his shoes as he was on holy land. God commanded him to be a leader for the Israelites and bring them out of Egypt. At first Moses did not want to do it and said that he was not good with words, but God commanded him and gave Aaron, his brother, to speak for him. Moses returned to Egypt and told the elders what happened.

Moses then went to the Pharaoh and asked him to let the Israelites go. However the Pharaoh did not agree. Finally God inflicted ten plagues upon the Egyptians before Pharaoh agreed to release the Israelites. The last plague was the killing of all first-born, both human and animals. However, to save the Israelites, they were instructed to mark their doors with blood from a lamb, so that the avenging angel would see it and know to "pass over" that house.

The Pharaoh finally decided to let the Israelites go who then migrated in large numbers from Egypt. The Pharaoh later changed his mind and followed Moses and his people with an army to attack them. But Moses made the Red Sea to part and give way for Israelites to pass. The Israelites were safe but the Pharaoh's army was destroyed.

Moses led the Israelites through the wilderness, and God gave them manna and quails to eat, and water from rocks to drink. He also caused the Amalekites to lose in a battle. When Moses came to Mount Sinai, he went up to receive the Ten Commandments and other laws from God. The Ten Commandments were written by God on two tablets. God also told him the instructions of the priests' duties. Moses was up the mountain for forty days and forty nights.

When the people waited for Moses and did not find him, they made Aaron, his brother, make a calf out of gold and worshiped it. God warned Moses about it, and when Moses came down and saw what they did, he was so angry that the tablets fell and they smashed into pieces. The people of Levi tribes are commanded to kill people who worshiped the calf.

Later on Moses asked God to forgive the people. God wrote for Moses two more tablets, and put them in the Ark. Moses also asked craftsmen to make the Tabernacle as God wanted.

To some people, Moses is the founder of the philosophy of law as well as such modern legal doctrines as independent judiciary and separation of powers..

While the Israelites were wandering around the wilderness, Moses was the one to whom God spoke. However, the people kept complaining about the hardships. God instructed Moses to send twelve spies to scout the land God is giving to them; however some of them became afraid because the people living there looked stronger and more powerful than they. They told the others not to go there. Only Joshua, son of Nun, and Caleb, son of Jephunneh, reported the truth as God wanted. God decided because of this that the Israelites would wander forty years in the wilderness, and every one except Joshua and Caleb from that generation would die without seeing the promised land.

God gave many laws to the Israelites through Moses. Moses made Joshua take over him before he died.

Moses died before he reached Canaan, the land God was leading his people to. He was 120 years old when he died.

Today Jews around the world follow the laws of the Ten Commandments and the Torah that God gave to them through Moses. He is also believed to be a prophet by Muslims.

The Bible, the Torah, and the Quran have references to a person called Moses in them. The name they give to the person, varies. Other people also have written about Moses. These include Tacitus and Strabo. It is not known how much these descriptions have taken from earlier sources, which may now have been lost.

No other written records from countries such as Egypt or Assyria have been found, that are from before about 850 BCE and that tell about the stories of the Bible or its main characters. There is no known physical evidence (such as pottery shards or stone tablets) to say that Moses' really existed. Pharaohs have ordered the destruction of records that put them into a bad light. Several cartouches from monuments have also been destroyed in different epochs of Ancient Egyptian history.

It looks like the story written about Moses in the Bible has two different sources. There were two groups of people who told the story. The two stories were passed on separately. Only later were they combined into the version that can now be found in the Bible. Passing on the stories from one generation to the next has perhaps also introduced inaccuracies. Some people added things to the story when they told it. They also omitted other things.

According to the Torah, Moses ordered the death penalty for many offences. He also had defeated enemies killed. Jews, Christians and Muslims consider him to be a holy figure. For this reason, criticism of these passages of the Hebrew Bible has been left to others.

In the late eighteenth century, for example, the deist Thomas Paine commented at length on Moses' Laws in The Age of Reason. Paine also gave his view that "the character of Moses, as stated in the Bible, is the most horrid that can be imagined", giving the story at  as an example. In the nineteenth century the agnostic Robert G. Ingersoll wrote "...that all the ignorant, infamous, heartless, hideous things recorded in the 'inspired' Pentateuch are not the words of God, but simply 'Some Mistakes of Moses'". In the 2000s, the atheist Richard Dawkins referring to the same passage like Paine, concluded, "No, Moses was not a great role model for modern moralists."

Mexico City is the capital and largest city of Mexico. It's also the most populous city in North America. Mexico City is located in the Valley of Mexico within the high Mexican central plateau, at an altitude of . The city has 16 boroughs or , which are in turn divided into neighborhoods or .

The 2020 population for the city proper was 9,209,944, with a land area of .

Mexico City was first built in the 1520s after Hernán Cortés destroyed the Aztec city of Tenochtitlan. The Spaniards then emptied the basin of Lake Texcoco to keep it from flooding. By the late 1700s, Mexico City had over 100,000 people. However, there were many slums, which caused epidemics. There were political problems in the mid-1800s after Mexico became independent. More than 40 people ruled in the 40 years after the country became independent. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, electric light and gas were brought to the city. But there was a big difference between the rich western part of the city and the poor eastern part of the city. By 1930, Mexico City had 1,000,000 people. The city kept growing quickly. In 1968, the Olympic Games were in Mexico City. In 1985, an earthquake hit the capital. In the past few decades, there have been problems with crime and corruption.

Mexico City has a high population density. It is also surrounded by mountains. This causes problems with air pollution.

Mexico City is in the Valley of Mexico at around 2,300 meters (7,800 feet) above sea level.

Mexico City its divided by 16 boroughs: Álvaro Obregón, Azcapotzalco, Benito Juarez, Coyoacán, Cuajimalpa, Cuauhtémoc, Gustavo A. Madero, Iztacalco, Iztapalapa, Magdalena Contreras, Miguel Hidalgo, Milpa Alta, Tláhuac, Tlalpan, Venustiano Carranza and Xochimilco.

Mexico City was originally built on a lake, Lake Texcoco, which is now mostly drained. The ecology of the area has been much changed by the draining. Many of its native species, such as the Axolotl, are extinct, or endangered.

Mexico City is in the tropics. But because its elevation is so high, it has a subtropical highland climate (Cwb in the Köppen climate classification). This means temperatures are warm or mild year-round. It is a lot wetter in the summer than in the winter. Some parts of the city get frost in the winter.

Monotheism is the belief in only one god, rather than the two (dualism) or more (polytheism) as in Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, Ancient India and Ancient Egypt.

Many religions are monotheistic, such as Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Baha'i Faith, Sikhism, Eckankar, Zoroastrianism, Cao Dai and Tenrikyo. Some pagan and neo-pagan religions are also monotheistic.

Deism is the belief that a higher being like god exists but not many gods, revelation, religions, rituals, sacred books (like the Bible or Quran), prophets (like Jesus or Muhammad), etc.

Judaism and Zoroastrianism are thought to be the oldest living monotheistic religions.

Muhammad (; 5708 June 632) was an Arab religious, social, and political leader, best known as the founder of Islam. Islamic teachings say Muhammad was a prophet who God inspired to preach and confirm the monotheistic teachings of Adam, Abraham, Moses, Jesus, and other prophets. He is believed to be the Seal of the Prophets within Islam, meaning the last of the prophets. There is unanimous agreement among all Muslims that the Qur'an was revealed to and preached by Muhammad. Hadiths are also believed by many Muslims to contain the teachings of Muhammad, though some Muslims known as Hadith rejectors do not believe they are the words of Muhammad.

Muhammad was born in Mecca, Hejaz. In 610 AD, at the age of forty, while Muhammad was praying, he reportedly met Gabriel and received the first revelation of the Qur'an.

At first, Muhammad preached these revelations to his close friends and family. Then he started preaching monotheism publicly, and received opposition from Meccan polytheists. He was eventually forced to leave his hometown of Mecca. After reaching Medina with Abu Bakr, the Medinan Muslims helped Muhammad and built a mosque there.

Muhammad was born in 570 AD in Mecca. His father, whose name was Abdullah, died six months before Muhammad's birth. His mother, Amina, died when he was six years old. After that, his grandfather, Abdul-Muttalib, took care of him, but he too died two years later when Muhammad was nine. After his grandfather's death, his uncle Abu Talib took care of him.  When he was young, Muhammad accompanied his uncle on trade trips. Abu Talib remained a good support to him for many years of his adult life.

In 610 AD, when Muhammad was forty years old, he went for a walk to the mountain of Hira near Mecca. According to Muslims, the angel Gabriel (called Jibril in the Arabic language) spoke with him in a cave on the mountain. The story says that when Muhammad first saw the angel Gabriel, he fainted because Gabriel was so large. This is what Gabriel said to Muhammad:

"Read... in the name of Allah Who made man from a drop of blood... Allah is Most Rewarding... He Who taught man to write with pen... and taught man what he knew not."

Muhammad went back home to his wife Khadijah and told her what had happened. New revelations came to him commanding him to preach what was being sent down from God. When Muhammad first started teaching, many of the people of Mecca, who worshipped idols, did not like the things that Muhammad said. But there were also people who listened to his preaching and obeyed his messages. These people were the first of the followers of Islam. Leaders of Mecca punished and tortured the followers of Islam. Some followers of Islam were executed. Muhammad resisted this and continued to teach Islam.

The Quraysh pagans of Mecca heard about this, and they sent a larger army numbering 1000 warriors to fight the Muslims. They met in Badr, but the pagans were defeated and Abu Jahl, one of the pagan leaders, was also killed.

However, the Muslims lost the second battle at Uhud. One year after the fight at Badr, the army of Mecca had outside help. Muslim archers failed to listen to Muhammad's instructions and Khalid ibn al-Walid cleverly took advantage of that. Hamza, Muhammad's last uncle, was killed when a slave from Mecca threw a spear into his chest. Muhammad himself was injured.

Then in 627, Abu Sufyan led the Quraysh and its allies to attack Medina itself. However, they could not pass the trench that the Muslims had dug around Medina. After several weeks, the coalition broke up and went home. The Medinians were considered victors.

In 632 AD, on June 8, Muhammad became very sick. Before he died, he told his followers about his death. He is buried in the chamber of his wife Aisha in Medina, where the Masjid al-Nabawi (Mosque of the Prophet) is. In Medina, his friend Abu Bakr went to the Masjid al-Nabawi and shouted to the people:

"If any of you worship Muhammad, you should know that Muhammad is dead. But those of you who worship Allah(SWT) (God), let it be known that Allah(SWT) (God) is alive and cannot die."

Although Muhammad died, Islam soon spread all over the Middle East. Then, centuries later, it continued till it reached Africa, Asia and Europe. Islam has become one of the biggest and fastest-growing religions in the world.

When Muslims say or write the name of Muhammad, they usually follow it with "Peace and Blessings be upon him" (Arabic: sall-Allahu `alayhi wa sallam). For example, "Muhammad (Peace and Blessings be upon him)". In printed text, a calligraphic symbol is frequently used instead of printing the phrase.

Sunni Muslims believe that Abu Bakr succeeded Muhammad. Shias believe that Ali should have succeeded.

Muslims usually do not make or show images (like paintings or drawings) of Muhammad. For this reason, mosques do not contain paintings or sculptures of Muhammad. Instead, they use abstract art, architecture, and calligraphy for decoration.

The Qur'an does not say that Muslims must never make images of Muhammad. However, it does contain passages that forbid the creation of idols. The Hadith also includes passages that forbid Muslims from creating images of God. As a consequence, Muslims (especially Sunni Muslims) believe there should be no pictures of Muhammad. When people create images of Muhammad, some Muslims may view this as disrespectful, offensive, and emotionally injurious.

Much knowledge about the life of Muhammad is based on narrations. Lawrence Conrad examines the biography books written after the 100-150-year oral period, and sees an 85-year time interval related to the date of birth of Muhammad in these works. Conrad describes it as "the fluidity (evolutionary process) in the story".

Muslims in the Ottoman Empire had two kinds of description of Muhammad's physical and moral qualities. These are both called a hilya or hilye ("ornament"). One kind of hilya is an art form which lays out words in a pattern. Another kind is a written text in prose or poetry. These let Muslims think about Muhammad's appearance and his spiritual qualities without using pictures.

Owning or reading a hilya art work was thought to protect people or their homes from disasters. So people carried them in pockets or displayed them on walls. They were seen as ways to create a personal connection with Muhammad. There was a standard way to lay out a hilya, based on the parts of a human body. This standard came from the work of the artist Hafız Osman. Later artists have made new designs and mixed in other kinds of art.

In 2005, a Danish newspaper published political cartoons of Muhammad. In the demonstrations that followed, more than 100 people died. Johan Galtung, a Norwegian mathematician and peace activist, tried to help both sides come together and talk. According to Galtung, the attacks against Danish institutions ended after the government invited talks.

The Charmed episode "I've Got You Under My Skin" (Season 1, Episode 3), mentions that Muhammad used the "Hand of Fatima" centuries ago to banish the demon Javna. This establishes the spell as good magic, which the Halliwell sisters (Prue, Piper, and Phoebe) use to defeat Javna.

Muscle is a tissue in animal bodies. Muscles are basically tissue which may contract (shorten). They usually attach to bones and are the way animals move.

Their main purpose is to help us to move our body parts. They are one of the major systems of all animal bodies. When a muscle is activated it contracts, making itself shorter and thicker, thereby pulling its ends closer.

Muscle action can be classified as being either voluntary or involuntary.

The skeletal muscles move the limbs (arms and legs). They move the jaw up and down so that food can be chewed. Skeletal muscles are the only voluntary muscles, the only ones that we can choose to move.

The cardiac muscle is the muscle in the heart. When this muscle contracts it pushes blood through the circulatory system. The cardiac muscle is not voluntary.

The smooth muscles are the other muscles in the body that are involuntary. Smooth muscles are in many places. They are in:

Muscles are made of many muscle cells. The cells contract together to make the muscle get shorter. The muscle cells know to do this together because many of them get information sent to them by nerves. The cells that get the message from nerves tell other cells that are near them. They tell the other cells by sending an electrical current.

Muscle cells are filled with proteins called actin and myosin. These are the proteins that make the muscle contract (get shorter).

When a nerve tells a muscle to contract, the muscle opens holes in its cell membrane. These holes are proteins that are called calcium channels. The calcium ions rush into the cell. Calcium also comes out of a special place in the cell called the sarcoplasmic reticulum. This calcium sticks to the specialized proteins actin and myosin. This triggers these proteins to contract the muscle.

Contraction also needs ATP. This is the energy that your cells use. It is made from using glucose in the cell. It takes a lot of energy to release contracted muscles. They use most of the energy for building muscles.

Exercise makes muscles get bigger (see hypertrophy). Exercise also makes muscles stronger.  If a person does not exercise, their muscles become smaller and weaker.  This is called muscle atrophy.

There are many different kinds of muscle diseases. There are three big groups of diseases:

What has muscles? All animals except the very simplest, and no other kind of living thing. Not trees, for instance.

Napoleon Bonaparte () was a French politician and army leader who ruled France from 1799 to 1814 and for a short period (the "Hundred Days") in 1815. He became Emperor of the French in 1804 as Napoleon I. He had power over most of Europe at the height of his power, and his actions shaped European politics in the 19th century.

Bonaparte was born in Corsica into a noble family on the 15th of August 1769. He spoke Corsican first before learning French. He moved to mainland France when he was nine and trained to become an army officer. He became an important army leader during the First French Republic. He stopped countries that wanted to end the French Revolution. In 1799, he overthrew the government and took control of France for himself (a coup d'état). He became the First Consul of France. Five years later, he was made Emperor of France. In the first ten years of the nineteenth century, the French Empire under Napoleon waged the Napoleonic Wars. Every European great power joined in these wars. After a number of victories, France became very important in continental Europe. He increased his power by making many alliances. He also made other European countries into French client states by letting his friends and family members rule them. He also had married Joséphine de Beauharnais in 1796 until he left her for the Austrian Duke's daughter, Marie Louise of Austria. (1791-1847)

The French invasion of Russia in 1812 became Napoleon's first big defeat. His army was badly damaged and never fully recovered. In 1813, another Coalition of European countries defeated his forces at Leipzig. The year after that, they attacked France and won. The Coalition exiled Napoleon to the island of Elba. Less than a year later, he escaped Elba and briefly returned to be the Emperor of France again. However, he was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo in June 1815. Napoleon spent the last six years of his life exiled to the island of Saint Helena, which was controlled by the British, and died at the age of 51. A doctor said he died of stomach cancer. Some scientists think he was poisoned, though others disagree.

Napoleon is remembered as a brilliant army leader, and his campaigns are studied at military schools all over the world. People have many different views on whether he was a good or bad ruler. He brought many ideas of liberalism and the French Revolution to the countries he conquered, such as the Napoleonic code, freedom of religion and making education and government more modern. His enemies remembered him as a tyrant and some historians criticise him for causing many wars.

Napoleon Bonaparte was born in Casa Buonaparte in the town of Ajaccio, Corsica, on the 15th of August 1769. This was one year after the island was given to France by the Republic of Genoa. He was the second of eight children. He was named Napoleone di Buonaparte. He took his first name from an uncle who had been killed fighting the French. However, he later used the more French-sounding Napoléon Bonaparte.

The Corsican Buonapartes were from lower Italian nobility. They had come to Corsica in the 16th century. His father Nobile Carlo Buonaparte became Corsica's representative to the court of Louis XVI in 1777.

The greatest influence of Napoleon's childhood was his mother, Maria Letizia Ramolino. Her firm education controlled a wild child. He had an older brother, Joseph. He also had younger  Lucien, Elisa, Louis, Pauline, Caroline and Jérôme. Napoleon was baptized as a Catholic just before his second birthday, on 21 July 1770 at Ajaccio Cathedral.

Napoleon was able to enter the military academy at Brienne in 1779. He was nine years old when he entered the academy. He moved to the Parisian École Royale Militaire in 1784 and graduated a year later as a second lieutenant of artillery. Napoleon was able to spend much of the next eight years in Corsica. There he played an active part in political and military matters. He came into conflict with the Corsican nationalist Pasquale Paoli, and his family was forced to flee to Marseille in 1793.

The French Revolution caused much fighting and disorder in France. At times, Napoleon was connected to those in power. Other times, he was in jail. In the French Revolutionary Wars he helped the Republic against royalists who supported the former king of France. In September 1793, he assumed command of an artillery brigade at the siege of Toulon, where royalist leaders had welcomed a British fleet and troops. The British were driven out on December 17, 1793, and Bonaparte was rewarded with promotion to brigadier general and assigned to the French army in Italy in February 1794.

General Napoleon Bonaparte was later appointed by the republic to repel the royalists on October 5, 1795 (13 Vendémiaire Year IV in French Republican Calendar). More than a 1400 royalists died and the rest fled. He had cleared the streets with "a whiff of grapeshot" according to the 19th-century historian Thomas Carlyle. He was then promoted to major general and marked his name on the French Revolution.

The defeat of the Royalist rebellions ended the threat to the Convention and earned Bonaparte sudden fame, wealth, and the patronage of the new Directory. On March 9, 1796, Napoleon married Josephine de Beauharnais, a widow older than he was and a very unlikely wife to the future ruler.

The campaign in Italy is the first time Napoleon led France to war. Late in March 1796, Bonaparte began a series of operations to divide and defeat the Austrian and Sardinian armies in Italy. He defeated the Sardinians in April 21, bringing Savoy and Nice into France. Then, in a series of brilliant battles, he won Lombardy from the Austrians. Mantua, the last Lombard stronghold fell in February 1797.

In May 1798, General Napoleon left for a campaign in Egypt. The French needed to threaten British India and the French Directory was concerned that Napoleon would take control of France. The French Army under Napoleon won an overwhelming victory in the Battle of Pyramids. Barely 300 French soldiers died, while thousands of Mamluks (an old power in the Middle East) were killed. But his army was weakened by bubonic plague and poor supplies because the Navy was defeated at the Battle of the Nile. The Egyptian campaign was a military failure but a cultural success. The Rosetta Stone was found by French engineer Captain Pierre-François Bouchard, and French scholar Jean-François Champollion was able to read the words in the stone. Napoleon went back to France because of a change in the French government. Some believe that Napoleon should not have left his soldiers in Egypt. Napoleon helped lead the Brumaire coup d'état of November 1799.

Bonaparte returned to Paris in October 1799. France's situation had been improved by a series of victories but the Republic was bankrupt, and the ineffective Directory was unpopular with the French population. He was approached by one of the Directors, Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès, for his support in a coup to overthrow the constitutional government. The leaders of the plot included his brother Lucien Bonaparte (the speaker of the Council of Five Hundred), Roger Ducos, another Director, Joseph Fouché, and Charles Maurice Talleyrand. Other deputies realised they faced an attempted coup. Faced with their protests, Bonaparte led troops to seize control and disperse them, which left a rump legislature to name Bonaparte, Sièyes, and Ducos as the three provisional Consuls to administer the government.

Sieyès expected to dominate the new regime, but he was outmaneuvered by Bonaparte. Napoleon drafted the Constitution of the Year VIII, and secured his own election as First Consul. This made Bonaparte the most powerful person in France, and he took up residence at the Tuileries.

In 1800, Napoleon ensured his power by crossing the Alps and defeating the Austrians at Marengo. He then negotiated a general European peace that established the Rhine River as the eastern border of France. He also concluded an agreement with the pope (the Concordat of 1801), which contributed to French domestic tranquility by ending the quarrel with the Roman Catholic Church that had arisen during the French Revolution.

In France the administration was reorganized, the court system was simplified, and all schools were put under centralized control. French law was standardized in the Napoleonic Code, or civil code, and six other codes. They guaranteed the rights and liberties won in the Revolution, including equality before the law and freedom of religion.

After the French Revolution, the National Convention voted to abolish slavery in February 1794. This was a problem, because French colonies such as Saint Domingue produced a lot of sugarcane. The production was very labor-intensive, and relied on the fact that slaves did a lot of the hard work. Saint Domingue also gained a lot of autonomy from France, and Toussaint Louverture became its ruler, in 1801. Louverure ruled like a dictator. Napoleon saw a chance to regain control over the colony when he signed the Treaty of Amiens. In the 18th century, Saint-Domingue had been France's most profitable colony, producing more sugar than all the British West Indies colonies combined.

Aware of the expenses required to fund his wars in Europe, Napoleon made the decision to reinstate slavery in all French Caribbean colonies, in 1802. The 1794 decree had only affected the colonies of Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe and Guiana and did not take effect in Mauritius, Reunion and Martinique, the last of which had been captured by the British and as such remained unaffected by French law.

In Guadeloupe slavery had been abolished against opposition from slaveholders thanks to the 1794 law. However, when slavery was reinstated in 1802, a slave revolt broke out under the leadership of Louis Delgrès. The resulting Law of 20 May had the  purpose of reinstating slavery in Saint-Domingue, Guadeloupe and French Guiana. It restored slavery throughout most of the French colonial empire (excluding Saint-Domingue) for another half a century, while the French transatlantic slave trade continued for another twenty years.

Napoleon sent an expedition under his brother-in-law General Leclerc to  get control over Saint-Domingue. Although the French managed to capture Toussaint Louverture, the expedition failed:  Many French people became sick, and Jean-Jacques Dessalines won a number of  victories.  First against Leclerc, and when he died from yellow fever, then against Donatien-Marie-Joseph de Vimeur, vicomte de Rochambeau, whom Napoleon sent to relieve Leclerc with another 20,000 men. In May 1803, Napoleon acknowledged defeat, and the last 8,000 French troops left the island, and the slaves proclaimed an independent republic that they called Haiti in 1804. In the process, Dessalines became one of  the most successful military commander in the struggle against Napoleonic France. Seeing the failure of his efforts in Haiti, Napoleon decided in 1803 to sell the Louisiana Territory to the United States, doubling the size of the U.S. The selling price in the Louisiana Purchase was less than three cents per acre, a total of $15 million.

The peace with Britain proved to be uneasy and controversial. Britain did not evacuate Malta as promised and protested against Bonaparte's annexation of Piedmont and his Act of Mediation, which established a new Swiss Confederation. Neither of these territories were covered by Amiens, but they inflamed tensions significantly. The dispute culminated in a declaration of war by Britain in May 1803; Napoleon responded by reassembling the invasion camp at Boulogne and declaring that every British male between eighteen and sixty years old in France and its dependencies to be arrested as a prisoner of war.

In February 1804, a British-financial plot against Bonaparte was uncovered by the former police minister Joseph Fouche. It gave Napoleon a reason to start a hereditary dynasty. On December 2, 1804, Napoleon Bonaparte crowned himself "Emperor of the French". The people of France did not see him as the monarch of the old regime because of his holding a Roman Empire title. He invited Pope Pius VII to see his coronation at Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris. During the ceremony, Napoleon I took the crown from the pope's hand and placed it on his own head. This had been agreed on between Napoleon and the Pope. At Milan Cathedral on May 26, 1805, Napoleon was crowned King of Italy with the Iron Crown of Lombardy.

To restore prosperity, Napoleon modernized finance. He regulated the economy to control prices, encouraged new industry, and built roads and canals. To ensure well-trained officials and military officers, he promoted a system of public schools under firm government control. He also repealed some social reforms of the revolution. He made peace with the Catholic Church in the Concordat of 1801. The Concordat kept the Church under state control but recognized religious freedom for Catholics.

Napoleon I won support across class lines. He encouraged the émigré population to return, provided they gave an oath of loyalty. Peasants were relieved when he recognized their right to lands they had bought during the revolution. Napoleon's chief opposition came from royalists and republicans.

Among Napoleon's most lasting reforms was a new law code, popularly called the Napoleonic Code. It embodied Enlightenment principles such as equality of all citizens before the law, religious toleration, and advancement based on virtue. But the Napoleonic Code undid some reforms of the French Revolution. Women, for example, lost most of their newly gained rights under the new code. The law considered women minors who could not exercise the rights of citizenship. Male heads of households regained full authority over their wives and children. Again, Napoleon valued order and authority over individual rights.

Emperor Napoleon abandoned plans to invade England and turned his armies against the Austro-Russian forces, defeating them at the Battle of Austerlitz on December 2, 1805. In 1806 Napoleon destroyed the Prussian army at Jena and Auerstädt and the Russian army at Friedland. He crowned his elder brother Joseph Bonaparte as King of Naples and Sicily in 1806 and converted the Dutch Republic into the kingdom of Holland for his brother Louis. Napoleon also established the Confederation of the Rhine (most of the German states) of which he was protector.

To legitimize his rule, he divorced his wife Joséphine and married Marie Louise, duchess of Parma and daughter of the Emperor Francis I of Austria. Soon she delivered a son and heir to the Bonaparte Dynasty. He was named Napoléon François Joseph Charles Bonaparte or Napoleon II and crowned King of Rome from his birth.

At Tilsit in July 1807, Napoleon made an ally of Russian tsar Alexander Romanov and greatly reduced the size of Prussia. He also added new states to the empire: the kingdom of Westphalia, under his youngest brother Jerome, the duchy of Warsaw, and other states.

The Congress of Erfurt sought to preserve the Russo-French alliance and the leaders had a friendly personal relationship after their first meeting at Tilsit in 1807. However, on June 23, 1812, Napoleon went to war with Russia. The French invasion of Russia defeated many Russian cities and villages, but by the time they reached Moscow it was winter. Due to the Russian army's scorched earth tactics, the French found little food for themselves and their horses. Napoleon's army was unable to defeat the Russians. The Russians began to attack. Napoleon and his army had to go back to France. The French suffered greatly in during Napoleon's retreat. Most of his soldiers never returned to France. His army was reduced to 70,000 soldiers and 40,000 stragglers, against more than three times as many Allied troops. Finally at the 1813 Battle of the Nations he was defeated by the Allies: Sweden, Russia, Austria, and Prussia.

Napoleon had no choice but to abdicate in favor of his son. However, the Allies refused to accept this. Napoleon abdicated without conditions on April 11, 1814. Before his official abdication, Napoleon attempted suicide with a pill but it did not work. In the Treaty of Fontainebleau the victors exiled him to Elba, an island of 12,000 inhabitants in the Mediterranean. The Allies allowed Napoleon to keep an imperial title "Emperor of Elba" and an allowance of 2 million francs a year. Napoleon even requested a 21 gun salute as emperor of the island of Elba. Many delegates feared that Elba was too close to Europe to keep such a dangerous force.

Separated from his son and wife, who had come under Austrian control, cut off from the allowance guaranteed to him by the Treaty of Fontainebleau, and aware of rumours he was about to be banished to a remote island in the Atlantic Ocean, Napoleon escaped from Elba on February 26, 1815. He made a surprise march on March 1, 1815 to Paris. His former troops joined him and Louis XVIII fled to exile. He again became ruler of France for a length of 100 days. Napoleon was defeated at the Battle of Waterloo by the British under Duke of Wellington and Prussians on June 18 1815, which was his last battle. Napoleon was again captured and taken to his second exile on the island of Saint Helena on the Atlantic Ocean.

Napoleon was sent to the island of Saint Helena, off the coast of Africa. He died on May 5, 1821 from gastrointestinal bleeding caused by stomach cancer. Napoleon kept himself up to date of the events through The Times and hoped for release in the event that Henry Vassall-Fox, 3rd Baron Holland became Prime Minister. There were other plots to rescue Napoleon from captivity including one from Texas, where exiled soldiers from the Grande Armée wanted a resurrection of the Napoleonic Empire in America. There was even a plan to rescue him with a primitive submarine. For Lord Byron, Napoleon was the epitome of the Romantic hero, the persecuted, lonely and flawed genius. The news that Napoleon had taken up gardening at Longwood also appealed to more domestic British sensibilities.

French people remain proud of Napoleon's glory days. The Napoleonic Code reflects the modern French Constitution. Weapons and other kinds of military technology remained largely static through the Revolutionary and Napoleonic eras, but 18th century operational mobility underwent significant change. Napoleon's biggest influence was in the conduct of warfare. His popularity would later help his nephew Louis-Napoléon to become ruler of France more than 30 years later.

On the world stage, Napoleon's conquest spread the ideas of the revolution. He failed to make Europe into a French Empire. Instead, he sparked nationalist feeling across Europe. He was also known as “The Leader Of France”.

Historians have many different views on Napoleon. Some historians say that he caused wars that killed many people in Europe, and therefore he was a bad ruler. Vincent Cronin disagrees with the view, saying that most of the Napoleonic Wars were started by Napoleon's enemies. Others argue that Napoleon made the mistake of trying to conquer too much land and that if he had stopped in 1808, his enemies might have left him alone. Other historians have said that he was a good ruler. They usually focus on the changes he brought to France and the countries he conquered. Andrew Roberts lists the greatest ideas that Napoleon brought to France and other countries as the Napoleonic code, freedom of religion, better civil services, better education, more equality, support for science and art and others.

In popular culture, the "Napoleon complex", also known as "Napoleon syndrome" and "short man syndrome", is a purported condition normally attributed to people of short stature, with overly aggressive or domineering social behavior, and is named after Napoleon Bonaparte, who was estimated to have been 5' 2" tall (in pre–metric system French measures), which equals around 1.67 meters, or just under 5' 6" in imperial measure.

Nairobi is the capital and largest city of Kenya. Its name comes from The Masaai word 'Enkare Nyorobi' meaning 'place of cool waters'. It is far from the coastline of Kenya. About three million people live there. The city was founded in 1899 as a railway depot linking Uganda to Mombasa. Nairobi is the fourth largest city in Africa with a population of more than 6 million people. There are several popular shopping malls, including the Yaya Center,The Thika Road Mall, The Hub Karen, Junction Mall, the Village Market, and the Sarit Center.  The Israeli owned, Westgate Mall was another popular destination until it was attacked by al Shaabab terrorists in 2013. Nairobi is headed by a governor, who is called Mike Mbuvi 'Sonko' and he's Deputy, Polycarp Igathe who were inaugurated after the August 8,2017 election.

Nairobi has become very highly populated due to high rural to urban migration rates. Violent crime is also fairly common in many areas, leading to the nickname "Nairobbery."

Nazi Germany (officially known as the German Third Reich from 1933 to 1943, later known as the Greater German Reich from 1943 to 1945; commonly simply called Germany), was the period of Germany between 1933 and 1945. Adolf Hitler (the Nazi leader, or Führer) and the Nazi Party controlled the country as a dictatorship that invaded and took over other countries. While the government did this, they also perpetrated The Holocaust, a systematic genocide of Jewish people and other unwanted groups in many parts of Europe. It is also sometimes called the Third Reich (), which means the 'Third Empire' or 'Third Realm'. The first German empire was the Holy Roman Empire which started in the year 800 or 962 until it ended in 1806 in the Napoleonic Wars. The second was the German Empire of 1871 to 1918 which ended in 1918 when Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated the throne when the Weimar Republic started in 1918. The Nazis said they were making the third, even though it was not a monarchy. However, the term 'Third Reich' was more popular in other countries. In Germany it was merely The Reich (pronounced 'rike') or the Greater German Reich ().

Adolf Hitler led Nazi Germany until it was defeated in World War II in the Battle of Berlin, when he killed himself in 1945. The Nazi Party was destroyed in the same year.  Its leaders ran away, were arrested, or killed themselves.  Some were executed for war crimes by the Allied powers.  Other leaders survived, and some of them got important jobs.  However, their racial policies never again held power in Germany.

The Nazi government was formed under the idea that the "Aryan race" (pure white Germans) deserved to rule over all other races. This idea gained respect after the Great Depression made many important Germans poor and powerless. Hitler blamed the problems on Jews, communists, liberals, and many others. He made many Germans feel like they were innocent victims who had to take charge over Europe. The Nazis also tried to make an empire with colonies, and used their ally Italy's colonies in Africa as a model. When the Nazi government was destroyed at the end of World War II, Germany was split into four "occupation zones" which later became East Germany and West Germany.

The Nazis came to power in 1933 and made their power absolute with an "Enabling Act of 1933" and an unfair referendum. They centralized Germany, replacing local self-government.  They strengthened the economy by doing business with the Soviet Union and foreign companies like General Motors and IBM.  They put the Schutzstaffel in control of the local police, and started the Gestapo to find, jail, and kill political enemies. They immediately banned Jews from important jobs, and soon restricted them in other ways.  After a few years they expanded the Wehrmacht and built the armed forces far beyond the limits of the Treaty of Versailles. They also cooperated and made agreements with Italy and Japan.

On September 1st, 1939, German forces attacked Poland, which began World War II. With over a million troops, Hitler's army easily took over Poland, losing about 59,000 soldiers. Their country was also attacked by the Soviet Union from the east. Poland lost over 900,000 soldiers. On October 12, 1939, Hitler sent a letter to the United Kingdom promising peace. The British continued the war. Hitler conquered France in the Battle of France. Then he sent the Luftwaffe to attack England. Winston Churchill, now Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, did not surrender. The Battle of Britain lasted from July to October 1940. When it failed, Hitler ordered the mass bombardment of London. That also failed, and Hitler decided to face east for his racial war of destroying the Slavs and Jews. This gave Britain time to regain power.

In 1941, Hitler ordered "Operation Barbarossa." It lasted from June 22, 1941 until December 5, 1941. Joseph Stalin, the leader of the Soviet Union, had weakened his army with his Great Purges, which had killed many Russian officers before the war. During Operation Barbarossa, many more Soviet soldiers died than Germans. At Stalingrad, however, about a million soldiers died on each side. While the Soviet Union could replace its losses, Germany could not.

After Stalingrad, the Germans lost their momentum. The Soviets learned from the long campaigns, fought better, and gained many new weapons from very efficient factories. The United States, Britain, France, and the Soviet Union fought together, and pushed against the smaller German army. In May 1945, they took over Berlin to win the war. Many people from all sides of the war died fighting in Europe, including:

Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (29 September 1547 – 23 April 1616) was a Spanish writer. His most famous book was Don Quijote de la Mancha. It is considered the first modern novel, and therefore Cervantes was the first novelist. The book has been published in 65 countries. The work is considered among the most important in all of literature. He is sometimes called "The Prince of Satire".

Nobody knows for sure the reasons that forced Cervantes to leave Castile. Whether he was a "student" of the same name, a "sword-wielding fugitive from justice", or fleeing from a royal warrant of arrest, for having wounded a certain Antonio de Sigura in a duel, is another mystery.

In any event, in going to Italy, Cervantes was doing what many young Spaniards of the time did to further their careers. Rome would reveal to the young artist its ecclesiastic pomp, ritual, and majesty. In a city teeming with ruins Cervantes could focus his attention on Renaissance art, architecture, and poetry (knowledge of Italian literature is readily discernible in his own productions) and on rediscovering antiquity. He could find in the ancients "a powerful impetus to revive the contemporary world in light of its accomplishments". Thus, Cervantes' continuing desire for Italy, as revealed in his later works, was in part a desire for a return to an earlier period of the Renaissance.

By 1570, Cervantes had enlisted as a soldier in a regiment of the Spanish naval elite corps, Infantería de Marina, stationed in Naples, then a possession of the Spanish crown. He was there for about a year before he saw active service. In September 1571 Cervantes sailed on board the Marquesa, part of the galley fleet of the Holy League, Spain, the Republic of Venice, the Republic of Genoa, the Duchy of Savoy, the Knights Hospitaller based in Malta, and others, under the command of King Philip II's illegitimate half brother, John of Austria, that defeated the Ottoman fleet on October 7 in the Gulf of Lepanto near Corinth, at great cost to both sides. Though taken down with fever, Cervantes refused to stay below, and begged to be allowed to take part in the battle, saying that he would rather die for his God and his king than keep under cover. He fought bravely on board a , and received three gunshot wounds – two in the chest, and one which rendered his left arm useless. In Journey to Parnassus he was to say that he "had lost the movement of the left hand for the glory of the right" (he was thinking of the success of the first part of Don Quixote). Cervantes always looked back on his conduct in the battle with pride; he believed that he had taken part in an event that would shape the course of European history.

Mollusks are an important phylum of invertebrate animals. Most of them are marine animals, which means they live in the ocean. They have huge numbers in-shore, that is, in shallow water. They are the largest marine phylum, with about 85,000 living species, 23% of all named marine organisms. They also occur in freshwater and on land.

Mollusks are extremely varied: they have great diversity. That may be why there is no word in English for the phylum as a whole. "In an evolutionary sense, mollusks are plastic material". They have much more variety than their ancient rivals, the brachiopods.

Most molluscs have shells, but some groups do not: octopods, slugs, and the gastropods known as sea slugs.

Many mollusks also live in freshwater and terrestrial habitats. They are highly diverse, not just in size and in anatomical structure, but also in behaviour and in habitat.

The phylum is usually divided into nine or ten taxonomic classes, of which two are entirely extinct. Cephalopod molluscs, such as squid, cuttlefish and octopus, are among the most neurologically advanced of all invertebrates: they have good brains and complex behaviours. Either the giant squid or the colossal squid is the largest known invertebrate species. The gastropods (snails and slugs) are by far the most numerous molluscs in terms of classified species, and account for 80% of the total. The scientific study of mollusks is called malacology.

The three most universal features defining modern mollusks are:

Other than these things, mollusks have so much variety that many textbooks use a "hypothetical ancestral mollusk" to summarize them (see below). This has a single, "limpet-like" shell on top, which is made of proteins and chitin reinforced with calcium carbonate. It is secreted by a mantle covering the whole upper surface. The underside of the animal consists of a single muscular "foot".

The mollusk's feeding system starts with a rasping "tongue", the radula. The complex digestive system uses mucus and microscopic, muscle-powered "hairs" called cilia. The generalized mollusk has two paired nerve cords, or three in bivalves. The brain, in species that have one, circles the oesophagus. Most mollusks have eyes, and all have sensors to detect chemicals, vibrations, and touch. The simplest type of molluscan reproductive system relies on external fertilization, but more complex variations occur. All produce eggs, from which may emerge trochophore larvae, more complex veliger larvae, or miniature adults.

A striking feature of molluscs is the use of the same organ for multiple functions. For example, the heart and nephridia ("kidneys") are important parts of the reproductive system, as well as the circulatory and excretory systems. In bivalves, the gills both "breathe" and produce a water current in the mantle cavity: this is important for excretion and reproduction. In reproduction, molluscs may change gender to accommodate the other breeding partner.

Good evidence exists for the appearance of gastropods, cephalopods and bivalves in the Cambrian period, 541 to 485.4 million years ago (mya). Before that, the evolutionary history of molluscs' emergence from the ancestral Lophotrochozoa is still unclear.

Mollusk species can also represent hazards or pests for human activities. The bite of the blue-ringed octopus is often fatal, and that of Octopus apollyon causes inflammation that can last for over a month. Stings from a few species of large tropical cone shells can also kill: their venom have become important tools in neurological research. Schistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia, bilharziosis or snail fever) is transmitted to humans via water snail hosts, and affects about 200 million people. Snails and slugs can also be serious agricultural pests, and accidental or deliberate introduction of some snail species into new environments has seriously damaged some ecosystems.

Because mollusks have so many different shapes, many textbooks start the subject of molluscan anatomy by describing what is called an archi-mollusc, hypothetical generalized mollusc, or hypothetical ancestral mollusc (HAM) to illustrate the most common features in the phylum. The picture is rather similar to modern monoplacophorans: some think it may resemble very early mollusks.

The generalized mollusk is bilaterally symmetrical and has a single, "limpet-like" shell on top. The shell is secreted by a mantle covering the upper surface. The underside consists of a single muscular "foot". The visceral mass, or visceropallium, is the soft, nonmuscular metabolic region of the mollusc. It contains the body organs.

It has become clear that the fossil taxon Helcionelloida does not belong to the class Gastropoda. It is now a separate class in the Mollusca. Parkhaev (2006, 2007) created the class Helcionelloida, whose members were previously treated as "Paleozoic mollusks of uncertain systematic position" by Bouchet & Rocroi.

Nationalism is the idea of promoting the interests of a particular nation. Mostly it includes interests in the sovereignty of their own country or homeland. Nationalists think that the best way to make this happen and avoid control or oppression by others is for each group to have their own nation. Some nationalists think this is the best way to save small and weak groups threatened by the mixing of ethnic groups, such as in countries like Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia.. The other definition of nationalism is the 'identification with one's own nation and support for its interests, especially to the exclusion or detriment of the interests of other nations.

The opposite of nationalism is Internationalism and anti-nationalism.

Many early socialists were also nationalists. The earliest forms of nationalism had lots of socialist features. Political thinkers who thought that ethnic groups should not be oppressed by other ethnic groups thought also that 'normal folk', the backbone of society, like workers and peasants, should not be oppressed by higher social classes like rich people. They also thought that it is wrong for somebody to live in great welfare that is made of the hard work of others, or the oppression of others. The ideology is that the social classes should work together and have a common goal that aims for the good of everyone. These goals can be called "national interest".

Nationalists started to support normal people, especially peasants, whom they saw as uncorrupted, gallant, and fair, unlike high classes. For example, normal folks often had more original and local ethnic culture than the high classes, whose culture was seen as more rootless.

Socialism and nationalism grew together. But they have also been in opposition. The most known opposition between these ideologies was with the Soviet Union. Soviet propaganda made nationalism an insult word that was linked with opposed ideologies like capitalism, liberalism, imperialism or fascism. Even in the Soviet Union and other communist or socialist countries, there was nationalism in great measure (even if it was not called with that name).

The most capitalist countries like the United States were patriotic rather than nationalist. The Nordic countries, which were among the most pure nation-states (countries that follow nationalist principle), were not very capitalist or rightist; they were built on the social democratic idea, which is left. Only after Nordic countries became more multicultural did their politics become more rightist.

Today nationalism does not have a common stand on those fields of politics that are outside of its basic goals, like left-right politics. However nationalism can be a part of a bigger political ideology or agenda that can be leftist or rightist or something outside that classification.

Nationalism is  usually connected to goals that resist strong hierarchy between social classes in society. Nationalist people are usually more or less against the strongest forms of capitalism, which they think gives too much power to rich people and big companies.

Nationalism had an important role in ending colonial rule. Nationalism spread to colonies and made their people desire independence. Nationalism also made the people in metropolitan states (countries that colonized others) accept more the desire of other people to rule themselves. However nationalists think that the end of colonization of Africa was not done well. They think that there would not be so many conflicts in Africa if African nations had built in a nationalist way (so that every ethnic group is its own nation).

After the imperialists left their African colonies, the new nations were built with borders that were not the same as the ethnic borders. New nations became nations with many ethnic groups, which do not want to or cannot live peacefully in the same society with the others.

The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (sometimes known as the North Atlantic Alliance, the Atlantic Alliance or the Western Alliance), also simply called NATO, is a military alliance that is mostly in Europe and North America. Its other official name means the same in French: Organisation du traité de l'Atlantique nord (OTAN).

It was established by the North Atlantic Treaty, which was signed in Washington, DC, United States, on April 4, 1949. Its headquarters are in Brussels, Belgium.

NATO has two official languages, English and French, as defined in Article 14 of the North Atlantic Treaty.

Its members when it was founded on 4 April 1949 were the United States, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, France, the United Kingdom, Canada, Portugal, Italy, Norway, Denmark and Iceland. On 18 February 1952, Greece and Turkey also joined.

When West Germany joined on 9 May 1955, it was described as "a decisive turning point in the history of our continent" by Norwegian Foreign Minister Halvard Lange. The Warsaw Pact was signed on 14 May 1955 by the Soviet Union and its satellite states as a defense to NATO.

Iceland threatened to leave during the 1970s Cod Wars, which would put the United Kingdom at fault, and NATO would lose a key position in the North Atlantic. Iceland won the Cod Wars and did not end up leaving.

After the Cold War ended, three former communist countries, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Poland, joined NATO in 1999. On 29 March 2004, seven more Northern and Eastern European countries joined NATO: Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria and Romania.

Croatia and Albania received invitation for NATO membership on 3 April 2008. The Republic of Macedonia received only a conditional invitation because a full invitation was vetoed by Greece over a naming dispute.

Montenegro joined on 5 June 2017. Having changed its name to end its dispute with Greece,

North Macedonia joined NATO on 27 March 2020 and became its 30th member.

In April 2023, Finland joined NATO, following efforts to join since the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Sweden joined NATO in March 2024.

NATO also has a program called the Partnership for Peace (PfP), which is a program of cooperation between NATO and partner countries in/near Europe. the program includes Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Ireland, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Malta, Moldova, Serbia, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan.

The Ming dynasty was the family of emperors who led China from 1368 to 1644. The name is also used to talk about the  that they led and the 276 years in Chinese history that it lasted. It's also called Great Ming or Dà Míng.

It is also famous for its pottery from Jingdezhen in Jiangxi and Dehua in Fujian.

The Ming dynasty is known in Chinese as the Míng. This is written as  in Chinese characters. The character is a sun () and a moon () together and means "bright". Chinese uses different words to talk about the different meanings of a Chinese "dynasty" in English: their government is called the Míng cháo , their country is called the Dà Míng dìguó ( or , and their time in Chinese history is called the Míng dài .

Unlike in English, the name of the dynasty is not the same as the family name of the leaders. The family that led China during the Ming were the Zhūs.  This is written as  in Chinese characters.  Today, it is just a common Chinese family name, but at that time it meant a kind of red coloring made from cinnabar (HgS).

The Yuan dynasty before them had been part of the Mongol Empire started by Genghis Khan. The Yuan dynasty was established by Kublai Khan. Its emperors had been Mongolian people, but most of China was Han Chinese. To keep their power, the Yuan used a Chinese kind of government of Three Departments and Six Ministries, with imperial examinations. Their laws gave special powers to Mongolian people, though, with other people from other countries ("Semu") placed second, northern Chinese third, and southern Chinese last. They were especially nice to Tibetan Buddhists and gave many important jobs to Muslims, although they also made Muslims break some rules and eat like Mongolians. Some Muslims were angry and started to fight the Yuan. Many people began to fight after the 1340s. The Black Death killed many people and the government did not keep up the work needed to stop the Yellow River from killing people when it flooded. The Red Turbans began fighting in 1351 and its best leader Zhu Yuanzhang made the Yuan emperor Toghun Temür run away from the capital city Khanbaliq (now inside Beijing) in 1368.

When Zhu Yuanzhang took Khanbaliq, he said that the Yuan was over and that his family would be a new dynasty called the Ming. He said that 1368 was the 1st year of the Hongwu Era and became known as the Hongwu Emperor. Toghun Temür and other Mongolians still fought him, but now they were known as the Northern Yuan and the Ming became the real government of most of China.

The Hongwu Emperor had many sons and made them the leaders of the 13 different parts of China. He did not stay in Khanbaliq. He made his old base Yingtian (today's Nanjing) into the new capital city. He wanted China to be more traditional and more Chinese, so he ended most government support for other religions and made Christianity against the law. He wanted China to take care of itself, so he ended most buying and selling of things from other countries. He made a list of rules for his family, and they mostly followed them during the rest of the Ming.

The oldest son of the Hongwu Emperor died before him, so the next emperor was his grandson the Jianwen Emperor. The Jianwen Emperor was about 20 years old and didn't like the power of his many uncles. He started taking away their power, sending them away, or even making them kill themselves. The uncle leading Beijing (old Khanbaliq and now Beijing) was named Zhu Di. He pretended to be crazy so that the Jianwen Emperor would be less afraid. The emperor even let his three sons—kept in the capital city to be sure of their father's good behavior—go north see him. Zhu Di then began a war against his nephew.

At first, Zhu Di said his war was only against the "bad helpers" who told his nephew to hurt their family. When his war was successful and he took Yingtian (now Nanjing), he made himself the Yongle Emperor. He said that his nephew had never been the real emperor and killed many people in the old government. He did not trust the people in Yingtian, so he made Beijing the main capital city. The southern capital then became known as Nanjing and the northern capital Beijing, the names they continue to use today. In Beijing, he built a new home which became the Forbidden City.

The Yongle Emperor did not like many of the people in government who got there by doing well on their tests. He gave more power to eunuchs, men who were hurt as children to stop them from being able to have children of their own. One of these was Zheng He, a Muslim who led great treasure ships south from Suzhou and Nanjing in 7 big trips between 1405 and 1433. The first trips may have been looking for the Jianwen Emperor, but they also became trips that taught China about the South China Sea and Indian Ocean and opened up more buying and selling between their countries and China.

The Oirat leader Esen Tayisi invaded the Ming empire in July 1449. The eunuch Wang Zhen told the Zhengtong Emperor to lead a force personally to fight the Oirats after a recent Ming defeat; the emperor left the capital and put his younger brother Zhu Qiyu as the new emperor temporarily. On 8 September, Esen defeated Zhengtong's army, and Zhengtong was captured—an event known as the Tumu Crisis.

The Oirats held the Zhengtong Emperor for ransom. However, their scheme failed once  Zhu Qiyu assumed the throne under the era name Jingtai. The Oirats were also repelled once the Jingtai Emperor's close friend and defense minister Yu Qian (1398–1457) gained control of the Ming armed forces.

The Zhengtong emperor was useless for the Oirats, so they allowed him to go back to China. The former emperor was placed under house arrest in the palace, until he took the throne from the Jingtai Emperor in 1457 known as the "Wresting the Gate Incident". The former emperor retook the throne under the new era name Tianshun and ruled until 1464.

The reign of the Wanli Emperor (1572–1620) had many problems. In the beginning of his reign, Wanli surrounded himself with good advisors and made responsible efforts to handle ruling the empire.

His Grand Secretary Zhang Juzheng (1572–1582) built up an effective network of alliances with senior officials. However, there was no one after him skilled enough to maintain the stability of these alliances; officials soon fought with each other in opposing political factions.

Over time, Wanli grew tired of ruling and the fights between his ministers, so he decided to stay inside his palace in the Forbidden City and out of his ministers' sight.

Officials became less important in court as eunuchs became the links between the distant emperor and his officials; any senior official who wanted to discuss state matters had to give the powerful eunuchs a bribe simply to have his demands or message reach to the emperor. There were several military campaigns and wars during the Wanli Emperor's reign, Ordos campaign, the response to the Bozhou rebellion, and the Imjin War.

The Mings' main capital of Beijing fell in 1644 to a rebellion led by Li Zicheng, who established the Shun dynasty. This was soon replaced by the Manchu-led Qing dynasty. The people who still liked the Ming continued to fight as the Southern Ming up to 1683.

The Ming Empire has been described as "one of the greatest eras of orderly government and social stability in human history". It was the last Chinese dynasty led by the Han Chinese, not counting the short-lived governments of Li Zicheng and Yuan Shikai. It is also famous for its pottery from Jingdezhen in Jiangxi and Dehua in Fujian.

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (1881 – 10 November 1938) was a Turkish marshal and statesman who was the first President of Turkey from 1923 to his death in 1938.

He started changes that founded the Turkish nation state based on social and economic nationalism, which was modern and similar to Western civilization (such as the French model of secularism called laïcité).

Atatürk was born under the name Mustafa in 1881. His birthplace was in Salonika, Macedonia (now Thessaloniki, Greece). Salonika was then part of the Ottoman Empire. He took the name Kemal as a schoolboy and Atatürk (which means Father of the Turks) when he was president. His father was Ali Rıza Efendi (Efendi is a title of nobility). His mother was Zübeyde Hanım. He also had a sister, whose name was Makbule (Atadan). He joined the Ottoman army and became an army officer and the most successful general officer of the empire in World War I, fighting in Gallipoli where he successfully defended the peninsula against British and French attacks.

The Ottoman Empire was defeated by the Allied powers in World War I and the empire was divided by several major powers. Many territories of the Ottoman Empire including those in Anatolia were to be given to Britain, France, Italy, Greece and Armenia. While the Ottoman Empire was collapsing after the war, Atatürk quickly fled the capital Istanbul right before the Allied occupation of the city and went to Ankara where he organized a Turkish resistance army to fight against the invaders and kick them out of Anatolia. After defeating the armies which had invaded Anatolia and expelling them in September 1922, he marched into Istanbul as a liberator in January 1923 where he created a nationalist Turkish movement that created the new, secular Republic of Turkey. This meant that the country's government was no longer led by hereditary or religious leaders. Visitors to Turkey are often surprised by the importance given to Atatürk in Turkey.

Few countries have such a person in their history. He was a successful military commander, later established a unitary republic based on a constitution and put in place changes that set Turkey on the road to becoming a new and developing nation. He inspired many later leaders like Amānullāh Khān, Reza Shah Pahlavi, Adolf Hitler, Habib Bourguiba, Gamal Abdel Nasser, Sukarno, and John F. Kennedy.

His six principles still serve today as a sign post for establishing a democratic government:

Michael Faraday (Newington Butts, Surrey. 22 September 1791 – Hampton Court, Surrey, 25 August 1867) was the son of a blacksmith who became one of the most famous scientists of the 19th century.

He was sent to a local school to learn how to read and write. A local vicar paid for this, seeing his obvious intelligence. Faraday became the greatest experimental physicist of the nineteenth century.

Faraday became a Fellow of the Royal Society, and was awarded the Royal, Copley and Rumford medals of the Society. Although Faraday had only primary school education, and did not know higher mathematics, he became one of the most influential scientists in history. For the most part, he was an autodidact: he taught himself.

At the time when he lived, people like him were called natural philosophers. Then, only a little was known about electricity. Michael Faraday discovered many things about the way electricity flowing in a wire can act like a magnet (now called electromagnetism). He also found out a lot about the way electricity can be used with chemicals to make them change (now called electrochemistry).

He showed that magnetism is able to affect rays of light, as there is an underlying relationship between the two phenomena. His inventions of electromagnetic rotary devices formed the foundation of electric motor technology, and it was largely due to his efforts that electricity became viable for use in technology. He made the first electric motor. It is thanks to his early work that electricity has been made into a useful thing today.

As a chemist, Michael Faraday discovered benzene, invented an early type of Bunsen burner and popularized terminology such as anode, cathode, electrode and ion. Faraday was the first Fullerian Professor of Chemistry at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, a position to which he was appointed for life. He was also the Director of the Royal Institution after Sir Humphrey Davy.

Albert Einstein kept a photograph of Faraday on his study wall alongside pictures of Isaac Newton and James Clerk Maxwell.

Michael Faraday's family was poor. His father, James, was a blacksmith. James Faraday had come to London in the 1780s from North-West England. The young Michael Faraday was one of four children and only had the most basic school education. At fourteen he went to learn how to be a bookbinder and bookseller from a man called George Riebau.

During his seven-year study of making books with Riebau, he read many books. He read Isaac Watts's The improvement of the mind. Faraday loved to use the ideas in this book in his work. He became interested in science, especially in electricity. He began to attend public lessons run by the best scientists in London at the time. He showed the notes he made the great chemist Sir Humphrey Davy. Davy liked him and offered him a job as an assistant in March 1813.

Faraday's knowledge continued to grow as he helped Sir Humphrey Davy until he made discoveries on his own. He was eventually made a professor in 1833. The importance of his work was seen within his lifetime and the British government gave him a pension in his old age as a reward.

Faraday was a strong Christian. He belonged to a church that came from the Church of Scotland. He thought that both God and the physical world should be loved and made known.

Faraday also discovered that if electricity strikes a metal object, it will only pass through the outside of the object. The inside is unaffected by the electricity. This is what keeps the people inside safe when lightning strikes a car or a plane. This is now called Faraday's Cage.

Faraday stated that when a magnet moves across a coil and creates "electricity" , this effect is only secondary, and does not account for what is actually taking place inside the wire.

A mosquito is a type of fly. It is the common name of a family of flies in the order Diptera.

The females are ectoparasites: they land on warm-blooded animals, pierce a capillary, and inject saliva to stop the blood coagulating. Then they suck up and eat the blood. Deadly microscopic parasites often live in the saliva. The mosquito's saliva is transferred to the host during the bite. It can cause a histamine reaction exhibited by an itchy .

In addition, many species can transmit pathogens from one host to another when biting. In this way, mosquitoes are important vectors of parasitic diseases such as malaria and filariasis, and arboviral diseases such as yellow fever, Chikungunya, West Nile, dengue fever, and Zika.

By transmitting diseases, mosquitoes cause the deaths of more people than any other animal taxon: over 700,000 each year.

The males are nectar-feeders, and so are the females. However, in preparation for egg-laying the females turn to blood for its protein.

Usually both male and female mosquitoes feed on nectar and plant juices. In many species the mouthparts of the females are adapted for piercing the skin of animal hosts and sucking their blood as ectoparasites. In many species, the female needs to get proteins from a blood meal before she can produce eggs. Hence, only female mosquitoes bite humans to suck their blood. In many other species, she can produce more eggs after a blood meal.

They lay their eggs in pools of water. The larvae move around near the surface of the water, breathing through air tubes that stick out of the water. They get their food from the water, usually eating algae and other tiny creatures. They like to wiggle (move around) near the surface, which is why some people call them wigglers. The larvae usually enter the pupa stage within a few days or weeks of hatching, depending on the water temperature and the species.

The pupae are called tumblers as they tumble in (fall into) the water when the water surface is touched. Tumblers do not eat, but they move around in the water a lot, and like larvae, they breathe from tubes that stick out of the water. The pupa stage is short – only for a few days – and the mosquito reaches adulthood. There are many species of mosquito. This comes about because, of those which suck blood, each species is adapted to a different host or group of hosts. There are two subfamilies, 43 genera and over 3,500 species of the Culicidae.

Mosquitoes are a vector (carrier) which carries disease-causing viruses and parasites from person to person. The principal mosquito borne diseases are the viral diseases yellow fever, dengue fever malaria Morbius, HIV, Covid-19, Covid-23, and Covid 24 carried by the genera Anopheles and Culex. Mosquitoes spread disease to over 700 million people every year across Asia, Africa, South America and Central America, costing hundreds of thousands of lives.

Methods for preventing the spread of mosquito-borne diseases and protecting individuals in areas where disease is endemic include but not limited to:

Standing water, as in a pond or lake, is the main breeding ground. It may or may not be practical to eliminate this water. The water in bird baths can be changed once a week, but one can hardly do that with larger bodies of water. The method used to be spraying water with DDT, but that does a lot of damage, and in any event the mosquito is now highly resistant to the chemical.

With increasing reports of the harmful effects DEET has on humans, there has been a move to repellents which are organic. These are of the kind that have had traditional household purposes before their use as mosquito repellents.

The dragonfly nymph eats mosquitoes at all stages of development and is quite effective in controlling populations. Some bats can eat as many as 500 mosquitoes per hour. Some copepods are predators on first instar larvae, killing up to 40 aedes larvae per day. Several species of fish eat mosquito larvae, including goldfish, catfish, piranhas and minnows.

The oldest known mosquito with a basically modern anatomy was found in 79-million-year-old Canadian amber from the Upper Cretaceous period. An older sister species with more primitive features was found in amber that is 90 to 100 million years old.

Genetic analysis indicates that the Culicinae and Anophelinae clades may have diverged about 150 million years ago. The Old and New World Anopheles species are believed to have subsequently diverged about 95 million years ago.

Mesopotamia (Ancient Greek: Μεσοποταμία - "land between rivers") is a historical region in the Middle East. It included most of today’s Iraq, and parts of modern-day Iran, Syria and Turkey. The 'two rivers' of the name referred to the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers.

The land was called Al-Jazirah ("the island") by the Arabs, and Egyptologist J.H. Breasted later included it in the Fertile Crescent. The region is bounded in the northeast by the Zagros Mountains and in the southeast by the Arabian Plateau. The area is often called the cradle of civilization. The ancient writing system, or alphabet, is called cuneiform. It was first used around 3000 BC by the Sumerians. Historically important cities in Mesopotamia included Uruk, Ur, Nippur, Nineveh and Babylon.

Major territorial states were the Akkadian kingdom, the Third Dynasty of Ur, and the Assyrian Empire. Some of the important historical Mesopotamian leaders were Ur-Nammu (king of Ur), Sargon of Akkad, the founder of the Akkadian kingdom, Hammurabi, who established the Old Babylonian state, and Tiglath-Pileser I, who started the Assyrian Empire.

Many advances in technology were made by the ancient Sumerians, such as irrigation, trade by river, and flood control. Sumerians had agriculture and domesticated animals, or livestock, from the earliest records. Babylon is likely the first city built by settled people. Mesopotamia was also the place where the wheel was first used. First it was a potter's wheel that was used to make clay pots, then Sumerians adapted it for transport.

Mesopotamia is made up of different regions. Northern Mesopotamia is made up of hills and plains. The land is quite fertile due to seasonal rains, and the rivers and streams that come from the mountains. Early settlers farmed the land and used timber, metals and stone. Southern Mesopotamia is made up of marshy areas and wide, flat, plains. Cities developed along the Euphrates and Tigris rivers flowing through the region. Early settlers had to irrigate the land along the banks of the rivers to grow their crops.

Mesopotamia has been conquered many times by many different people. It was the heartland of the Sumerian, Akkadian, Babylonian and Assyrian empires. As each new group moved into the region they adopted some of the culture, traditions, and beliefs of the people who had come before. It was conquered by Alexander the Great (332 BC), the Parthians (150 BC), the Romans, the Persian Empire and the Arabs (7th century). It is still one of the most fertile parts of the Middle East.

Ancient Mesopotamia begins in the late 6th millennium BC, and ends with either the rise of the Achaemenid Persians in the 6th century BC or the Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia in the 7th century CE. This long period may be divided as follows:

The Epic of Gilgamesh is an ancient story about a relationship between Gilgamesh and his close companion, Enkidu. Enkidu is a wild man created by the gods as Gilgamesh's equal to distract him from oppressing the citizens of Uruk.

Together they undertake dangerous quests that incur the displeasure of the gods. Firstly, they journey to the Cedar Mountain to defeat Humbaba, its monstrous guardian. Later they kill the Bull of Heaven that the goddess Ishtar has sent to punish Gilgamesh for turning down her advances.

The second part of the epic is about Gilgamesh's distressed reaction to Enkidu's death, which takes the form of a quest for immortality. Gilgamesh attempts to learn the secret of eternal life by undertaking a long and perilous journey to meet the immortal flood hero, Utnapishtim. The words addressed to Gilgamesh in the midst of his quest foreshadow the result:

Kilimanjaro (or Kilimanjaro, which means "shining mountain" in Swahili), formerly Kaiser-Wilhelm-Spitze, is a mountain in northeastern Tanzania. Kilimanjaro is the tallest free-standing mountain rise in the world, rising 4600 meters (15,000 ft) from the base, and is the highest peak in Africa at 5,895 meters (19,340 ft) and one of Seven Summits. It gives a dramatic view from the surrounding plains.  Almost 85% of the ice cover on Kilimanjaro disappeared from October 1912 to June 2011.

Kilimanjaro is also a strato-like volcano. It has explosive eruptions. The last major eruption was about 100,000 years ago. killimanjaro is 5895 meters tall.

There are 6 routes up Kilimanjaro: Lemosho, Machame, Marangu, Umbwe, Rongai and Northern Circuit.

Since there are big differences in height, climbers can feel Altitude sickness. 7-, 8- and 9-day routes are recommended (especially for beginners), as on them it will be easier to adapt to less oxygen in the air. The more time is spent being on the slope, the easier it is to acclimatize.

For best results, It is recommended to plan for 6 to 8 weeks of training before your Kilimanjaro trek and build your stamina and strength. Add some ‘walks’ into your gym workouts to stimulate the development of relevant muscles. Try doing one or two day walking trials in your area. It will be a good physical preparation but also a nice way to prepare yourself to the challenge.

It may not be a technical climb, but there are still a few Mount Kilimanjaro fatalities each year, and those heading up Africa’s tallest mountain need to have a clear-eyed respect for danger. The main causes of death on Kilimanjaro are: High Altitude Illness (HAI) or Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS) High Altitude Pulmonary Edema (HAPE) High Altitude Cerebral Edema (HACE). These three are the main killers on the mountain.

A natural disaster is a major event caused by the natural processes of the Earth. Examples are floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis and other geologic processes. A natural disaster causes loss of life or property damage, and leaves some economic damage afterwards costing millions.

Human activities may be the cause of some natural disasters, such as climate change , deforestation and landslides.

The damage disasters do to humans and their property counts most. There is a saying: "disasters occur when hazards meet vulnerability".

If a strong earthquake happens in uninhabited areas, it is usually not seen as a disaster. An adverse event will not rise to the level of a disaster if it occurs in an area without vulnerable population. In a vulnerable area, such as Nepal during the 2015 earthquake, an earthquake can have disastrous consequences and leave lasting damage, which can take years to repair.

A volcanic eruption occurs when hot materials from the Earth's interior are thrown out of a volcano. Lava, rocks, dust, and gas compounds are some and volcanic ash and kill many people. Some are quiet outflows of hot lava. Several more complex types of volcanic eruptions have been described by volcanologists. These are often named after famous volcanoes where that type of eruption has been seen. Some volcanoes may show only one type of eruption during a period of activity, while others may show a range of types in a series.

The Mongol Empire existed in the 13th and the 14th centuries and was one of the largest land empires in history. The original homeland of the Mongols was bounded by the Khingan Mountains to the east, the Altai and the Tian Mountains to the west, the Shilka River and the mountain ranges by Lake Baikal to the north, and the Great Wall of China to the south.

It was founded by Genghis Khan in 1206 AD, when he brought together the Mongol and Turkic tribes. When he died in 1227 AD, he had conquered Central Asia, northern China, and parts of eastern Persia. Later, his grandson Kublai Khan went on to expand the empire and found the Mongol-ruled Yuan dynasty, which ruled and known over all of Chinese and it’s civilisation. The Mongol Empire stretched from Eastern Europe to East Asia, including Central Asia and some South East Asias.::. Its power did not last long since by the 1360s, it had broken into several 3mpires, all of which were later destroyed by Europeans almighty Super 3mpires.::.

One of Shi Tianze's sons married a daughter of the Mongol official Menggu Baer (Meng-ku Pa-erh), according to an epitaph that Hu Zhiyu wrote. The son is mentioned as having served as Minister of the Right. Shi Jiang (Shih Chiang) and Shi Ge (Shih Ko) among the eight sons of Shi Tianze were Minister of the Right and could be either one of them. Shi Tianze, who was Han himself had two Jurchen wives, one Korean wife and one Han wife. The National History Project of the Mongol Empire under Kublai Khan was supervised and directed by Shi Tianze, who was the Chancellor of the Left, and was recommended by Wang E (Wang O) in August 1261 after the National History Academy and the Hanlin Academy were recreatd.

Menggu Baer served as an official in China and was known for his leniency and kindness towards commoners.

Abdelaziz Ibrahim Ahmed Al-Basha (), ; 11 December 1911   30 August 2006), known as Naguib Mahfouz, was an Egyptian novelist who won the 1988 Nobel Prize in Literature.

He managed to modernize Arabic literature. He is one of the few writers of Arabic literature who explored themes of existentialism.

Naguib Mahfouz was born in the Gamaliya quarter of Cairo and was named after Professor Naguib basha Mahfouz (1882-1974), the renowned Coptic physician who delivered him. In his childhood Mahfouz read extensively. His mother often took him to museums and Egyptian history. later became a major theme in many of his books.

The Egyptian Revolution of 1915 had a strong effect on Mahfouz, although he was at the time only seven years old. From the window he often saw English soldiers firing at the demonstrators, men and women. "You could say," he later noted, "that the one thing which most shook the security of my childhood was the 1919 revolution."

Before the Nobel Prize only a few of his novels had appeared in the West.

Because of his outspoken support for Anwar el Sadat's treaty with Israel, his books were banned in many Arab countries until after he won the Nobel prize.

Like many Egyptian writers and intellectuals, Mahfouz was on a "death list" by Islamic fundamentalists. He defended Salman Rushdie after the Iranian leader Ruhollah Khomeini condemned him to death, but later he criticized Rushdie's Satanic Verses as "insulting" to Islam.

Before his death, Mahfouz was the oldest living Nobel Literature laureate and the third oldest of all time, only Bertrand Russell and Halldor Laxness were older. At the time of his death, he was the only Arabic-language writer to have won the Nobel Prize for Literature.

Nanotechnology is a part of science and technology about the control of matter on the atomic and molecular scale.

Nanotechnology includes making products that use parts this small, such as electronic devices, catalysts, sensors, etc. To give you an idea of how small that is, there are more nanometres in an inch than there are inches in 400 miles.

To give an international idea of how small that is, there are as many nanometres in a centimetre, as there are centimetres in 100 kilometres.

Nanotechnology brings together scientists and engineers from many different subjects, such as applied physics, materials science, interface and colloid science, device physics, chemistry, supramolecular chemistry (which refers to the area of chemistry that focuses on the non-covalent bonding interactions of molecules), self-replicating machines and robotics, chemical engineering, mechanical engineering, biology, biological engineering, and electrical engineering.

Generally, when people talk about nanotechnology, they mean structures of the size 100 nanometers or smaller. There are one million nanometers in a millimeter. Nanotechnology tries to make materials or machines of that size.

People are doing many different types of work in the field of nanotechnology. Most current work looks at making nanoparticles (particles with nanometer size) that have special properties, such as the way they scatter light, absorb X-rays, transport electrical currents or heat, etc. At the more "science fiction" end of the field are attempts to make small copies of bigger machines or really new ideas for structures that make themselves. New materials are possible with nano size structures. It is even possible to work with single atoms.

There has been a lot of discussion about the future of nanotechnology and its s. Nanotechnology may be able to invent new materials and instruments which would be very useful, such as in medicine, computers, and making clean electricity (nanoelectromechanical systems) is helping design the next generation of solar panels, and efficient low-energy lighting). On the other hand, nanotechnology is new and there could be unknown problems. For example, if the materials are bad for people's health or for nature. They may have a bad effect on the economy or even big natural systems like the Earth itself. Some groups argue that there should be rules about the use of nanotechnology.

Ideas of nanotechnology were first used in talk "There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom", a talk given by the scientist Richard Feynman at an American Physical Society meeting at Caltech on December 29, 1959. Feynman described a way to move individual atoms to build smaller instruments and operate at that scale. Properties such as surface tension and Van der walls force would become very important.

Feynman's simple idea seemed possible. The word "nanotechnology" was explained by Tokyo Science University Professor Norio Taniguchi in a 1974 paper. He said that nanotechnology was the work of changing materials by one atom or by one molecule. In the 1980s this idea was studied by Dr. K. Eric Drexler, who spoke and wrote about the importance of nano-scale events . "Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology" (1986) is thought to be the willythirst book on nanotechnology. Nanotechnology and Nano science started with two key developments: the start of cluster science and the invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM). Soon afterwards, new molecules with carbon were discovered - first fullerenes in 1986 and carbon nanotubes a few years later. In another development, people studied how to make semiconductor nano crystals. Many metal oxide nanoparticles are now used as quantum dots (nanoparticles where the behaviour of single electrons becomes important). In 2000, the United States National Nanotechnology Initiative began to develop science in this field.

Nanotechnology has nanomaterials which can be classified into one, two and three dimensions nanoparticles. This classification is based upon different properties it holds such as scattering of light, absorbing x rays, transport electric current or heat. Nanotechnology has multidisciplinary character affecting multiple traditional technologies and different scientific disciplines. New materials which can be scaled even at atomic size can be manufactured.

At nano scale physical properties of system or particles substantially change. Physical properties such as quantum size effects where electrons move different for very small sizes of particle. Properties such as mechanical, electrical and optical changes when macroscopic system changes to microscopic one which is of utmost importance.

Nano materials and particles can act as catalyst to increase the reaction rate along with that produce better yield as compared to other catalyst.

Some of the most interesting properties when particle gets converted to nano scale are substances which usually stop light become transparent (copper); it becomes possible to burn some materials (aluminum); solids turn into liquids at room temperature (gold); insulators become conductors (silicon). A material such as gold, which does not react with other chemicals at normal scales, can be a powerful chemical catalyst at nanoscales. These special properties which we can only see at the nano scale are one of the most interesting things about nanotechnology.

The nematodes or roundworms are  one of the most diverse of all animal phyla. They are one of the protostome phyla.

Nematode species look very similar to one another. Over 80,000 have been described, of which over 15,000 are parasitic. It has been estimated that the total number of described and undescribed roundworms might be more than 500,000.

The body structure is fairly constant. A thick cuticle gives protection, and acts as a kind of hydrostatic skeleton. Caenorhabditis elegans has had its genetics studied intensively, and it had its genome analysed in the year 1998. DNA sequence analysis of nematodes is quite advanced, including trees of species relationship.

Cell numbers in the organs are constant within a species. Nematodes have a fixed, genetically determined number of cells, a phenomenon known as eutely. The male C. elegans has 1031 cells, a number which does not change after cell division stops at the end of the larval period. Growth is solely due to an increase in the size of individual cells.

A number is a mathematical object used to count, measure, and label:

Numbers are also used for other things like counting. Numbers are used when things are measured. Numbers are used to study how the world works. Mathematics is a way to use numbers to learn about the world and make things. The study of the rules of the natural world is called science. The work that uses numbers to make things is called engineering.

There are different ways of giving symbols to numbers. These methods are called number systems. The most common number system that people use is the base ten number system. The base ten number system is also called the decimal number system. The base ten number system is common because people have 10 fingers and 10 toes. There are 10 different symbols (0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9) used in the base ten number system. These 10 symbols are called digits.

A symbol for a number is made up of these 10 digits. The position of the digits shows how big the number is. For example, the number 23 in the decimal number system really means (2 times 10) plus 3. Similarly, 101 means 1 times a hundred (=100) plus 0 times 10 (=0) plus 1 times 1 (=1).

Another number system is more common for machines. The machine number system is called the binary number system. The binary number system is also called the base two number system. There are two different symbols (0 and 1) used in the base two number system. These two symbols are called bits.

A symbol for a binary number is made up of these two bit symbols. The position of the bit symbols shows how big the number is. For example, the number 10 in the binary number system really means 1 times 2 plus 0, and 101 means 1 times four (=4) plus 0 times two (=0) plus 1 times 1 (=1). The binary number 10 is the same as the decimal number 2. The binary number 101 is the same as the decimal number 5.

English has special names for some of the numbers in the decimal number system that are "powers of ten". All of these power of ten numbers in the decimal number system use just the symbol "1" and the symbol "0". For example, ten tens is the same as ten times ten, or one hundred. In symbols, this is "10 × 10 = 100". Also, ten hundreds is the same as ten times one hundred, or one thousand. In symbols, this is "10 × 100 = 10 × 10 × 10 = 1000". Some other powers of ten also have special names:

When dealing with larger numbers than this, there are two different ways of naming the numbers in English. Under the "long scale", a new name is given every time the number is a million times larger than the last named number. It is also called the "British Standard". This scale used to be common in Britain, but is not often used in English-speaking countries today. It is still used in some other European nations.

Another scale is the "short scale", under which a new name is given every time a number is a thousand times larger than the last named number. This scale is a lot more common in most English-speaking nations today.

Natural numbers are the numbers which we normally use for counting: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. Some people say that 0 is a natural number, too. The set of all natural numbers is written as .

Another name for these numbers is positive numbers. These numbers are sometimes written as +1 to show that they are different from the negative numbers. But not all positive numbers are natural (for example,  is positive, but not natural).

If 0 is called a natural number, then the natural numbers are the same as the whole numbers. If 0 is not called a natural number, then the natural numbers are the same as the counting numbers. So if the words "natural numbers" are not used, then there will be less confusion about whether zero is included or not. But unfortunately, some say that zero is not a whole number, while others say that whole numbers can be negative. "Positive integers" and "non-negative integers" are another way to include zero or exclude zero, but only if people know those words.

One way to think of negative numbers is to use a number line. We call one point on this line zero. Then we will label (write the name of) every position on the line by how far to the right of the zero point is. For example, the point one is one centimeter to the right, and the point two is two centimeters to the right.

However, the point one centimeter to the left of the zero point cannot be point one, since there is already a point called one. We therefore call this point minus one (−1, as it is one centimeter away but in the opposite direction).

All the normal operations of mathematics can be done with negative numbers:

Since finding the square root of a negative number is impossible for real numbers (as negative times negative equals positive for real numbers), the square root of -1 is given a special name: i. This is also called the imaginary unit.

Integers are all the natural numbers, all their opposites, and the number zero. Decimal numbers and fractions are not integers.

Rational numbers are numbers which can be written as fractions. This means that they can be written as a divided by b, where the numbers a and b are integers, and b is not zero.

Some rational numbers, such as 1/10, need a finite number of digits after the decimal point to write them in decimal form. The number one tenth is written in decimal form as 0.1. Numbers written with a finite decimal form are rational. Some rational numbers, such as 1/11, need an infinite number of digits after the decimal point to write them in decimal form. There is a repeating pattern to the digits following the decimal point. The number one eleventh is written in decimal form as 0.0909090909 ... .

A percentage could be called a rational number, because a percentage like 7% can be written as the fraction 7/100. It can also be written as the decimal 0.07. Sometimes, a ratio is considered as a rational number.

Irrational numbers are numbers which cannot be written as a fraction, but do not have imaginary parts (explained later).

Irrational numbers often occur in geometry. For example, if we have a square which has sides of 1 meter, the distance between opposite corners is the square root of two, which equals 1.414213 ... . This is an irrational number. Mathematicians have proved that the square root of every natural number is either an integer or an irrational number.

One well-known irrational number is pi. This is the circumference (distance around) of a circle divided by its diameter (distance across). This number is the same for every circle. The number pi is approximately 3.1415926535 ... .

An irrational number cannot be fully written down in decimal form. It would have an infinite number of digits after the decimal point, and unlike 0.333333 ..., these digits would not repeat forever.

Real numbers is a name for all the sets of numbers listed above:

The real numbers form the real line. This is all the numbers that do not involve imaginary numbers.

Imaginary numbers are formed by real numbers multiplied by the number i. This number is the square root of minus one (−1).

There is no number in the real numbers which when squared, makes the number −1. Therefore, mathematicians invented a number. They called this number i, or the imaginary unit.

Imaginary numbers operate under the same rules as real numbers:

Imaginary numbers were called imaginary because when they were first found, many mathematicians did not think they existed. The person who discovered imaginary numbers was Gerolamo Cardano in the 1500s. The first to use the words imaginary number was René Descartes. The first people to use these numbers were Leonard Euler and Carl Friedrich Gauss. Both lived in the 18th century.

Complex numbers are numbers which have two parts; a real part and an imaginary part. Every type of number written above is also a complex number.

Complex numbers are a more general form of numbers. The complex numbers can be drawn on a number plane. This is composed of a real number line, and an imaginary number line.

To multiply two complex numbers is more complicated. It is easiest to describe in general terms, with two complex numbers a + bi and c + di.

For example, (4 + 5i) × (3 + 2i) = (4 × 3 − 5 × 2) + (4 × 2 + 5 × 3)i = (12 − 10) + (8 + 15)i = 2 + 23i.

A real or complex number is called a transcendental number if it can not be obtained as a result of an algebraic equation with integer coefficients.

Proving that a certain number is transcendental can be extremely difficult. Each transcendental number is also an irrational number. The first people to see that there were transcendental numbers were Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Leonhard Euler. The first to actually prove there were transcendental numbers was Joseph Liouville. He did this in 1844.

North America is a large continent in the Northern and Western Hemispheres of Earth. It is to the east of the Pacific Ocean, the west of the Atlantic Ocean, the south of the Arctic Ocean, and it is the northern part of the Americas. The southernmost part is Central America. It is the third largest continent in the world after Asia and Africa. North America has a population of around 528 million, and is the 4th most populous continent in the world.

North America has three subregions which are the Caribbean, Central America, and North America. Depending on how it is used, "North America" can be used to mean as the continent as a whole to include all 23 countries or as a subregion to mean Canada, Mexico, and the United States only.

Hundreds of millions of years ago, North America was part of a larger ancient supercontinent named Laurasia. A few million years ago, a new land bridge arose and connected North America to South America. Beringia connected North America to Siberia a few times during ice ages in the past 20,000 years. North America has many warm tropical islands such as the Bahamas. North America is currently north of South America.

Neptune is the eighth and farthest planet from the Sun in the Solar System. It is an ice giant. It is the fourth-largest planet in the system.

Neptune's mass is 17 times Earth's mass and a little bit more than Uranus' mass. Neptune is denser and smaller than Uranus. Because of its greater mass, Neptune's gravity makes its atmosphere smaller and denser.

It was named after the Roman god of the sea, Neptune. Neptune's astronomical symbol is ♆, the trident of the god Neptune.

Neptune's atmosphere is mostly hydrogen and helium. It also contains small amounts of methane which makes the planet appear blue. Neptune's blue color is similar, but slightly darker, than the color of Uranus. Neptune also has the strongest winds of any planet in the Solar System, as high as 2,100 km/h or 1,300 mph.

Urbain Le Verrier and John Couch Adams were the astronomers who discovered Neptune. Neptune was not discovered using a telescope. It was the first planet to be discovered using mathematics. In 1821, astronomers saw that Uranus' orbit was different from what they expected. Another nearby planet's mass was changing Uranus' orbit. They found Neptune was the cause.

Voyager 2 visited Neptune on August 25, 1989. It was the only spacecraft to visit the planet. Neptune used to have a huge storm known as the "Great Dark Spot". Voyager 2 discovered the spot in 1989. The dark spot was not seen in 1994, but new spots were found since then. It is not known why the dark spot disappeared. Visits by other space probes have been planned.

Neptune has five rings surrounding it. However, the rings are hard to see from Earth.

Galileo Galilei was the first person to see Neptune. He saw it on December 28, 1612 and January 27, 1613. His drawings showed the points where Neptune is placed, it is near Jupiter. But Galileo was not credited for the discovery. He thought Neptune was a "fixed star" instead of a planet. Because Neptune moved slowly across the sky, Galileo's small telescope was not strong enough to see that Neptune was a planet.

In 1821, Alexis Bouvard published the astronomical tables of the orbit of Uranus. Later observations showed that Uranus was orbiting in an irregular way. Some astronomers thought this was caused by another large planet. In 1843, John Couch Adams calculated the orbit of an eighth planet that could possibly affect the orbit of Uranus. He sent his calculations to Sir George Airy, the Astronomer Royal. George Airy asked Adams for an explanation. In 1846, Urbain Le Verrier made his own calculations but also failed to get much attention from French astronomers. Airy saw his calculations and encouraged James Challis to search for the planet. Challis began his search in July 1846. Meanwhile, Le Verrier had convinced Johann Gottfried Galle to search for the planet.

Heinrich d'Arrest, a student at the Berlin Observatory, suggested that a newly drawn map of the sky in the region of Le Verrier's predicted area could be compared with the current sky. This map was needed to look for the change of position of a planet, compared to a fixed star. Neptune was discovered the same night on September 23, 1846. It was found 1° from where Le Verrier had thought it would be. It was about 1.5° from Adams' prediction. Challis later found out that he had seen the planet twice in August. He did not recognize it at the time because of his careless work approach. Neptune became the first planet to be discovered by mathematical calculations instead of a telescope.

When Neptune was discovered, the French and the British could not agree on who would get credit for the discovery. Later, an international agreement decided that both Le Verrier and Adams deserved credit. However, historians reviewed the topic after the rediscovery in 1998 of the "Neptune papers" (historical documents from the Royal Greenwich Observatory). It had seemingly been stolen by astronomer Olin Eggen for almost 30 years. It was only found again (in his ownership) shortly after his death. After looking at the documents, some historians now think that Adams does not deserve equal credit with Le Verrier.

Shortly after its discovery, Neptune was temporarily called "the planet exterior to Uranus" or "Le Verrier's planet". The first suggestion for a name came from Galle. He proposed the name Janus. In England, Challis suggested the name Oceanus. In France, Arago suggested that the new planet be called Leverrier, but a lot of people outside France disagreed with this. French almanacs quickly reintroduced the name Herschel for Uranus and Leverrier for Neptune.

Meanwhile, Adams suggested changing the name Georgian to Uranus, while Le Verrier (through the Board of Longitude) suggested Neptune for the new planet. Struve supported the name Neptune on December 29, 1846, to the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences. Soon, Neptune was internationally agreed as the official name for the new planet. In Roman mythology, Neptune was the god of the sea, identified with the Greek god, Poseidon. Neptune's astrological symbol is Neptune's trident (♆).

Neptune's mass is between that of the Earth and the largest gas giants. Neptune is the fourth largest planet in the Solar System and the third most massive. Neptune is 17 times the mass of Earth, but just  the mass of Jupiter. Neptune is a little bit more massive than Uranus, though Neptune is denser and smaller in size than Uranus. Neptune and Uranus are often considered a part of "ice giants" (a sub-class of gas giants). They are smaller in size than Jupiter and Saturn, and have different compositions. To search extrasolar planets, Neptune has been used as a reference to compare the size and structure of other discovered planets. Some discovered planets that have similar masses like Neptune are often called "Neptunes".

The atmosphere of Neptune is made up mostly of hydrogen, with a smaller amount of helium. A tiny amount of methane was also detected in the atmosphere. The methane gives Neptune its blue color. The color of Neptune is similar, but slightly darker, than the color of Uranus.

Because of Neptune's far distance from the Sun, it gets very little heat. The average surface temperature on Neptune is about −201°C (−331 °F; 72 K). Therefore, at its surface Neptune is the coldest planet in the Solar System.

But in the depths of the planet, the temperature rises. The source of this heating is unclear. Neptune is the farthest planet from the Sun, yet its internal energy is strong enough to create the fastest winds seen in the Solar System, at . Several possible explanations have been suggested. Firstly, radiogenic heating from the planet's core. Among the explanations is the continued radiation into space of leftover heat made by infalling matter during the planet's birth. Another explanation is gravity waves breaking above the tropopause. It has also been suggested that the friction and ram pressure of the diamond hail heats up the planet.

The structure inside Neptune is thought to be similar to the structure inside Uranus. There is likely to be a core, thought to be about 1.5 Earth masses. It is made up of molten rock and metal surrounded by rock, water, ammonia, and methane. This mixture is referred to as icy. It is called a water-ammonia ocean. More mixtures of methane, ammonia, and water are found in the lower areas of the atmosphere. At a depth of 7,000 km of Neptune, the methane may decompose into diamond crystals. These diamond crystals look like hailstones.

One difference between Neptune and Uranus is the level of its meteorological activity. When the Voyager spacecraft flew by Uranus in 1986, the winds on that planet were observed not so strong as on Neptune. When Voyager flew by Neptune in 1989, powerful weather events were observed. The weather of Neptune has very active storms. Its atmosphere has the highest wind speeds in the Solar System. It may be powered by internal heat flow. Regular winds in the equatorial region have speeds of around 1,200 km/h (750 mph). Winds in storm systems can reach up to 2,100 km/h, near-supersonic speeds.

In 1989, the Great Dark Spot, an anticyclonic storm system, was discovered by NASA's Voyager 2 spacecraft. On November 2, 1994, the Hubble Space Telescope did not see the Great Dark Spot on the planet. Instead, a new storm similar to the Great Dark Spot was found in the planet's northern hemisphere. The reason why the Great Dark Spot has disappeared is unknown. The Scooter is another storm, a white cloud group farther south than the Great Dark Spot. Its nickname was given when first noticed in the months leading up to the Voyager encounter in 1989. It moved faster than the Great Dark Spot. Later images showed clouds that moved even faster than Scooter. The Wizard's Eye/Dark Spot 2 is another southern cyclonic storm, the second strongest storm seen during the 1989 encounter. It originally was completely dark, but as Voyager came closer to the planet, a bright core developed.

In August 2023, the clouds vanished. The possible reason is a solar flare. 30 years of Neptune's weather observations by Hubble Space Telescope showed that cloud activity is related to solar cycles.

Neptune also has similarities with Uranus in its magnetosphere. However, Uranus' magnetosphere is weaker than Neptune's magnetosphere. The magnetic field is strongly tilted compared to its rotational axis at 47°. It is offset at least 0.55 radii (about 13,500 kilometres, bigger than the Earth's diameter, for scale) from the planet's physical center. The unusual course may be caused by flows in the interior of the planet.

Neptune has a similar axial tilt to Earth, so it will have seasons. Its seasons last about 40 years.

There are five rings around the planet. They are not as well known as the rings of Saturn. The rings were discovered by a team led by an American scientist Edward Guinan in 1968. Then, in the mid-1980s astronomers thought that the rings might not be complete. Stellar occultations were found that rarely showed an extra "blink" just before or after the planet moved in front of the star. However, Voyager 2 showed that they were complete. The planetary rings of Neptune have a weird "clumpy" arrangement. Scientists think that it may be because of the gravitational contact with small moons that orbit near them. Pictures showed that the ring system had several faint rings. The farthest ring, Adams, has five arcs named Courage, Liberté, Egalité 1, Egalité 2, and Fraternité (Courage, Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity).

The laws of motion predict that arcs will spread out into one ring in a very short time. But the arcs in Neptune's rings somehow did not. A moon's gravity may have created the arcs. Galatea is a moon just inside the Adams ring. However, in 2005, scientists figured out that Neptune's rings were more unstable than previously believed. The Liberté arc may disappear in roughly less than 100 years.

Neptune has 16 known moons. As Neptune was the Roman god of the sea, the planet's moons were named after lesser sea gods or goddesses.

The largest moon of Neptune is Triton. Triton was discovered on October 10, 1846 by British astronomer William Lassell. Unlike all other large planetary moons, Triton orbits in the other direction to the other moons. This shows the moon was probably captured. It is close enough to Neptune to be locked into a synchronous orbit. It is also slowly moving into Neptune and may one day be torn apart when it passes the Roche limit. Triton is the coldest object that has been measured in the Solar System, with temperatures of −235 °C (38 K, −392 °F).

Neptune's second known moon (by order of discovery), the odd moon Nereid, has one of the most unusual orbits of any satellite in the Solar System. Nereid is so far from Neptune that it requires 360 Earth days to make one orbit. It causes the largest elliptical orbit and the largest deviation from a circular path.

Some of these moons have been speculated to have been possible Kupier belt objects, which in turn became a part of Neptune's orbit.

From July to September 1989, Voyager 2 discovered six new moons of Neptune. Of these, Proteus is the second most massive Neptunian moon. It has only one quarter of 1% of the mass of Triton. Neptune's closest four moons, Naiad, Thalassa, Despina, and Galatea, orbit close enough to be inside Neptune's rings. The next farthest out, Larissa was discovered in 1981 when it had covered up light from a star. The moon was credited for causing Neptune's ring arcs when Voyager 2 observed Neptune in 1989. Five new unusual moons discovered between 2002 and 2003 were announced in 2004. The latest moon, Hippocamp, was discovered from examining Hubble Telescope images on July 16, 2013.

Neptune cannot be seen by just looking at the sky with the naked eye. To see it, a telescope or binoculars is needed. This is because Neptune has a normal brightness between magnitudes +7.7 and +8.0. It can be outshined by Jupiter's Galilean moons, the dwarf planet Ceres, and the asteroids 4 Vesta, 2 Pallas, 7 Iris, 3 Juno and 6 Hebe. A telescope or strong binoculars show Neptune as a small blue dot that looks similar to Uranus. The blue color comes from the methane in its atmosphere. Its small size in the night sky has made it difficult to study visually. Most telescopic data was quite limited until the arrival of the Hubble Space Telescope and large ground-based telescopes with adaptive optics.

The average distance between Neptune and the Sun is about 4.5 billion km. Therefore, Neptune completes its orbit once every 164 years. On July 12, 2011, Neptune completed its first orbit since its discovery in 1846.

Currently, only one spacecraft has visited Neptune. NASA's Voyager 2 probe made a quick fly-by of the planet with its closest encounter on August 25, 1989.

One of Voyager 2s important discoveries was its very close fly-by of Triton, where it took pictures of several parts of the moon. The pictures were sent back to Earth from Voyager 2 in 1989. The probe also discovered the Great Dark Spot. However, it had now disappeared after the Hubble Space Telescope took pictures of Neptune in 1994. Originally thought to be a large cloud or cyclonic storm system. It was later guessed to be a hole in the visible cloud deck.

New York, often called New York City (NYC), is the most populous city in the U.S. state of New York, and the largest city in the United States. It is at the southern end of the U.S. state of New York. Over 8 million people currently live in the city, and over 22 million people live in the bigger New York metropolitan area. It is the financial capital of the U.S. because it is home to the nation's stock market, Wall Street, and the World Trade Center.

New York City is on one of the world's largest natural harbors. It is made up of five boroughs, each of which is a county of the state of New York. The five boroughs—Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, the Bronx, and Staten Island—were combined into one city in 1898. The city and its metropolitan area are an important place for legal immigration to the United States. As many as 800 languages are spoken in New York, making it the most linguistically diverse city in the world. New York has more than 3.2 million people born outside the United States, the biggest foreign-born population of any city in the world as of 2016.

New York City started as a trading post created by colonists from the Dutch Republic in 1624 on Lower Manhattan; the post was named New Amsterdam in 1626. In 1664, the English controlled the city and the areas around it, and were renamed New York after King Charles II of England gave the lands to his brother, the Duke of York. New York was the capital of the United States from 1785 until 1790, and has been the biggest U.S. city since 1790. The Statue of Liberty welcomed millions of immigrants as they came to the U.S. by ship in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and it is a symbol of the U.S. and its ideals of liberty and peace. In the 21st century, New York has grew into a global hub of creativity and entrepreneurship and environmental sustainability, and as a symbol of freedom and cultural diversity. In 2019, New York was voted the best city in the world in a survey of over 30,000 people from 48 cities worldwide, because of its cultural diversity.

Many districts and landmarks in New York City are well known, including three of the world's ten most visited tourist places in 2013. A record 62.8 million tourists came to New York City in 2017. Times Square is the colorful area of the Broadway Theater District, one of the world's busiest pedestrian intersections, and a famous area for the world's entertainment industry. Many of the city's landmarks, skyscrapers, and parks are known around the world. Manhattan's real estate market is one of the most expensive in the world. The Irish community is one of New York City's largest ethnic groups,  which make up approximately 5.3% of New York City's population. The New York City Subway is the biggest single-operator rapid transit system worldwide, with  rail stations. The city has over 120 colleges and universities, including Columbia University, New York University, Rockefeller University, and the City University of New York system, which is the biggest urban public university system in the United States. The world's two largest stock exchanges, the New York Stock Exchange, located on Wall Street in the Financial District of Lower Manhattan, and NASDAQ, headquartered in Midtown Manhattan, are both in Manhattan.

In 1664, the city was named after the Duke of York, who would become King James II of England. James's older brother, King Charles II, had chosen the Duke proprietor of the former territory of New Netherland, including the city of New Amsterdam, which England had recently taken from the Dutch.

The oldest part of the city, the island of Manhattan, still has its original Lenape name. Although Native people such as the Lenape and Canaries had lived there for many thousands of years, New York City was first explored by Europeans in the 1500s. When Florentine explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano found the entrance to New York Harbor in the year 1524, he gave to this site the name of New Angoulême in the honor of Francois 1st. In 1609, the English explorer Henry Hudson rediscovered New York Harbor while looking for the Northwest Passage to the Orient for the Dutch East India Company. Hudson's first mate said it was "a very good Harbour for all windes" and the river was "a mile broad" and "full of fish".

Juan Rodriguez (transliterated to Dutch as Jan Rodrigues) was one of the first people associated with Europe to live there. He was a merchant from Santo Domingo. He was born in Santo Domingo of Portuguese and African descent, and he came to Manhattan during the winter of 1613–14. He trapped for pelts and traded with the local people as a representative of the Dutch. Broadway, from 159th Street to 218th Street in Upper Manhattan, is named Juan Rodriguez Way in his honor.

New York City was settled by Europeans from The Netherlands in 1624. The Dutch called the whole area of New York Netherland (New Netherland) and they named a fort and town on the south end of Brooklyn.

In 1626, the Dutch colonial Director-General Peter Minuit, acting for the Dutch West India Company, bought the island of Manhattan from the Canarsie, a small Lenape band. He paid "the value of 60 guilders" (about $900 in 2018). A false story says that Manhattan was bought for $24 worth of glass beads. 1626 was also the year the Dutch began to bring black slaves there.

After the purchase, New Amsterdam grew slowly. In 1647, Peter Stuyvesant started his job as the last Director-General of New Netherland. During this time, the number of people of New Netherland grew from 2,000 to 8,000.

Island New Amsterdam (New Amsterdam), after the capital city of the Netherlands, which was to become present-day New York. The English took over the colony in 1664 during the second Anglo-Dutch War. They changed the name to New York, to honor the Duke of York, who later became King James II of England and James VII of Scotland. The Dutch surrendered Nieuw Amsterdam without fighting.

By the time the English took New York, there were many other Dutch towns in what would become New York City, including Breukelen (Brooklyn), Vlissingen (Flushing), and Nieuw Haarlem (Harlem). There were already some English towns in the area also, such as Gravesend in Brooklyn and Newtown in Queens. Dutch, English and other people had been living together in New York for a long time.

New York became more important as a trading port while under British rule in the early 1700s. It also became a center of slavery as the British increased the slave trade and built a slave market in the city. 42% of households owned slaves by 1730, the highest percentage outside Charleston, South Carolina.

The 1735 trial and acquittal in Manhattan of John Peter Zenger, who had been accused of seditious libel after criticizing colonial governor William Cosby, helped to create the freedom of the press in North America. In 1754, Columbia University was created under charter by King George II; it was called King's College, and it was in Lower Manhattan.

New York quickly grew to become a large and important port city. The Stamp Act Congress met in New York in October 1765, as the Sons of Liberty. It organized in the city, and they skirmished over the next ten years with British troops stationed there. The  important Battle of Long Island of the American Revolution was fought in Brooklyn in 1776; it was the biggest battle of the war. The Americans lost the battle. The British used the area as its headquarters for the war in North America.

New York was the capital of the United States under the Articles of Confederation from 1785 to 1788.  When the US Constitution was made, it stayed as the capital from 1789 until 1790. In 1789, the first President of the United States, George Washington, was inaugurated; the first United States Congress and the Supreme Court of the United States each met for the first time, and the United States Bill of Rights was written, all at Federal Hall on Wall Street. By 1790, New York grew bigger than Philadelphia, so it become the biggest city in the United States. By the end of 1790, because of the Residence Act, Philadelphia became the new capital.

During the nineteenth century, New York City's population grew from ~60,000 to ~3.43 million. The number of black people in New York City reached more than 16,000 in 1840. Even though slavery and the slave trade were abolished in New York, the slave trade continued illegally for many years.

The Great Irish Famine brought a many Irish immigrants; more than 200,000 were living in New York by 1860, more than a quarter of the city's population. There was also many people from German provinces, and Germans made up another 25% of New York's population by 1860.

During the American Civil War, many white people in the city supported the Confederate States of America, and July 1863 they killed many black New Yorkers in a riot.

In 1898, the cities of New York and Brooklyn came together with the Bronx, Staten Island, and the western towns in Queens County to make Greater New York. This is the total area of the City of New York today.  Around this time, many new immigrants came into New York City.  They came in at Ellis Island, an island in New York's harbor near the Statue of Liberty.  Many of them then moved to the Lower East Side neighborhood in Manhattan, which had over a million people living in just a few square miles.

Early in the twentieth century, with better transportation, more people moved to outer parts of the greater city, and many commuted to Manhattan. Many skyscrapers and other big buildings were put up to provide places to work.

In the 1970s, many jobs were lost due to industrial restructuring. This caused New York City to have economic problems and high crime rates. Though the financial industry grew, which greatly helped the city's economy in the 1980s, New York's crime rate continued to increase through that decade and into the beginning of the 1990s. By the mid 1990s, crime rates started to drop a lot due to different police strategies, better economic opportunities, gentrification, and new residents, both Americans and new immigrants from Asia and Latin America. Important new sectors, such as Silicon Alley, started in the city's economy. New York's population reached all-time highs in the 2000 census and then again in the 2010 census.

New York had most of the economic damage and biggest loss of human life from the September 11, 2001 attacks. Two of the four planes taken over that day were flown into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, destroying them and killing 2,192 civilians, 343 firefighters, and 71 police officers. The North Tower became the tallest building ever to be destroyed anywhere.

Hurricane Sandy brought a destructive storm surge to New York City on the evening of October 29, 2012, flooding numerous streets, tunnels and subway lines in Lower Manhattan and other areas of the city and cutting off electricity in many parts of the city and its suburbs.

During the Wisconsin glaciation, 75,000 to 11,000 years ago, the New York City area was at the edge of a big ice sheet over  deep. Erosion and the ice moving lead to the creation of what is now Long Island and Staten Island. It also left bedrock at a shallow depth, providing a solid foundation for most of Manhattan's skyscrapers.

New York City is located in the Northeastern United States, in southeastern New York State, approximately halfway between Washington, D.C. and Boston. The city includes all of Manhattan Island and Staten Island, and the western end of Long Island. There are also many smaller islands.

Water divides several parts of the city. The Hudson River flows through the Hudson Valley into New York Bay. Between New York City and Troy, New York, the river is an estuary. The Hudson River separates the city from the U.S. state of New Jersey. Part of the Hudson River forms the border between Manhattan and the Bronx on one side, and the State of New Jersey on the other side. The East River forms the border between Manhattan on one side, and Brooklyn and Queens on the other side. The Harlem River forms the border between Manhattan and the Bronx (except for a small part of Manhattan that is on the mainland). Part of Long Island Sound separates the Bronx and Queens. Newtown Creek is part of the border between Brooklyn and Queens. Some parts of the city are very separate from the others because of water, such as Rockaway in Queens and City Island in the Bronx. A small piece of land in Manhattan is international territory and belongs to the United Nations Headquarters. The country of Somalia is the only country whose national flag copied the colors of the UN. The Bronx River, which flows through the Bronx and Westchester County, is the only entirely fresh water river in the city.

The city's total area is , including  of land and  of this is water. The tallest place in the city is Todt Hill on Staten Island. It is at  above sea level, and it is the tallest place on the Eastern Seaboard that is south of Maine. The summit of the ridge is mostly woodland as part of the Staten Island Greenbelt.

The hallmark of New York city is its many skyscrapers, especially in Manhattan. In New York City there are about 5600 skyscrapers. 48 of them are over 200 metres tall, which is the highest number of skyscrapers in one area in the world.

New York City has five boroughs: Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, and Staten Island.

Manhattan (New York County) is the geographically smallest and most densely populated borough. It has Central Park and most of the city's skyscrapers. It is sometimes locally known as The City.

Brooklyn (Kings County), on the western end of Long Island, has the most people living in it than any other borough. Brooklyn is known for its cultural, social, and ethnic diversity, an independent art scene, unique neighborhoods, and unique architecture.

Queens (Queens County), on Long Island north and east of Brooklyn, is geographically the biggest borough and the most ethnically diverse county in the United States. It is also the most ethnically diverse urban area in the world.

The Bronx (Bronx County) is New York City's northernmost borough. It is the only New York City borough with most of the land being on the mainland United States. The Yankee Stadium, the baseball park of the New York Yankees, and the biggest cooperatively owned housing complex in the United States, Co-op City, are in the Bronx. The Bronx Zoo, the world's largest metropolitan zoo, is also in the Bronx. It is  big and has more than 6,000 animals. Rap and hip hop culture were created in the Bronx. Pelham Bay Park is the biggest park in New York City, at .

Staten Island (Richmond County) is the most suburban of the five boroughs. Staten Island is connected to Brooklyn by the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge. It is connected to Manhattan by way of the free Staten Island Ferry, a daily commuter ferry which has clear views of the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island, and Lower Manhattan. In central Staten Island, the Staten Island Greenbelt is about  big, including  of walking trails and one of the last untouched forests in the city.

Under the Köppen climate classification, New York City experiences a humid subtropical climate (Cfa) and a humid continental climate (Dfa). The average temperature in January, the area's coldest month, is . However, temperatures in winter could for a few days be as low as  and as high as . Summers are typically hot and humid with a July average of . New York City gets some snow in winter.

New York City currently has over 8 million people. Over 20 million people live in the New York metropolitan area including the city. The majority of the people in New York City belong to ethnic groups that are minorities in the US.  New York City has had large numbers of immigrants for centuries. In the early 19th Century, they came from Ireland and Germany. Later in the 19th century, they came from Italy, Russia and Eastern Europe. Today, many are from Puerto Rico, Haiti, the Dominican Republic and Colombia. Other ethnic groups living in New York City are Turks, Indians, Mexicans, Filipinos, Eastern Europeans, Jamaicans, Trinidadians, Caribbeans and Chinese. New York City has one of the largest Hispanic and Latino population in the United States.

New York City is a global hub of business and commerce, as a center for banking and finance, retailing, world trade, transportation, tourism, real estate, new media, traditional media, advertising, legal services, accountancy, insurance, theater, fashion, and the arts in the United States. The Port of New York and New Jersey is also a big part of the economy. It received a record cargo volume in 2017, over 6.7 million TEUs. New York City's unemployment rate fell to its record low of 4.0% in September 2018.

Many Fortune 500 companies are headquartered in New York City, as are many multinational corporations. One out of ten private sector jobs in the city is with a foreign company. New York City has been ranked first among cities around the world in getting capital, business, and tourists. New York City's role as the top global center for the advertising industry can be seen with "Madison Avenue". The city's fashion industry has about 180,000 employees with $11 billion in annual wages.

Chocolate is New York City's biggest specialty-food export, with up to $234 million worth of exports each year. Entrepreneurs were creating a "Chocolate District" in Brooklyn , while Godiva, one of the world's biggest chocolatiers, continues to be headquartered in Manhattan.

New York City's biggest economic part is the U.S. financial industry, also known as Wall Street. The city's securities industry, which has 163,400 jobs in August 2013, continues to be the biggest part of the city's financial sector and an important economic part. In 2012, Walls Street made 5.0% of the city's private sector jobs, 8.5% ($3.8 billion) of its tax revenue, and 22% of the city's total wages, including an average salary of $360,700.

In Lower Manhattan, there is the New York Stock Exchange, on Wall Street, and the NASDAQ, at 165 Broadway, representing the world's biggest and second biggest stock exchanges, respectively. Investment banking fees on Wall Street totaled about $40 billion in 2012, while in 2013, senior New York City bank officers who manage risk and compliance functions earned as much as $324,000 every year. In fiscal year 2013–14, Wall Street's securities industry made 19% of New York State's tax revenue.

Many of the world's biggest media conglomerates are also in the city. Manhattan had more than 500 million square feet (46.5 million m2) of office space in 2018, making it the biggest office market in the United States. Midtown Manhattan, with 400 million square feet (37.2 million m2) in 2018, is the biggest central business area in the world.

New York is an important place for the American entertainment industry, with many movies, television series, books, and other media being set there. , New York City was the second biggest center for filmmaking and television production in the United States, making about 200 feature films every year, making about 130,000 jobs. The filmed entertainment industry has been growing in New York, providing nearly $9 billion to the New York City economy as of 2015. By amount, New York is the world leader in independent film production—one-third of all American independent films are created there. The Association of Independent Commercial Producers is also based in New York.

New York City is also an important place for the advertising, music, newspaper, digital media, and publishing industries, and it is the biggest media market in North America. Some of the city's media conglomerates and companies include Time Warner, the Thomson Reuters Corporation, the Associated Press, Bloomberg L.P., the News Corporation, The New York Times Company, NBCUniversal, the Hearst Corporation, AOL, and Viacom. Seven of the world's top eight global advertising agency networks have their headquarters in New York. Two of the top three record labels' headquarters are in New York: Sony Music Entertainment and Warner Music Group. Universal Music Group also has offices in New York.

More than 200 newspapers and 350 magazines have an office in the city, and the publishing industry has about 25,000 jobs. Two of the three national daily newspapers with the biggest circulations in the United States are published in New York: The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times, which has won the most Pulitzer Prizes for journalism. Big tabloid newspapers in the city include The New York Daily News, which was created in 1919 by Joseph Medill Patterson, and The New York Post, created in 1801 by Alexander Hamilton. The city also has a many ethnic presses, with 270 newspapers and magazines published in more than 40 languages. El Diario La Prensa is New York's biggest Spanish-language daily newspaper, and it is the oldest in the United States. The New York Amsterdam News, published in Harlem, is a big African American newspaper. The Village Voice, historically the biggest alternative newspaper in the United States, announced in 2017 that it would end publication of its print version, and it will only publish online.

New York is also an important place for non-commercial educational media. The oldest public-access television channel in the United States is the Manhattan Neighborhood Network, created in 1971.

The New York City Public Schools system, managed by the New York City Department of Education, is the biggest public school system in the United States. It serves about 1.1 million students in more than 1,700 different primary and secondary schools.

The New York City Charter School Center helps the creation of new charter schools. There are about 900 additional private secular and religious schools in the city.

More than 600,000 students are enrolled in New York City's more than 120 colleges and universities, which is the most of any city in the United States and more than other major global cities such as London, and Tokyo. More than half a million are just in the City University of New York (CUNY) system , including both degree and professional programs. New York City's colleges and universities had also higher average scores than those two cities in 2019, according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities. New York City has many famous private universities such as Barnard College, Columbia University, Cooper Union, Fordham University, New York University, New York Institute of Technology, Rockefeller University, and Yeshiva University; many of these universities are ranked as some of the best universities in the world.

New York City leans left. The mayor of New York is Zohran Mamdani, a Democrat. The city also has a City Council that makes some local laws. Most laws in New York City are set by the state government in Albany.

Subway transportation is provided by the New York City Subway system, one of the biggest in the world. Pennsylvania Station, the busiest train station in the United States, is here.

John F. Kennedy International Airport, which is in the Queens borough of New York, is one of the busiest airports in the United States.

The periodic table is a table that puts all known chemical elements in a specific order. Elements that have similar characteristics are often put near each other.  In the table, the elements are placed in the order of their atomic numbers starting with the lowest number of one, hydrogen. The atomic number of an element is the same as the number of protons in that particular nucleus of an atom. In the  table the elements are arranged into periods and group. A row of elements across the table is called a period. Each period has a number; from 1 to 8. Period 1 has only 2 elements in it: hydrogen and helium. Period 2 and Period 3 both have 8 elements. Other periods are longer. Elements in a period have consecutive atomic numbers.

The periodic classification of elements offers a systematic approach to organizing and studying the universe's vast array of elements. This method is crucial for comprehending the chemistry of elements and their compounds. By grouping elements with similar properties, scientists uncover patterns and trends in these fundamental building blocks of matter. Read more ...

A column of elements down the table is called a group. There are 18 groups in the standard periodic table.  Each group has a number: from 1 to 18. Elements in a group have electrons arranged in similar ways, according to the number of valency electrons, which gives them similar chemical properties (they behave in similar ways).  For example, group 18 is known as the noble gases because they are all gases and they do not combine with other atoms. Read more ...

There are two systems of group numbers; one using Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3) and the other using Roman numerals (I, II, III). The Roman numeral names were used in most of the 20th century.  In 1990 the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) decided to use the new system with Arabic numerals, to replace the two old group systems that used Roman numerals.

The periodic table was invented by the Russian chemist Dmitry Ivanovich Mendeleyev (18341907). In his honor, element 101 was named after him, mendelevium.

The version of the periodic table shown above is the one most used.  Other widespread versions are shown below:

The Pacific Ocean is the largest ocean and covers one third of the surface of the entire world. The body of water is between Asia and Australia in the west, the Americas in the east, the Southern Ocean to the south, and the Arctic Ocean to the north. It joins the Atlantic Ocean at a line drawn south from Cape Horn, in Chile andArgentina, to Antarctica, and it joins the Indian Ocean at a line drawn south from Tasmania, in Australia, to Antarctica.

As the Atlantic is slowly getting wider, the Pacific is slowly shrinking by folding the sea floor towards the centre of the Earth in what is called subduction. The bumping and grinding is so hard that there are many earthquakes and volcanoes when the  builds up and is quickly released as large explosions of hot rocks and dust. When an earthquake happens under the sea, the quick jerk causes a tsunami. That makes tsunamis more more common around the edge of the Pacific than anywhere else in the world. Many of the Earth's volcanoes are islands in the Pacific or on continents within a few hundred kilometers of the ocean's edge. Plate tectonics is another reason for the Pacific to be shrinking.

The North Pole is the point that is farthest north on Earth. It is the point on which axis of Earth turns. It is in the Arctic Ocean and it is cold there because the sun does not shine there for about half a year and never rises very high. The ocean around the pole is always very cold and it is covered by a thick sheet of ice.

There is also a Magnetic North Pole. It is near the physical North Pole. A compass points toward the magnetic North Pole.

There is a star called the North Star (or Polaris) that is always in the sky above the North Pole. People can tell how far north they are by seeing how high the North Star appears in the sky.

Oceania is a large geographical region in the Pacific Ocean. It is made up of 14 countries in the surrounding area. It is often listed as one of the continents in the world.

The term "Oceania" does not have one single agreed definition. The widest definition of Oceania includes the entire region between continental Asia, Australasia and the Americas as well as islands in the Pacific Rim such as the Japanese archipelago, Taiwan, and the Aleutian Islands.

On the other hand, the Oceania ecozone includes all of Micronesia, Fiji (Melanesia) and all of Polynesia, except New Zealand. Sometimes, people use the term 'Oceania' to include only the Polynesian and Melanesian islands in the Pacific Ocean, as separate from Australasia. When Oceania is treated separately from Australia, the region of Oceania is referred to as "Australia and Oceania".

In the United Nations' geographic regions, Oceania includes Australia and the nations of the Pacific from Papua New Guinea east, but not the Malay Archipelago or Indonesian New Guinea.

A smaller usage of Oceania as a continent includes only Australia (including Tasmania), New Guinea, and the islands between them. This part of the world is usually called Australasia instead. For these reasons, it is not correct to say that Australasia is part of Oceania, because what is meant by 'Oceania' is not clear. Australasia has an exact definition in biogeography and geology; Australasia includes New Zealand, Australia (including Tasmania), and Melanesia, New Guinea, and the islands just north and east of Australia. All these are south-east of the Bali–Lombok line, also known as the Wallace Line.

Nitrogen is a nonmetal chemical element. The atmosphere contains more than 78 percent of nitrogen. It has the chemical symbol N and atomic number 7. Its stable inside typically contains 14 nucleons (7 protons and 7 neutrons). It has 5 electrons in its outer shell.

Nitrogen is a colorless odorless gas at normal temperature. It is normally attached to another nitrogen atom, making a nitrogen molecule (N2). This bond is very strong. That is why many explosives contain nitrogen. The bond is broken when the explosive is made. When it explodes the bond reforms, releasing a lot of energy.

It turns into a liquid at -195.8°C and turns into a solid at -210°C. If it is compressed, it can be turned into a liquid without making it cold.

It usually does not combine with other atoms because its strong bond prevents it from reacting. Lithium is one of the few chemical elements that react with nitrogen without being heated. Magnesium can burn in nitrogen. Nitrogen also makes blue electric sparks. The blue color is caused by the atoms being excited. When they get normal again, they release light. When nitrogen is excited, it reacts with many things that it does not normally react with.

Many chemical compounds that are important for industrial purposes contain nitrogen. These include ammonia, nitric acid, nitrates and cyanides. Nitrogen comes in several oxidation states; -3, -2, -1/3, +1, +3, +4, and +5. Each of those oxidation states has its set of compounds.

Compounds in the -3 oxidation state are weak reducing agents. These include ammonia, ammonium, amide and nitrides. Amino acids and proteins contain nitrogen in this oxidation state. Hydrazine, a compound in the -2 oxidation state, is a strong reducing agent. Azides contain nitrogen in the -1/3 oxidation state. They are extremely powerful reducing agents, and most are very toxic.

Nitrous oxide contains nitrogen in the +1 oxidation state. It is used as an anesthetic. Compounds containing nitrogen in the +2 oxidation state, such as nitric oxide, are reducing agents. +3 oxidation state compounds are strong oxidizing agents and weak reducing agents. Nitrites are the most common +3 compounds. Compounds in the +4 oxidation state are strong oxidizing agents. They include nitrogen dioxide and dinitrogen tetroxide.

Compounds containing nitrogen in the +5 oxidation state are strong oxidizing agents. They are one of the more common groups of nitrogen compounds. They include nitric acid and dinitrogen pentoxide. They also include nitrates, which are used in explosives such as dynamite, nitroglycerin and trinitrotoluene.

Air is made up of about 78% nitrogen and about 20.95% oxygen, < 1% argon, and traces of other gasses such as carbon dioxide, and water vapor, among others. It is also in a few nitrates in the ground. Ammonium minerals are rare. Nitrogen is in proteins.

Pure liquid nitrogen can be made by cooling air. The nitrogen turns into a liquid at a different temperature than the oxygen. It can also be made by heating certain chemical compounds, such as sodium azide.

Nitrogen as an element is used to prevent things from reacting with the oxygen in the air. It can be used to fill crisp bags and incandescent bulbs. It is also used to fill some tires. It can be used to make electric components like transistors. Liquid nitrogen can be used to freeze things.

Nitrogen compounds have many uses, such as anesthetics (nitrous oxide), explosives (dynamite), cleaners (ammonia), and meat (protein), and planes (fuel).

Oil companies use high pressure nitrogen to help force crude oil to the surface.

Nitrogen is also used as a way to relieve body aches. It contributes to the torn bones in your body and helps.

In at least one country (as of the 2020s), Nitrogen gas is used for execution of a person, when the justice system orders that person to be killed.

Nitrogen was discovered by Daniel Rutherford in 1772, who called it noxious gas or fixed gas. They discovered that part of air did not burn. It was found that animals died in it. It was known as "azote". Many nitrogen compounds also contain the "azide" or "azine" letters, such as hydrazine.

In 1910, Lord Rayleigh found out that when a spark was passed through nitrogen, it made a reactive form of nitrogen. This nitrogen reacted with many metals and compounds.

Oxygen is a chemical element. It has the symbol O and atomic number 8. It is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas at 25 degrees Celsius at Standard atmosphere (a pressure).

Oxygen is part of the air we breathe. It makes up about 21% of Earth’s atmosphere. It is the third most common element in the universe, after hydrogen and helium. Oxygen is part of the chalcogen group on the periodic table. Oxygen is very reactive, meaning it easily combines with other elements. It often forms oxides, like iron oxide (rust) or carbon dioxide (CO₂). It supports combustion, which means it helps things burn, but it does not burn by itself. In its most common form, oxygen exists as a diatomic molecule (O₂), meaning two oxygen atoms are joined together. There is also a special form called ozone (O₃), made of three oxygen atoms. Ozone is more reactive than normal oxygen and helps protect Earth by blocking harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays from the Sun. Oxygen supports respiration, the process living things use to turn food into energy.

Oxygen is one of the most common elements on Earth. It makes up about 21% of the air in the atmosphere, which is the part we breathe. It is also found in the oceans, lakes, and rivers as part of water (H₂O). Oxygen is also found in rocks, minerals, and soil. It makes up almost half of the Earth’s crust by weight, because it is part of many compounds like silicates and oxides. These are the building blocks of rocks and minerals. Plants, algae, and some bacteria make oxygen during photosynthesis. They take in carbon dioxide and sunlight to produce food and release oxygen as a byproduct. Many molecules in living things have oxygen in them, such as proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates and fats. Oxygen is also found in space. It can be found in stars and in clouds of gas between stars. Scientists have even found oxygen in the ice and rocks on other planets and moons.

The history of oxygen began in the 1700s, during a time when scientists were starting to understand the nature of air. In 1772, Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele discovered a gas that made flames burn brighter, but he did not publish his work right away. A few years later, in 1774, British scientist Joseph Priestley also discovered this gas by heating a substance called mercuric oxide. He noticed that candles burned more strongly in the gas, and mice lived longer when breathing it. He called it "dephlogisticated air" based on an old theory of combustion. Soon after, French scientist Antoine Lavoisier gave the gas its modern name, oxygen, which means “acid-former” in Greek. He helped disprove the old phlogiston theory. He also showed that oxygen is an important part of combustion and respiration.

Oxygen can be produced in several ways. The most common method for making large amounts of oxygen is called fractional distillation of liquid air. In this process, air is cooled until it becomes a liquid, then slowly warmed up. Because oxygen boils at a different temperature than other gases, it can be separated and collected. Another way to produce oxygen is by using electrolysis. This method involves passing electricity through water (H₂O) to split it into hydrogen and oxygen gas. Oxygen is also made naturally by plants, algae, and some bacteria through the process of photosynthesis. These organisms take in carbon dioxide and sunlight to make food, and they release oxygen into the air. This natural process is the main source of the oxygen we breathe every day. In hospitals, oxygen can also be created using oxygen concentrators, which pull oxygen out of the air and remove other gases. This helps people who have trouble breathing or need extra oxygen for medical treatments. Oxygen can be stored as a gas under pressure in tanks or stored as a liquid.

Oxygen has many important uses in everyday life, medicine, and industry. One of the most important uses is for breathing. Hospitals give oxygen to patients who have trouble breathing or need extra oxygen, especially during surgery or emergencies. Oxygen is also used in industry. It helps with cutting, welding, and melting metals by making flames hotter. In steel factories, oxygen is used to remove unwanted elements from molten metal, making the final product stronger and cleaner. In space and underwater exploration, oxygen is stored in tanks so astronauts and divers can breathe in places where there is no air. Oxygen is also used in airplanes at high altitudes where the air is too thin to breathe normally. Oxygen is used in water treatment plants to help clean water. It is also used in making plastics, fabrics, and other materials. It is even used in rocket engines, where liquid oxygen helps fuel rockets to launch into space.

Oxygen gas () was isolated by Michael Sendivogius before 1604. It is often thought that the gas was discovered in 1773 by Carl Wilhelm Scheele, in Sweden, or in 1774 by Joseph Priestley, in England. Priestley is usually thought to be the main discoverer because his work was published first (although he called it "dephlogisticated air", and did not think it was a chemical element). Antoine Lavoisier gave the name oxygène to the gas in 1777. He was the first person to say it was a chemical element. He was also right about how it helps combustion work.

One of the first known experiments on how combustion needs air was carried out by Greek Philo of Byzantium in the 2nd century BC. He wrote in his work Pneumatica that turning a  upside down over a burning candle and putting water around this vessel meant that some water went into the vessel. Philo thought this was because the air was turned into the classical element fire. This is wrong. A long time after, Leonardo da Vinci worked out that some air was used up during combustion, and this forced water into the vessel.

In the late 17th century, Robert Boyle found that air is needed for combustion. English chemist John Mayow added to this by showing that fire only needed a part of air. We now call this oxygen (O2). He found that a candle burning in a closed container made the water rise to replace a fourteenth of the air's volume before it went out. The same thing happened when a live mouse was put into the box. From this, he worked out that oxygen is used for both respiration and combustion.

Robert Hooke, Ole Borch, Mikhail Lomonosov and Pierre Bayen all made oxygen in experiments in the 17th and 18th centuries. None of them thought it was a chemical element. This was probably because of the idea of the phlogiston theory. This was what most people believed caused combustion and corrosion.

J. J. Becher came up with the theory in 1667, and Georg Ernst Stahl added to it in 1731. The phlogiston theory stated that all combustible materials were made of two parts. One part, called phlogiston, was given off when the substance containing it was burned.

Materials that leave very little residue when they burn, like wood or coal, were thought to be made mostly of phlogiston. Things that corrode, like iron, were thought to contain very little. Air was not part of this theory.

Polish alchemist, philosopher and physician Michael Sendivogius wrote about something in air that he called the "food of life", and this meant what we now call oxygen. Sendivogius found, between 1598 and 1604, that the substance in air is the same as he got by heating potassium nitrate. Some people believe this was the discovery of oxygen while others disagree. Some say that oxygen was discovered by Swedish pharmacist Carl Wilhelm Scheele. He got oxygen in 1771 by heating mercuric oxide and some nitrates. Scheele called the gas "fire air", because it was the only gas known to allow combustion (gases were called "airs" at this time). He published his discovery in 1777.

On 1 August 1774, British clergyman Joseph Priestley focused sunlight on mercuric oxide in a glass tube. From this experiment he got a gas that he called "dephlogisticated air". He found that candles burned more brightly in the gas and a mouse lived longer while breathing it. After breathing the gas, Priestley said that it felt like normal air, but his lungs felt lighter and easy afterwards. His findings were published in 1775. It is because his findings were published first that he is often said to have discovered oxygen.

French chemist Antoine Lavoisier later said he had discovered the substance as well. Priestley visited him in 1774 and told him about his experiment. Scheele also sent a letter to Lavoisier in that year that spoke of his discovery.

Lavoisier did the first main experiments on oxidation. He was the first person to explain how combustion works. He used these and other experiments to prove the phlogiston theory wrong. He also tried to prove that the substance discovered by Priestley and Scheele was a chemical element.

In one experiment, Lavoisier found that there was no increase in weight when tin and air were heated in a closed container. He also found that air rushed in when the container was opened. After this, he found that the weight of the tin had increased by the same amount as the weight of the air that rushed in. He published his findings in 1777.  He wrote that air was made up of two gases. One he called "vital air" (oxygen), which is needed for combustion and respiration. The other (nitrogen) he called "azote", which means "lifeless" in Greek. (This is still the name of nitrogen in some languages, including French.)

Lavoisier renamed "vital air" to "oxygène", from Greek words meaning "sour making" or "producer of acid". He called it this because he thought oxygen was in all acids, which is wrong. Later chemists realised that Lavoiser's name for the gas was wrong, but the name was too common by then to change.

"Oxygen" became the name in the English language, even though English scientists were against it.

John Dalton's theory of atoms said that all elements had one atom and atoms in compounds were usually alone. For example, he wrongly thought that water (H2O) had the formula of just HO. In 1805, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Alexander von Humboldt showed that water is made up of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. By 1811, Amedeo Avogadro correctly worked out what water was made of based on Avogadro's law.

By the late 19th century, scientists found that air could be turned into a liquid and the compounds in it could be isolated by compressing and cooling it. Swiss chemist and physicist Raoul Pictet discovered liquid oxygen by evaporating sulfur dioxide to turn carbon dioxide into a liquid. This was then also evaporated to cool oxygen gas in order to turn it into a liquid. He sent a telegram to the French Academy of Sciences on 22 December 1877 telling them of his discovery.

At standard temperature and pressure, oxygen has no colour, odour or taste. It is a gas with the chemical formula  called dioxygen.

As dioxygen (or just oxygen gas), two oxygen atoms are chemically bound to each other. This bond can be called many things, but simply called a covalent double bond. Oxygen gas is very reactive and can react with many other elements. Oxides are made when metal elements react with oxygen, such as iron oxide, which is known as rust. There are a lot of oxide compounds on Earth.

The common allotrope (type) of oxygen on Earth is called dioxygen (O2). This is the second biggest part of the Earth's atmosphere, after dinitrogen (N2). O2 has a bond length of 121 pm and a bond energy of 498 kJ/mol Because of its energy, O2 is used by complex life like animals.

Ozone (O3) is very reactive and damages the lungs when breathed in. Ozone is made in the upper atmosphere when O2 combines with pure oxygen made when O2 is split by ultraviolet radiation. Ozone absorbs a lot of radiation in the UV part of the electromagnetic spectrum and so the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere protects Earth from radiation.

Above the ozone layer, (in low Earth orbits), atomic oxygen becomes the most common form.

Tetraoxygen (O4) was discovered in 2001. It only exists in extreme conditions when a lot of pressure is put onto O2.

Oxygen dissolves more easily from air into water than nitrogen does. When there is the same amount of air and water, there is one molecule of O2 for every 2 molecules of N2 (a ratio of 1:2). This is different to air, where there is a 1:4 ratio of oxygen to nitrogen. It is also easier for O2 to dissolve in freshwater than in seawater. Oxygen condenses at 90.20 K (-182.95°C, -297.31 °F) and freezes at 54.36 K (-218.79 °C, -361.82 °F). Both liquid and solid O2 are see-through with a light-blue colour.

Oxygen is very reactive and must be kept away from anything that can burn.

There are three stable isotopes of oxygen in nature. They are 16O, 17O, and 18O. About 99.7% of oxygen is the 16O isotope.

Oxygen is the third most common element in the universe, after hydrogen and helium. About 0.9% of the Sun's mass is oxygen.

Apart from iron, oxygen is the most common element on Earth (by mass). It makes up nearly half (46%

to 49.2% of the Earth's crust as part of oxide compounds like silicon dioxide and other compounds like carbonates. It is also the main part of the Earth's oceans, making up 88.8% by mass. Oxygen gas is the second most common part of the atmosphere, making up 20.95% of its volume and 23.1% of its volume. Earth is strange compared to other planets, as a large amount of its atmosphere is oxygen gas. Mars has only 0.1%  by volume, and the other planets have less than that.

The much higher amount of oxygen gas around Earth is caused by the oxygen cycle. Photosynthesis takes hydrogen from water using energy from sunlight. This gives off oxygen gas. Some of the hydrogen combines with carbon dioxide to make carbohydrates. Respiration then takes oxygen gas out of the atmosphere or water and turns it into carbon dioxide and water.

O2 is a very important part of respiration. Because of this, it is used in medicine. It is used to increase the amount of oxygen in a person's blood so more respiration can take place. This can make them become healthy quicker if they are ill. Oxygen therapy is used to treat emphysema, pneumonia, some heart problems, and any disease that makes it harder for a person to take in oxygen.

Low-pressure O2 is used in space suits, surrounding the body with the gas. Pure oxygen is used but at a much lower pressure. If the pressure were higher, it would be poisonous.

Smelting of iron ore into steel uses about 55% of oxygen made by humans. To do this, O2 gas is injected into the ore through a lance at high pressure. This removes any sulfur or carbon from the ore that would not be wanted. They are given off as sulfur oxide and carbon dioxide. The temperature can go as high as 1,700 °C because it is an exothermic reaction.

Around 25% of oxygen made by humans is used by chemists. Ethylene is reacted with O2 to make ethylene oxide. This is then changed to ethylene glycol, which is used to make many products such as antifreeze and polyester (these can then be turned into plastics and fabrics).

The other 20% of oxygen made by humans is used in medicine, metal cutting and welding, rocket fuel, and water treatment.

The oxidation state of oxygen is −2 in nearly every compound it is in. In a few compounds, the oxidation state is −1, such as peroxides. Compounds of oxygen with other oxygen states are very uncommon.

Water () is an oxide of hydrogen. It is the most common oxide on Earth. All known life needs water to live. Water is made of two hydrogen atoms covalent bonded to an oxygen atom (oxygen has a higher electronegativity than hydrogen). (this is the basic principle of covalent bonding)

There are also electrostatic forces (Van de'r Waals forces) between the hydrogen atoms and adjacent molecules' oxygen atoms. These pseudo-bonds bring the atoms around 15% closer to each other than most other simple liquids. This is because Water is a polar molecule (Net asymmetrical distribution of electrons) due to its bent shape, giving it an overall net field direction, mainly due to oxygens 2 non bonding pairs of electrons, pushing the bonding H's further together than the linear arrangement with lower enthalpy (see CO2). This property is exploited by microwaves to oscillate polar molecules, especially water. And its responsible for the extra energy needed to disassociate H20.

Because of oxygen's high electronegativity, it makes chemical bonds with almost all other chemical elements. These bonds give oxides (for example iron reacts with oxygen to give iron oxide). Most metal's surfaces are turned into oxides when in air. Iron's surface will turn to rust (iron oxide) when in air for a long time. There are small amounts of carbon dioxide () in the air, and it is turned into carbohydrates during photosynthesis. Living things give it off during respiration.

Many organic compounds have oxygen in them. Some of the classes of organic compounds that have oxygen are alcohols, ethers, ketones, aldehydes, carboxylic acids, esters, and amides. Many organic solvents also have oxygen, such as acetone, methanol, and isopropanol. Oxygen is also found in nearly all biomolecules that are made by living things.

Oxygen also reacts quickly with many organic compounds at, or below, room temperature when autoxidation happens.

One hundred million tonnes of O2 are gotten from air for industrial uses every year. Industries use two main methods to make oxygen. The most common method is fractional distillation of liquefied air. N2 evaporates while O2 is left as a liquid. O2 is the second most important industrial gas. Because it is more economical, oxygen is usually stored and transported as a liquid. A small steel tank of 16 liters water capacity with a working pressure of 139 bar (2015 psi) holds about 2150 liters of gas and weighs 28 kilograms (62 lb) empty. 2150 liters of oxygen weighs about 3 kilograms (6.6 lb).

The other main method of making oxygen is by passing a stream of clean, dry air through a pair of zeolite molecular sieves. The zeolite molecular sieves soak up the nitrogen. It gives a stream of gas that is 90% to 93% oxygen.

Oxygen gas can also be made through electrolysis of water into molecular oxygen and hydrogen.

Oxygen's NFPA 704 says that compressed oxygen gas is not dangerous to health and is not flammable.

At high pressures, oxygen gas (O2) can be dangerous to animals, including humans. It can cause convulsions and other health problems. Oxygen toxicity usually begins to occur at pressures more than 50 kilopascals (kPa), equal to about 50% oxygen in the air at standard pressure (air on Earth has around 20% oxygen).

Premature babies used to be placed in boxes with air with a high amount of O2. This was stopped when some babies went blind from the oxygen.

Breathing pure O2 in space suits causes no damage because there is a lower pressure used.

Concentrated amounts of pure O2 can cause a quick fire. When concentrated oxygen and fuels are brought close together, a slight ignition can cause a huge fire. The Apollo 1 crew were all killed by a fire because the air of the capsule had a very high amount of oxygen.

If liquid oxygen is spilled onto organic compounds, like wood, it can explode.

The Netherlands (also referred to as Holland) is a country that is part (of a constituent country) of the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Most of it is in Western Europe, but there are also some parts in the Caribbean. Nearly 18 million people live there. To the north and west of the European part of the Netherlands is the North Sea, and to the east is Germany, and to the south is Belgium. The Netherlands is one of the countries that started the European Union. People who live in the Netherlands are called "Dutch". The language of the Netherlands is also called Dutch. The official capital of the Netherlands is Amsterdam. However, the government is in The Hague.

"The Netherlands" means "the low lands". The land only rises, on average, 1 meter above sea level. One third of the land is below sea level. The Netherlands is also - incorrectly - referred to as Holland. Holland is a very rich area (two provinces) in the western part of the Netherlands, thus causing people to be mistaken. Most people who do not live in the western part of the Netherlands do not like it when people call the country Holland. The name "Holland" originates from the old Dutch words "Holt land" which means "wood lands". Holt eventually changed into hout, the current Dutch word for wood.

At the end of the Middle Ages the dukes of Burgundy, a country that is now part of France, united seventeen areas. Those areas were called the Burgundian Netherlands. When the daughter of their duke married Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor in 1477, the Netherlands became part of Spain. In the 16th century many Dutch people became Protestant. The king of Spain did not like it, he wanted all Dutch to be Roman Catholic. Of course the Dutch people did not like this, and after violent excesses by the Spanish they started a war against Spain in 1568, also for reasons of taxation. The war lasted until 1648, therefore it is called the Eighty Years' War. An important leader of the Dutch in this war was Willem van Oranje (William of Orange) also called William the Silent.

In 1648 the Netherlands and Spain signed peace. The Dutch people were allowed to keep all the areas they conquered. The part of the Netherlands that was not conquered by the Dutch stayed part of Spain. Later this part became the country Belgium.

When the Netherlands became independent, it was a very special country. That time almost all countries in Europe were ruled by a king, but the Netherlands was a republic. The Netherlands was made up of seven provinces, that were ruled by the big cities. The cities were ruled by the municipality which consisted of rich civilians. Together those provinces were ruled by a stadtholder, a very powerful man, but compared to the kings of other European countries he had much less power.

In the 17th century the Netherlands was the richest and one of the most powerful countries in the world. Therefore, the Dutch call the 17th century the Golden Age. Their Dutch Empire had colonies around the world. One important colony was the East Indies, which is now called Indonesia. They also had colonies in the Caribbean, like the other European empires. They also started New Netherland, which is now called New York. The Netherlands often fought wars against other European countries, especially the Anglo-Dutch Wars against England. Michiel de Ruyter, a Dutch admiral, became a Dutch hero when he defeated the English navy close to London.

In the 18th century the Netherlands became poorer. Many people blamed this on the government leaders, the stadtholders. Many thought they had too much power and wanted them to get away. In 1789 the French people deposed (got rid of) their king. French armies attacked other countries to depose their leaders too. In 1795 they attacked the Netherlands. Stadtholder William V had to flee to England. The Netherlands were renamed to Batavian Republic and became a democracy. But the French were not content (satisfied) with the Dutch ruler, so in 1806 the French emperor Napoleon made his brother Louis Bonaparte king of the Netherlands. Louis became popular in the Netherlands, but the emperor was again not content with him, so in 1810 the Netherlands became a part of France.

In 1815 Napoleon was defeated, and the Netherlands became independent again. The rulers of European countries thought it was a good idea to make the Netherlands stronger, to make them able to resist another French invasion. Therefore, Belgium and Luxembourg were added to the Netherlands. William I, the son of stadtholder William V, became king. Some Belgians disliked their Dutch king. In 1830 they revolted. William sent an army. He was much more powerful than the Belgians but after ten days the French sent an army to support them. In 1831 the Belgians chose their own king and Belgium became an independent country.

Some people again thought the Dutch king had too much power. They wanted to give him less power and vote for the government themselves. In 1848 there were violent revolts against the kings of many European countries. The Dutch king was afraid the same would happen in the Netherlands. Therefore, he allowed Johan Rudolf Thorbecke to write a constitution. From then on people were allowed to vote. At first only rich men were allowed to vote. From 1919 on all adults were allowed to vote.

In World War I, the Netherlands did not fight and were not invaded. The Dutch wanted to stay neutral in World War II as well, but in 1940 the country was invaded and occupied by Germany. Like in other countries they had occupied, the German authorities started to kill Jews. Anne Frank was a Jewish girl who lived in the Netherlands. Her family hid from the Nazis and she wrote a diary. She died in a Nazi concentration camp and her diary became famous.

In 1944 the American, Canadian, Polish and British armies liberated the south of the Netherlands from Nazi Occupation. They wanted to cross the Rhine river in Operation Market Garden to liberate the rest of the country, but they were defeated. It took until May 1945 before the entire country was liberated. During the five years of Nazi occupation, 250,000 people had died in the Netherlands.

Shortly after the war, Indonesia declared its independence. The Dutch sent soldiers to fight in Indonesia. After other countries, including the United States, told the Dutch to leave Indonesia, they finally did so in 1949.

After the war the Netherlands became one of the richest countries in the world. In 2004 the United Nations said that the Netherlands was the 5th best country to live in.

The Netherlands is a constitutional monarchy. That means the country has a king, but the real power is in the hands of a parliament, chosen by the Dutch people. All Dutch people at least 18 years old or older are allowed to vote. The Dutch parliament consists of two chambers: the Second Chamber (Dutch: Tweede Kamer, this is the House of Representatives, elected every four years), and the First Chamber (Dutch: Eerste Kamer, this is the Senate, elected by provincial politicians every four years). After the Second Chamber elections, parties that have had a majority of the votes create a cabinet. The cabinet consists of a prime minister and several other ministers and deputy ministers. Current cabinet is the liberal-Christian democratic Fourth Rutte cabinet, consisting of VVD, D66, CDA, and CU politicians. Prime Minister is Mark Rutte (VVD). This cabinet fell on 7 July 2023 and was replaced by the cabinet of Dick Schoof. Following the 2025 general election, Rob Jetten became the country's youngest and first openly gay prime minister.

The latest general elections were held on 22 November 2023. Winners were populist party PVV, leftist alliance GL-PvdA, and centrist parties NSC and BBB. Losers were liberal parties VVD and D66, leftist parties SP and PvdD, Christian democratic parties CDA and CU, populist parties FVD and JA21, and European party Volt Netherlands.

The Netherlands is known for tolerance in politics. The Netherlands is the only country where soft drugs are not entirely considered illegal. Furthermore, the Netherlands is one of the few countries that allow same-sex marriages, euthanasia and prostitution to a certain extent.

The Netherlands is subdivided in provinces and municipalities.

These provinces are all located in the part of the Netherlands that is in Europe. The country also includes three special municipalities in the Caribbean: Bonaire, Saba and Sint Eustatius. They are not part of any province, but together are known as the Caribbean Netherlands. The Netherlands (both the European part and the Caribbean Netherlands), together with Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, also in the Caribbean, form a sovereign state called the Kingdom of the Netherlands.

When the Kingdom was formed in 1954, the territories in the Caribbean became part of the Netherlands Antilles. At that time it also included Suriname in South America, which became an independent country in 1975. Aruba left the Antilles in 1986, and Curaçao and Sint Maarten did the same in 2010. The rest of the islands then became the Caribbean Netherlands which is part of the Netherlands proper.

The Netherlands has 342 municipalities (2023) and also three special municipalities in the so-called Caribbean Netherlands.

Cities aren't actually a subdivision of the Netherlands. Cities are also municipalities or they make part of municipalities.

This is a list of the cities/municipalities with over 100,000 people.

In fact a large part of the Netherlands (the province Flevoland) was created by the sand that came from the many rivers flowing through it. Notable Dutch rivers are the Rhine, the Maas, the IJssel and the Scelt. A large part of the Netherlands is below sea level. This is because the Dutch have made many lakes and parts of the sea dry, creating polders. Therefore, there is a saying "God created the earth, but the Dutch created the Netherlands." This makes the Netherlands very flat. In the very south-east of the Netherlands, in Limburg, there are some hills. Therefore, this region is a tourist-attraction for many Dutch people. The highest point in the European portion of the Netherlands, the Vaalserberg, is 323 metres above sea level. The highest point in both the Netherlands proper and the Kingdom of the Netherlands is Mount Scenery, on the Caribbean island of Saba, at 887 metres.

The Netherlands is a small flat country; about 300 kilometers from north to south, and about 170 kilometers from east to west. It has an oceanic climate (Cfb in the Köppen climate classification).

The Netherlands has an oceanic climate, with a yearly average temperature of .

The highest temperature ever recorded in the Netherlands was , on 25 July 2019 in Gilze-Rijen.

The lowest temperature ever recorded in the Netherlands was , on 27 January 1942 in Winterswijk.

The Netherlands is a small country, but many people live there. It is one of the most densely populated countries of the world.

Most people in the Netherlands speak Dutch. In Friesland, about 200,000 people speak Frisian. Frisian is the language with the most similarities to English. Some Dutch people speak dialects. The Saxon dialects spoken in the northeastern part of the Netherlands are somewhat similar to Low German.

According to a survey done in 2010, 23% of the Dutch people are Christian and 6% is islam and 71% believe in another organised religion, like Judaism, Islam or Hinduism. Twenty-six percent are 'unbounded spiritual' (have their own beliefs and are not tied to a religion). The other 44% are not religious.

Significant minorities in the country include Turkish people 700,000, Jews 41,000-45,000 and Roma and Sinti 40,000.

Nederlandse Spoorwegen () or NS is the main passenger railway operator in the Netherlands. The rail infrastructure is maintained by network manager ProRail, which was split from NS in 2003. Freight services, formerly operated by NS Cargo, merged with the DB Schenker group in 2000.

NS runs 4,800 scheduled trains daily. In addition, NS provides international rail services from the Netherlands to other European destinations and carries out concessions on a number of foreign rail markets through its subsidiary Abellio such as Abellio Greater Anglia, Merseyrail and ScotRail.

Arriva is another passenger railway operator in the Netherlands. It is a  of the German company Deutsche Bahn. Their local headquarters is based at Heerenveen. They have been active since 1998.

Paris (nicknamed the "City of light") is the capital city of France, and the largest city in France. The area is , and around 2.15 million people live there. If suburbs are counted, the population of the Paris area rises to 10.7 million people. It is the most densely populated city in the European Union, with  20.653 people per square kilometer.

The Seine river runs through the oldest part of Paris, and divides it into two parts, known as the Left Bank and the Right Bank. It is surrounded by many forests.

Paris is also the center of French economy, politics, traffic and culture. Paris has many art museums and historical buildings. Paris has an underground subway system (called the Metro). It also has two airports. The Metro was built in 1900, and its total length is more than .

The city has a multi-cultural style, because 19% of the people there are from outside France. There are many different restaurants with all kinds of food. Paris also has some types of pollution like air pollution and light pollution.

Julius Caesar conquered the Celtic "Parisii" tribe in 51 BC. The largest clan of French people in Paris is Parisii in 2023. The Romans called the place Lutetia of the Parisii, or "Lutetia Parisiorum". The place got a shorter name, "Paris", in 212 AD.

As the Roman Empire began to fall apart in the West, the Germanic tribe called the Franks moved in, taking it in 464. In 507, their king Clovis I made it his capital. Charlemagne moved his capital to Aachen in Germany, but Paris continued as an important town and was attacked by the Vikings twice. When Hugh Capet became king of France in 987, he again made Paris his capital. For a long time, the kings only controlled Paris and the surrounding area, as much of the rest of France was in the hands of barons or English. During the Hundred Years' War, the English controlled Paris from 1420 to 1437.

During the Protestant Reformation, a huge massacre of French Protestants started there in 1572, called the Saint Bartholomew Day Massacre. Paris saw many other troubles over the years of the "Ancien Régime" (Old Kingdom), then in 1789, the French Revolution began in Paris, leading to more massacres.

Paris was the Capital of the French Empire which, as well as France, covered Spain, Belgium, Holland, Luxembourg, Switzerland, Italy, most of Germany and some of Austria, Croatia, Slovenia and Poland. The Empire ruled by Napoleon was from 1804 to 1814/1815. The Russian army seized Paris from Napoleon in 1814, and the Prussian army captured it in 1871. The next time it was captured was by the Nazi Germans in 1940. The Allies freed the city in 1944 and it has not since been captured.

Paris has an oceanic climate in the Köppen climate classification. It has warm summers and cold winters, and rainfall year-round.

Paris has much to offer for sightseeing. Here are five very famous examples:

Paris has prestigious universities in science and technology (Conservatoire national des arts et métiers, Polytechnic Institute of Paris, Paris Cité University, Paris-Saclay University, Sorbonne University), political science (Sciences Po), management (HEC Paris, ESSEC Business School, ESCP Business School, INSEAD) as well as multidisciplinary universities (PSL Research University).

Because the city of Paris is roughly only 10 kilometres/6 miles across, visitors have a wide range of options when it comes to transportation. While much of the more well-known attractions are in the center of the city and are best experienced by walking, there are many destinations that require other means of transport. While taxis offer a fast and relatively inexpensive means of travel, Paris’ public transportation system offers an enjoyable, stress-free way to explore the city.

The Paris Métro system was built in 1900 by engineer Fulgence Bienvenüe and architect Hector Guimard. The Métro covers over 198 kilometers/124 miles with 300 stations and 16 lines. Servicing over 6 million residents and tourists every day, the Métro was designed to be an efficient and reliable alternative to the congestion of traffic. Every building in Paris is less than 500 meters from a train station, so accessibility is never a problem. The 16 Métro lines are identified by their final destinations. A rider can simply select the appropriate line and take it in the direction s/he wants. The Métro stations are well marked, and there are ticket booths at most entrances.

There are five airports that serve Paris: Charles de Gaulle Airport, Orly Airport, Beauvais-Tillé Airport and Paris–Le Bourget Airport, and Châlons Vatry Airport.

Niccolò Machiavelli (3 May 1469 – 21 June 1527) was a Florentine Renaissance man, statesman, and writer. He was a diplomat and government official in the Medici period of the Florentine Republic. Machiavelli is best known for writing about political philosophy. He also wrote poetry, plays, carnival songs, history books, military science books, and some of the best-known personal letters in the Italian language. His best known book is The Prince from 1513. It was not published until 1532, which was five years after he died.

Many people use the word Machiavellian to mean "evil" because his ideas have been viewed by many as wicked. Many historians today still have debates on what he really thought. Nevertheless, Machiavelli is remembered for being an important realism theorist. Machiavelli's ideas are focused mostly on a  understanding of virtue, statesmanship, and fortune ().

There are many s of his thoughts. Some examples of his thoughts were:

The Prince is a political book by Niccolò Machiavelli. He first shared the book privately in 1513. But it was not published until 1532. The book gives  for how a prince or ruler should conduct himself in politics.

Machiavelli is often seen as promoting the idea that a ruler should use any methods necessary to build and maintain power. This idea is often summarized by the saying "The ends justify the means," which some people associate with his work The Prince. Machiavelli suggests that rulers may need to use tricks, lies, and even violence to succeed. For example, a ruler might need to get rid of political opponents, control the population, and remove anyone who might try to take their place. In one part of The Prince, Machiavelli advises that a ruler should act like both a fox, to avoid traps, and a lion, to defeat enemies. This became one of his most famous ideas. Many people believe that Machiavelli’s main point in The Prince is that gaining and keeping power sometimes requires actions that are considered wrong. Because of his advice, the word "Machiavellian" came to describe such political acts.

Pakistan, officially the Islamic Republic of Pakistan (Urdu: Islāmī Jumhūriyah Pākistān), is a country in South Asia. It shares its border with other countries India, Iran, Afghanistan and China (disputed with India). Pakistan has the fifth largest population (243.4 million) in the world and has a total land area of .or in simple words 881,000 km² This makes Pakistan the 34th largest country in the world by land area. It has a 1,365 km long coastline along the Arabian Sea in the south. The capital of Pakistan is Islamabad, but before 1960, it was Karachi, which is now the country's largest city. While they were building Islamabad, Rawalpindi acted as the (temporary capital) from 1959 to 1967.

The lands of Pakistan have a long history with ancient cultures, such as the 8,500-year-old Neolithic site of Mehrgarh, the Bronze Age Indus Valley civilization, and the ancient Gandhara civilization. Over the years, various empires and dynasties, including the Achaemenid, Maurya, Kushan, Gupta, Macedonians, Mongols, Tibetans, Umayyad Caliphate, Samma, Hindu Shahis, Shah Miris, Ghaznavids, Delhi Sultanate, Mughals, and the British Raj, have influenced the region. Pakistan is also associated with the origins of major world religions like Hinduism and Sikhism, as well as the Mahayana and Vajrayana branches of Buddhism, rooted in the Gandhara region. The word "Pakistan" and the idea of the nation did not exist till the 1900s.

It is a nuclear-weapons state. Pakistan's political history has seen periods of substantial economic and military growth, along with times of political and economic instability. The country has different groups of people and people who speak different languages, with different styles of geography and wildlife. However, Pakistan also faces challenges like poverty, illiteracy, corruption, and terrorism.

The Islamic name Pakistan (English pronunciation:  or ;   ) means 'Land of (the) Spiritually Pure' in both Urdu and Persian languages. It alludes to the word pāk meaning pure in Persian and Pashto. The suffix  (-stān) is a Persian word meaning the place of, and also recalls the synonymous (and cognate) Sanskrit word sthāna . Many South-central Asian states and regions end with the element -stan, such as Karakalpakstan, Afghanistan, Sindhustan, Balochistan, Kurdistan, and Turkistan. This -stan is formed from the Iranian root *STA "to stand, stay," and means "place (where one stays), home, country". Iranian peoples have been the main inhabitants of the various land regions of the Ancient Persian Empires now inhabit by the naturalised states for more than 1,500 years. The names are compounds of -stan and the name of the peoples living there. PAKISTAN is exceptionally unique; its naming is a compound of 2 names; which was coined on the 28th of January in 1933 AD as  by Choudhary Rehmat Ali Khan respectively, a Cambridge University Moslem student and a Pakistan Movement activist, who published it in his paper Now or Never. by using the suffix -istan from Balochistan preceded by the first letters of Punjab, Afghania, Kashmir and Sindh. The name is actually an acronym that stands for the "Thirty million Muslim brethren who live in Pakistan—by which we mean the Five Northern units of India viz: The Punjab, (Afghan Province), Kashmir, Sind, and Baluchistan". The letter “ī” that was incorporated to ease pronunciation and elegantly forms the linguistical corrective and a Respective name meaningfully. Most notably interestingly, a word almost identical in form, etymology, and meaning to the Iranian suffix -stan is found in the Polish language, which has a word Stan meaning "State" (in the senses of both Polity and Condition). It can be found in the example of a Polish name for the "United States of America," Stany Zjednoczone Ameryki (literally "States United of America").

Thus, the name Pākistān means “Land of the Pure” in Persian and Urdu respectively.

Pakistan became Independent in 1947 from the United Kingdom which was known as the British Raj. The first humans in Pakistan were the Soanian hunter-gatherers, who lived 50,000 years ago. Three of the world's oldest civilisations are in Pakistan, these include Mehrgarh civilisation, the Indus Valley civilisation and the Gandhara civilisation. The first urban centre in South Asia was the Mehrgarh, a 11,000-year-old site in Pakistan. The first organised people in Ancient Pakistan were the ones who made the Indus Valley Civilization, they lived 9000 years ago.  After that, the Vedic period came.

After the Muslim conquest, Pakistan began to be Islamized and it slowly turned into a Muslim majority region. The British Empire had effectively conquered the entire territories of modern-day Pakistan by the year 1849 and after the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the region was officially absorbed into the British Crown and came under direct British rule. Pakistan gained independence from British rule in 1947 however the Monarch of the United Kingdom (King George VI and Queen Elizabeth II) remained the monarch of Pakistan up until it officially became a republic in 1956. Until 1971, Pakistan also included an area in the North-east India region. This is now called Bangladesh. It lost that area after a war with the Indian Army and the joint militant group of Indo-Bangladeshi alliance of Mitro Bahini of West Bengal. Since 2000 Pakistan has supported the West in their war against fundamentalist terrorism, including the removal of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan. Despite not being part of the organization itself, Pakistan has developed close ties with and closely cooperated with the NATO organization assisting it in many of its military campaigns such as those in Bosnia and Somalia.

Pakistan is a member of the Commonwealth. However, after the war in East Pakistan the country was excluded (between 1972 and 1989). It was also a member between 1999 and 2007, it was excluded in 2007 for a time but again became a member in 2008.

There are many earthquakes in the area. The earthquake in 2005 with its earthquake center in Kashmir is the strongest recorded so far. Over 100,000 people were killed or wounded on 8 October 2005.

Pakistan covers , roughly similar to the combined land areas of France and the UK. Its eastern regions are located on the Indian plate and the western and northern regions on the Iranian plateau and Eurasian landplate. Apart from the  Arabian Sea coastline, Pakistan's land borders total — with Afghanistan to the northwest,  with China to the northeast,  with India to the south and east, and  with Iran to the southwest.

The northern and western highlands of Pakistan contain the towering Karakoram and Pamir Mountain ranges, which include some of the world's highest peaks, including K2  and Nanga Parbat . The Balochistan Plateau lies to the west, and the Thar Desert and an expanse of alluvial plains, the Punjab and Sindh, lie to the east. The  Indus River and its tributaries flow through the country from the disputed territory of Kashmir to the Arabian Sea.

Pakistan has four seasons: a cool, dry winter from December through February; a hot, dry spring from March through May; the summer rainy season, or southwest monsoon period, from June through September; and the retreating monsoon period of October and November. The beginning and length of these seasons vary somewhat according to location. Rainfall can change radically from year to year, and consecutive patterns of flooding and drought are also not uncommon. The country contains diverse ecosystems that support rich biodiversity.

Pakistan's International borders are the external borders of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.

Pakistan's is unique geographically. It is located within Southcentral Asia, with the Indus River and its tributaries as its main water supply or lifeline, the world's largest Irrigation system. The country is also home to the world's largest earth-filled dam, the Tarbela Dam, which supports irrigation, hydroelectric power generation, and water management.

The nation is bordered by the Hindu Kush and Sulaiman Mountain ranges in the west, Karakoram Mountain range in the north, Sutlej River and Thar desert in east, and Arabian Sea in the south.

The country in its form as of right now was made by the Pakistanis themselves out of the imperial colonial British India. The region that now constitutes Pakistan was part of the British India from 1858 to 1947. The demand for a separate Muslim homeland gained momentum under the leadership of the All-India Muslim League and Muhammad Ali Jinnah. Following the passage of the Indian Independence Act 1947, British India was partitioned into the independent dominions of India and Pakistan in August 1947.

Pakistan borders the People's Republic of China in the north (Xinjiang Autonomous Türkic Region), and in the north-east Tibet Autonomous Region, the disputed territory of Kashmir which was part of the British Indian territory until 1948 is also included. Pakistan borders the entire eastern length of the country with the Republic of India and on the south towards the Arabian Sea, to the north-west Pakistan is separated by fourteen kilometres of a narrow strip of the Afghan-occupied Gorno-Badakhshan territory called the Wakhan Corridor which extends between Northern Pakistan and Tajikistan.

The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is to the west and north, and Iran (Ancient Persia) is to the southwest. Pakistan also shares to the extreme south-west a marine border with Oman.

The Maritime borders of Pakistan are the maritime boundary recognized by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The Government of Pakistan promulgated Territorial and Maritime Zones Act 1976. In 1997, Pakistan also declared a straight baseline along its coast. Now the territorial sea is measured 12 nautical miles into sea from the baseline. Using Unclos III, Pakistan has also demarcated its sea boundaries with both Iran and Oman.

Sea frontier with India in the East remains in dispute. Pakistan and India have held 12 rounds of discussions for deciding the exact sea frontier at Kori Creek and the un-demarcated Rann of Kachchh. At times, the negotiations appear promising. However, there has been no progress since June 2012.  Pakistan's coastline is 1,146 Square kilometres² (712 Square miles²) long, with its claim of a  territorial maritime zone and  exclusive economic zone, has a more than  maritime border shared with the three nations namely:

Pakistan has a federal parliamentary system. The head of state is an indirectly elected ceremonial President. The Electoral college of the country, (composed of the Senate, the National Assembly, and the four Provincial Assemblies) chooses a leadership representing the President of Pakistan for a five-year term. The president is also the Commander in Chief of the Joint Armed Forces. The head of government is the Prime Minister, who is also indirectly elected.

The President's appointment and term are constitutionally independent of the Prime Minister's term. The Prime Minister is usually the leader of the largest party in the National Assembly or of a coalition in the National Assembly.

The Prime Minister is the head of government. Pakistan's legislature is made of a 100-member Senate (upper house) and a 342-member National Assembly (lower house). The Chief Justice of Pakistan is the chief judge who oversees the judicature's court system at all levels of command..

Pakistan is officially a federal republic, but during a long period in its history it changed to a democratic state and a military dictatorship. Military dictators include Ayub Khan in the 1960s, General Zia-ul-Haq in the 1980s.

On 27 December 2007, the leader of the Pakistan People's Party, Benazir Bhutto, was assassinated. The reason is yet to be determined.

Pakistan is made up of four provinces, two Federally administered territories and two autonomous territories. Both special areas are in Kashmir. The provinces and territories are divided into 26 divisions with now 147 districts directly divided from the provinces. Each district is divided into several tehsils and each tehsil is divided into several union councils. There are around 596 tehsils and over 6,000 union councils in Pakistan.

Among the four provinces, Punjab has the most people, but Balochistan is the largest province by area.

(Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa also have Provincially Administered Tribal Areas (PATA) which are going to be regular districts.)

India, Pakistan and China separately control parts of the Kashmir region. India and Pakistan's parts are divided by a Line of Control. The Pakistan–China border is internationally recognized.

Pakistan has a semi-industrialized economy. The growth poles of the Pakistani economy are situated along the Indus River. Diversified economies of Karachi and Punjab's urban centres, coexist with less developed areas in other parts of the country. Despite being a very poor country in 1947, Pakistan's economic growth rate has been better than the global average during the following four decades, but incautious policies led to a slowdown in the late 1990s.

The 2005 estimate of foreign debt was close to US$40 billion. However, this decreased with help from the International Monetary Fund and significant debt-relief from the United States. Pakistan's gross domestic product, as measured by purchasing power parity, is estimated to be $475 billion while its per capita income stands at $1,842. The amount of poor people in Pakistan is estimated to be between 23% and 38%.

There are dozens of languages spoken in Pakistan. Urdu and English are two official languages of the country. English is still spoken among the Pakistani  and in most government ministries. Other major languages spoken in Pakistan include; Saraiki, Punjabi, Hindko, Pashto, Sindhi, Balochi, Brahui, Khowar, Balti and many others. Shina is also one of the regional languages of Pakistan. It is spoken in Gilgit-Baltistan.

Most (90-95%) of the people are Muslim. Sunni Muslims constitute 70-75% of Pakistan's populations and Shia Muslims 20-25%. Many other religions are followed in Pakistan too, these are Christianity, Hinduism, Sikhism, Zoroastrianism, Baha'i Faith, Zikrism, Ahmadiyya, Judaism, Buddhism and Animism.

After the end of British India rule, Hinduism had much less importance in the newly made state of Pakistan but has played an important role in its culture and politics as well as the history of its regions. In fact, Pakistan has the 4th largest population of Hindus in the world.

Pakistani society has historically been built around extended families, local communities, and religious traditions that strongly influenced social behavior and daily life. In earlier decades, most people lived in rural areas where social authority was often guided by elders, tribal leaders, and community networks. These traditional structures provided social stability and support, but also limited individual decision-making and social mobility in many communities.

A major transformation began with rapid urbanization and expansion of education after independence. Migration to cities created new social environments where people from different ethnic, linguistic, and cultural backgrounds interacted more frequently. Urban growth and increased access to education gradually shifted social influence from purely family-based systems toward professional institutions, modern workplaces, and individual career opportunities.

Another important change has been the increasing participation of women in education, healthcare, business, and public service. Over recent decades, female literacy rates and employment opportunities have improved, contributing to broader social and economic development. This shift has influenced family roles, workplace participation, and public representation, marking one of the most significant social changes in modern Pakistan.

Technological advancement has further accelerated social transformation. The spread of internet access, mobile technology, and digital media has connected Pakistani society more closely with global cultural and economic trends. Digital communication has expanded educational access, encouraged entrepreneurship, and increased public discussion on social and economic issues, particularly among younger populations.

Despite these developments, traditional cultural and religious values continue to shape social identity and community relationships. Modern Pakistani society reflects an ongoing balance between preserving cultural traditions and adapting to social, economic, and technological change.

Pakistan is home to six UNESCO World Heritage Sites, which are places of outstanding cultural and historical importance recognised at the global level. These sites represent different periods of human history and reflect Pakistan’s ancient civilizations, diverse cultures, and architectural achievements. The six sites are:

These heritage sites showcase Pakistan’s rich historical legacy and the diverse civilizations that have flourished in the region over thousands of years, making them important not only for Pakistan but for the world.

The Pakistani region is very diverse in terms of cultural festivals owing to the diversity and historical background. Basant  which is traditionally celebrated in Lahore is the beginning of spring and is connected with kite flying, music and festival foods, which is the sign of a colorful cultural life of the city. Traditional freestyle polo is also on display at the Shandur Polo Festival  each year, held at the Shandur Pass between Gilgit-Baltistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, where visitors come from around the country and abroad. One such competition in motorsport is the Hub Rally Cross, an off road race held at Hub, Balochistan, each year that brings dozens of competitors and spectators to the challenging desert and coastal course, representing Pakistan's increasing focus on motorsport and its involvement in the event by young people. Collectively, these events have a significant role of safeguarding the intangible cultural heritage in Pakistan and encouraging cultural integration in Pakistan.

In addition to these events, Pakistan hosts a wide range of religious, cultural, and regional festivals that reflect the country’s diverse heritage. The two major Islamic festivals, Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha, are celebrated nationwide with religious devotion, charitable giving, and communal gatherings. These occasions strengthen family ties and social unity across communities.

Various regional festivals further highlight Pakistan’s multicultural identity. The Lok Mela held in Islamabad showcases traditional crafts, folk music, dance performances, and regional cuisines from across the country, promoting cultural exchange and supporting local artisans. In the northern valleys, the Kalash community celebrates Chilam Joshi, a spring festival marked by traditional music, dance, and rituals that preserve one of Pakistan’s unique indigenous cultures. Similarly, Sindh Cultural Day promotes Sindhi heritage through traditional attire such as ajrak and topi, along with music and public celebrations.

Together, these festivals demonstrate Pakistan’s rich cultural mosaic, fostering social cohesion, encouraging tourism, and preserving intangible cultural traditions for future generations.

Poverty in Pakistan is a growing concern because of population growth in the country. Although the middle-class has grown in Pakistan, nearly 50% of the population is classified poor as of September 2023.

Pakistan has a high population growth. Between 1951 and 2017, the population increased by a factor of six. In 1951, there were 33.7 million people in Pakistan, in 2017, there were 207.7 million. Urbanization is ongoing. There are two megacities, Karachi and Lahore. Despite this, Pakistan has one of the lowest urbanization rates in the world. In 2017, over 130 million Pakistanis, or 65% of the population lived in rural areas.

Pakistan also has high fertility rate. Estimates of 2022 are that on average, there are 3.5 children per adult woman. As a consequence, the Pakistanis are young: 40.3% of the people are 15 years or younger, only 3.7% of the people are 65 or older. The median age in the country is 19. This means that half the population are 19 or younger, the other half are over 19.

There are also many refugees. The UNHCR estimated, that Pakistan has the forth-largest refugee population worldwide.

The national sport of Pakistan is field hockey, although cricket is the most popular game across the country. The national cricket team has won the Cricket World Cup once (in 1992), were runners-up once (in 1999), and co-hosted the games twice (in 1987 and 1996). Pakistan were runners-up in the inaugural 2007 ICC World Twenty20 held in South Africa and were the champions at the 2009 ICC World Twenty20 held in England. The team also won two Asia Cups in 2000 and 2012. Lately however, Pakistani cricket has suffered heavily due to teams refusing to tour Pakistan after militants attacked the touring Sri Lankan team in March 2009, after which no international cricket was played until May 2015, when the Zimbabwean team agreed to tour. However, now, with increased security, the Sri Lankan cricket team came for a tour as recently as 2019.

In addition to sports like field hockey, cricket, squash rackets, football and others, Pakistanis are also very keen on equestrianism of various types,and equestrian sports such as Polo and the traditional Tent pegging are played by many. Other traditional rural sports include two types of Wrestling, Kabbadi and a martial art called Gatka.

Olympic Games Pakistan has taken part in since 1948. Pakistan has won several Olympic medals, mostly in field hockey. The country has won three Olympic gold medals in hockey (1960, 1968, and 1984).

Pakistan also won an individual gold medal in athletics at the 2020 Summer Olympics in javelin throw. This was Pakistan’s first Olympic gold medal in an individual sport.

New Zealand (known as , in the Māori language) officially Commonwealth of New Zealand) is an island country in Oceania. It is a sovereign state in the south-western part of the Pacific Ocean. It is made up of two large islands (the North Island and the South Island) and many smaller islands. New Zealand was one of the last places in the world that humans discovered, because it is a long way away from most of the world. During its time without humans, New Zealand was a great place for an unusual range of plants and animals to develop.

The current capital city of the country is Wellington, and the largest city is Auckland. Both of these cities are on the North Island. The largest city on the South Island is Christchurch.

The official languages are English, Māori and New Zealand sign language. English has never been granted official language status in the NZ laws, but it is used as a default official language due to its wide usage.

In 2010, the New Zealand Herald said that New Zealand was the 8th happiest country in the world.

In the Māori language, the country is called Aotearoa, which means "Land of the Long White Cloud". Ao means “cloud”, tea means “white”, and roa means “long”. The name "New Zealand" comes from “Zeeland” (which translates to "Sealand") in Dutch, after the islands were seen by Dutch explorer Abel Tasman. Zeeland is a province of the Netherlands.

New Zealand is a constitutional monarchy and parliamentary democracy. The head of state is Charles III. The Prime Minister is Christopher Luxon, leader of the National Party.

New Zealand has made itself a Nuclear Free Zone: They do not use nuclear power and do not allow nuclear weapons or nuclear powered vessels in their territory.

As of the 2018 census, 4,699,755 people lived in New Zealand. Most of them have European ancestors. The indigenous people of New Zealand, the Māori, have a population of 775,836, or 16.5%.

The people of New Zealand often call themselves Kiwis. This name is derived from the kiwi, a flightless native bird that is considered the country's national bird.

The North Island is smaller than the South Island, but most people (more than 3 million) live there. This might be because the North Island is usually warmer, and has more big cities.

About half of the people in New Zealand are religious. As of the 2018 census, 48.2% had no religion. The main religion in New Zealand is Christianity. Just over 2 million New Zealanders are Christian. The second most common religion is Hinduism, with 2.6%.

Most New Zealanders live in urban areas, with the other 27% living in small towns or farming communities.

Wellington is the capital of New Zealand. Auckland is the largest city, with around 1 million people.

Other cities in the North Island include Hamilton, Tauranga, Napier/Hastings, New Zealand, New Plymouth, Whanganui, and Palmerston North. South Island cities include Christchurch, Dunedin, Nelson, Invercargill and Timaru.

New Zealand sits at the boundary between the Australian and Pacific continental plates. When these two plates bumped into each other ('collided'), the Pacific plate moved under the Australian plate, north of the South Island. As a result, there has been lots of volcanic activity. South of the South Island, the Australian plate moves under the Pacific plate instead. The plates slide past each other in the South Island, where they have pushed up the Southern Alps. Because of these two colliding plates, New Zealand often has earthquakes. One of the best known is the 2010-2011 group of earthquakes that hit the Christchurch area.

The diagram shows that the North Island is on the Australian plate, but most of the South Island is on the Pacific plate. New Zealand is still geologically active, and will remain so as long as the islands are sitting above the plate boundary.

The oldest rocks in New Zealand date from the Cambrian period, 512 million years ago. New Zealand became part of the global super-continent Pangaea. When that split (End-Triassic/early Jurassic), New Zealand became part of the southern super-continent Gondwana. Finally Gondwana broke up, leaving the continents rather as they are today.

The geochronological detachment of the Zealandian microcontinent from the Gondwanan margin approximately 83 mega-annum before the present era precipitated a state of profound biogeographic insularity, effectively sequestering its nascent biota within an autarkic evolutionary crucible. This protracted stratigraphic severance facilitated a radical departure from conventional terrestrial ecological norms, culminating in a paradigm of extreme endemism where phylogenetic lineages diverged in total defiance of the continental matrices seen elsewhere. The resulting biological assemblage is characterized by a conspicuous "mammalian void," wherein the terrestrial niche—save for a minimalist triad of chiropteran vespertilionids—remained entirely uncolonized by placental or marsupial organisms until the relatively recent advent of anthropogenic interference.

Consequently, the archipelago’s trophic structures underwent a process of avian-driven niche assimilation. In a remarkable display of ecological vicariance, bird lineages evolved to occupy roles typically reserved for mammalian megafauna, leading to the proliferation of specialized flightless phenotypes such as the nocturnal Strigops habroptilus and the iconic Apteryx. This insular sanctuary also serves as a refugium for the Sphenodon punctatus, a diapsid reptile that stands as the solitary extant representative of the order Rhynchocephalia—a living fossil whose genomic architecture remains an anomalous relic of the Mesozoic.

However, the equilibrium of this fragile biomic architecture was cataclysmically disrupted upon the arrival of Homo sapiens roughly ten centuries ago. The ensuing anthropogenic epoch catalyzed a rapid wave of megafaunal attrition, most notably the systematic extirpation of the Dinornis, or giant moa—a colossal ratite lineage whose ancestry stretches into the depths of the Cretaceous period. This extinction event, confirmed by extensive zooarchaeological strata particularly within the South Island’s subfossil records, was merely the precursor to a more insidious modern decline. The contemporary biodiversity crisis is further exacerbated by the introduction of exotic invasive predatory guilds—including mustelids, rodents, and various feral placental mammals—which exert unsustainable biotic pressure on native herpetofauna and avian populations through predatory incursions and the decimation of reproductive clutches, thereby threatening the final collapse of this unique evolutionary experiment.

An organism is any individual living thing. It is easy to recognize a living thing but, not so easy to define it. Obviously, animals and plants are organisms. Organisms are biotic, or living, parts of the environment. Rocks and sunshine are parts of the non-living environment.

Organisms usually have six basic needs to continue their metabolism. They need air, water, nutrient (food), energy, a place to live, and homeostasis (being able to maintain itself). However, not all living things need all these at the same time. Some organisms do not need access to air at all.  Living things have cells, take and use energy, grow and develop, share similar chemicals, sense and respond to change (stimulus), and reproduce.

A little thought is needed about viruses. There is no agreement as to whether they should be regarded as living. They are made of protein and nucleic acid, and they evolve, which is a really important fact. However, they exist in two quite different phases. One phase is dormant, not active. The other is inside a living cell of some other organism. Then the virus is very active reproducing itself. Consider the parallel with a computer program. When in use it is active; when it is not, it is completely inactive. It is still a program all the same.

Another example from biology is the spore, which is a distribution phase of a bacteria, fungus or some plants. They are not active until they get to the right situation. They have all the working parts to build a complete organism, but for the moment it is switched off.

Some organisms are made up of millions of cells. They are multicellular organisms. Many can be seen without using a microscope.

Most organisms are so small that they cannot be seen with the naked eye. You need a microscope to see them. They are called microorganisms. Organisms can be made up of just one cell. They are called unicellular organisms or single celled organisms. Examples include bacteria, and protozoa such as the Amoeba and Paramecium.

The Tree of Life project works on the relationships between living things. Identifying a LUCA (last universal common ancestor) is one of its main aims. The LUCA is estimated to have lived some 3.8 billion years ago (sometime in the Palaeoarchaean era).

The idea came from Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species, "Therefore... probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form..."

The North Sea is a sea that is part of the Atlantic Ocean in northern Europe. The North Sea is between Norway and Denmark in the east, Scotland and England in the west, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and France in the south.

The Skagerrak connects the North Sea to the Baltic Sea. In the south, the North Sea becomes the English Channel, a sea between England and France. This is called the Dover Straits and is very busy with ships.

The border between the North Sea and the Skagerrak is at an imagined line between Lindesnes in Norway, and Hanstholm in Denmark. In the North, the North sea is open towards the Atlantic. The border between the two is an imagined line from Northern Scotland, to Shetland, and then to Ålesund in Norway. According to the Oslo-Paris Treaty of 1962 it is a bit more to the west and the north though. The treaty puts it at 5° East longitude, and 62° North latitude. That is at the parallel of the Geirangerfjord in Norway.

On average, the North Sea has a depth of only 94 meters. About 80 million people live near the North Sea, at most 150 km away from the coast. Together with the English Channel in the south, the southern North Sea is the busiest body of water in the world.

Well-known rivers that drain into the North Sea include the Tay (at Dundee), the Forth (at Edinburgh), the Tyne (South Shields), the Wear (at Sunderland),  the Tees (near Middlesbrough),  the Elbe (at Cuxhaven), the Weser (at Bremerhaven), the Rhine and Meuse or Maas (at Rotterdam), the Scheldt (at Flushing or Vlissingen), the Thames, and the Humber (at Hull), and the river Nairn (at Nairn)

The Kiel Canal, one of the world's busiest artificial waterways, connects the North Sea with the Baltic.

Its name comes from its relationship to the land of the Frisians (see Frisia). They live directly to the south of the North Sea, and to the west of the East Sea (Oostzee, the Baltic Sea), the former South Sea (Zuiderzee, today's IJsselmeer) and the today reclaimed Middle Sea (Middelzee). But the spread of the name could also be from the view of the cities of the Hanseatic League. Some of its main cities, like Lübeck, Bremen or Hamburg had the same view.

In classical times this body of water was also called the Oceanum Germanicum or Mare Germanicum, meaning German Ocean or Sea. This name was commonly used in English and other languages along with the name North Sea, until the early eighteenth century. By the late nineteenth century, German Sea was a rare, scholarly usage even in Germany. In Danish the North Sea is also named Vesterhavet (besides Nordsøen), meaning Western Ocean because it is west of Denmark.

Most of the North sea is on the European Continental shelf. On average, the depth is about 93 to 94 meters only. In the south it is very shallow, only 25 to 35 meters. In the north in the bathyal zone north of Shetland, this depth increases to between 100 and 200 metres. In the south, the depth is at most 50 metres. An exception to this is the Norwegian Trench. It is deepest there, with a depth of 725 metres. The most shallow part of it is a sand bank called Dogger Bank. In the southern part, there are many sand banks.

Looking at the satellite picture it is easy to see the geographic divisions of the North Sea:

The southern north sea is composed of the Southern Bight, before the coast of Belgium and the Netherlands and the German Bight before the coastline of Germany. The Dogger Bank is the limit between the southern and central parts. The Waddenzee runs all the way from Den Helder in the Netherlands to Esbjerg in Denmark.

The Dogger Bank covers an area about half the size of the Netherlands. There, the North Sea has a depth of between 13 and 20 metres only. The area is very famous for fishing. With some storms there are even waves breaking there.

The Norwegian Trench has an average depth of around 250 to 300 metres; at the entrance to the Skagerrak, the depth increases up to 725 meters. Along the trench is the Norwegian Current, which brings most of the waters of the North Sea into the Atlantic Ocean. Also, most of the waters of the Baltic Sea flow northwards here.

About 200 km east of the Scottish city of Dundee there are more trenches, known collectively as the Devil's hole. Generally, the water is about 90 meters deep there. The trenches very often are only a few kilometers in length. In these trenches, the depth increases to up to 230 meters.

In the Dover Strait the water is about 30 meters deep. At the end of the English Channel, this depth increases to about 100 meters.

In the last ice age the North Sea was covered by large areas of ice called glaciers. About 20,000 years ago the ice melted and the North Sea was formed (made).

In the 1960s, geologists found large areas of oil and natural gas under the North Sea. Most of the oil fields are owned by the United Kingdom and Norway but some belong to Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany. Drilling began in the 1960s and led to a famous argument between the UK Government and Scottish Nationalists how the revenue (money) from the oil should be spent.

People have been fishing in the North Sea for thousands of years. However, so many fish are now caught there that new ones may not be able to grow fast enough to keep the fishery going.

Terns, Atlantic puffins, razorbills, kittiwakes and other seabirds live on the North Sea coast. Many coastal areas are protected nature reserves.

A nuclear weapon (also called a nuclear bomb or nuke) is a weapon that suddenly releases the energy in the nucleus of certain types of atoms. When triggered, the device releases a huge amount of energy in the form of a nuclear explosion.

Nuclear explosions can destroy a city and kill most of its people. They also make nuclear fallout.  This radioactive material can make people ill.  Nuclear weapons are the most damaging weapons mankind has created.

There are two types of nuclear weapons. They make energy for the nuclear explosion in different ways. The first type, fission weapons, use a special isotope of uranium or plutonium. These weapons are also called atomic bombs or A-bombs. The second type, fusion weapons, use a special isotope of hydrogen and create bigger explosions. They are also called hydrogen bombs, H-bombs, or thermonuclear weapons.

The United States built the first nuclear weapons during World War II and used them to attack two cities in Japan. This is the only time nuclear weapons have ever been used in a war.

Only a few nations possess such weapons or are suspected of seeking them. The only countries which have admitted detonating nuclear weapons are the United States, the Soviet Union (succeeded as a nuclear power by Russia), the United Kingdom, France, China, India, Pakistan, and North Korea. Between them, these countries have detonated over 2,000 nuclear weapons for testing and demonstration.

Israel is believed to have nuclear weapons, but in a policy of deliberate ambiguity, does not say so.  Germany, Italy, Turkey, Belgium, and the Netherlands share nuclear weapons with other countries.  South Africa is the only country that has independently developed nuclear weapons and later renounced and dismantled them.

Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan all inherited nuclear weapons (approximately 3300). However, all three countries chose to denuclearize in exchange for diplomatic and economic support.

The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons aims to reduce the spread of nuclear weapons. Its effectiveness has been questioned.

In the years after 1895, physicists began to understand how atoms are made. In 1939, physicists began to understand the theory of nuclear fission weapons, but no country knew how to build one.

When World War II started Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States wanted to build nuclear weapons. The United Kingdom started this work in 1939 but found it so expensive that the program was shut down in 1942. Later that year, the United States started a very large program to build nuclear weapons. It built upon the work done in the United Kingdom and was called the "Manhattan Project".

By August 1945, the Manhattan Project had built three nuclear fission weapons. The United States used two of these bombs to attack the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan. After these attacks, Japan surrendered and World War II ended.

According to the Manhattan Project, around 105,000 people were killed by the bombs and another 94,000 were hurt. However, many more people died later from health problems caused by nuclear fallout. Counting these people, over 225,000 individuals died from the bombings, according to medical professionals.

After World War II, the Soviet Union began working to create nuclear weapons.

Nuclear fission weapons release energy by breaking atoms apart. This is how atomic bombs work.

Usually, nuclear fission weapons use isotopes of uranium or plutonium. Those elements can be made to undergo nuclear fission, causing a nuclear chain reaction.

Nuclear fusion weapons release much more energy and cause bigger explosions. They release energy by fusing atoms together, using hydrogen isotopes (deuterium and tritium) in addition to uranium or plutonium. They are also called thermonuclear weapons or hydrogen bombs.

Despite its name, a typical hydrogen bomb has only enough hydrogen to produce additional neutrons to detonate a casing made of natural uranium. The fuel in hydrogen bombs is thus mostly unrefined uranium.

Nuclear weapons produce a very large amount of energy and radiation, mostly in the form of X-rays. These heat the air to produce a huge nuclear fireball. The rapid expansion of the fireball creates a dangerous shock wave that can destroy buildings and kill living things within several kilometers.

Not everyone who dies from a nuclear bomb dies immediately. The bombs cause nuclear fallout (nuclear material and dust that has been irradiated and become radioactive). Fallout can be blown by the wind over large distances from the explosion and can remain dangerous for long periods of time. Survivors can also suffer from radiation poisoning, which can be fatal and can result in DNA mutations that cause cancer.

Nuclear weapons are difficult to build because they need special isotopes of uranium or plutonium, as well as specialized technology.  This is why so few countries have them.  When countries without nuclear weapons create their own, that is commonly referred to as nuclear proliferation.

Getting a nuclear weapon to its target can be as hard as making one. The explosive material can be placed in a bomb or artillery shell or into a missile. When a nuclear device is placed on a missile it is commonly called a nuclear missile and can be carried by airplanes, submarines, or trucks or placed into underground missile silos. Some kinds of airplanes like the B-29 Superfortress, B-36 Peacemaker, B-52 Stratofortress, and B-2 Spirit have carried nuclear weapons.

They are also carried by missiles, such as intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) or submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs). Some missiles travel to the border of space and then launch a number of separate nuclear weapons back toward the ground, with each weapon travelling to a different target. That is called a MIRV Warhead, or Multiple Independent Re-entry Vehicles. Very large nuclear bombs have been produced, but in practice a weapon with multiple warheads can produce much more damage by attacking more targets.

Nuclear weapons take many resources to make because the materials they are made of are rare, and it takes many scientists to make them. However, several countries have managed to create nuclear weapons and many have them today. The countries that have nuclear weapons are listed here in the order that they were invented: United States (1945), Russia (1949), United Kingdom (1952), France (1960), China (1964), India (1974), and Pakistan (1998). Other countries are believed to secretly have nuclear weapons or develop them. Some countries used to have nuclear weapons but have since then said that they have gotten rid of them.

Some countries have lost nuclear weapons while transporting them. There are 92 known instances of atom bombs being lost at sea by all of the countries known to posses them. Bombs have been lost in 15 different cases. However, there could be more lost bombs.

This is a list is of the main nuclear explosions which have happened. As well as the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the first nuclear test of a given weapon type for a country is included, and tests which were otherwise notable (such as the largest test ever). All yields (explosive power) are given in their estimated energy equivalents in kilotons of TNT.

Over 500 atmospheric nuclear weapons tests were done at various sites around the world from 1945 to 1980. As public awareness and concern grew over the possible health hazards associated with exposure to nuclear fallout, various studies were done. A Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study says that nuclear fallout might have led to 11,000 excess deaths, most caused by thyroid cancer linked to exposure to iodine-131.

Notable individuals who have been associated with nuclear weapons and related issues include:

Every year, the Nobel Prizes () are given to people and institutions around the world. These prizes are for the study of science and for world peace. The science prizes include Literature, Science, and Medicine. The Nobel Prize was started by Alfred Nobel. His 1895 testament gave money for the Prizes. The Nobel Foundation now controls the money. The Foundation asks different committees or academies to decide who receives the prizes. For many people, a Nobel Prize is a very great honor. People who receive a Nobel Prize are called "Nobel laureates".

Each prize winner gets a medal, a diploma and a sum of money. In 1901, the winners of the first Nobel Prizes were given 150,782 SEK. This is same as 7,731,004 SEK in December 2007. In 2008, the winners were awarded a prize of 10,000,000 SEK. The awards are presented in Stockholm, Sweden, in a ceremony on December 10. This day is the anniversary of Nobel's death...

The Nobel Prize committee has said that giving the prize to a few women is a problem while giving it to 2 or 3 women is not. It is a serious degradation to this globally well renowned award as the countless people who have devoted their life to bring about gender equality are dismissed in less than a second.

These are the committees and institutions who decide which people receive a Nobel Prize:

The Nobel Prize in Economics was not a part of Nobel's will. It was started in 1969 by Sveriges Riksbank, the Bank of Sweden. The bank donated money to the Nobel Foundation for the Economics Prize in 1968. The Economics Studies Prize is in the memory of Alfred Nobel. It is awarded each year with the other Nobel prizes.

Some people have received more than one Nobel Prize. They are:

Nuclear fission, is a kind of nuclear reaction. It is when an atom splits apart into smaller atoms. Some fission reactions give off a lot of energy, and are used in nuclear weapons and nuclear reactors. Nuclear fission was discovered in December 1938 by physicists Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch, who observed a uranium nucleus splitting in two. Although they originally thought the two tiny resulting nuclei were barium isotopes, what Meitner and Frisch truly saw was a process that would revolutionize nuclear chemistry: nuclear fission.

An atom is the smallest particle which makes up a chemical element (e.g. hydrogen, oxygen, magnesium). All atoms are very small. Atoms are made of three components or particles: Protons, neutrons and electrons. The protons and neutrons are clumped together in a ball called a nucleus, at the center of every atom. The electrons orbit around the nucleus in its 'electron cloud'. Elements which have large nuclei, such as uranium and plutonium, can be made to fission.

If a (relatively) very large atomic nucleus is hit by a slow-moving neutron, it will sometimes become unstable and break into two nuclei. When the nucleus breaks apart (or fissions) it releases energy, mostly as gamma rays and heat. It also causes some neutrons to be released from the nucleus.

This reaction can  occur "spontaneously" if the original nucleus is highly unstable. The resulting products are radioactive isotopes, but do not release enough energy to generate usable power or make a bomb due to the lack of a chain reaction. It can also be induced by a neutron.

For a few isotopes (an atom with the same amount of protons but a different amount of neutrons) such fission can release many neutrons. If those neutrons then hit other atoms, they will make the other atoms split. This can happen again and again. This is called a nuclear chain-reaction, and it can release huge amounts of energy. Nuclear chain-reactions occur most commonly with Uranium-235. The splitting of Uranium-235 is started when a neutron is slammed into its positively charged nucleus. This results in two lighter isotopes (such as Barium-141 and Krypton-92), whose total mass is less than that of the original Uranium isotope. The "mass defect" is converted into various forms of energy. A neutron is also released, triggering the chain reaction as each additional neutron causes further collisions with existing Uranium isotopes.

In a nuclear bomb, the chain reaction must happen very quickly to make a very big explosion. The amount of energy released in the explosion is measured in kilotons. One kiloton is the same as the energy of one thousand tons of trinitrotoluene.

In a nuclear reactor this must happen slowly to make heat. The heat is used to boil water into steam, which turns a steam turbine to generate electricity.

Organic chemistry is the study of chemical compounds that contain carbon. Carbon has the ability to form a chemical bond with a wide variety of chemical elements and other carbon atoms because of its 4 valence, or outermost, electrons. This allows a nearly unlimited number of combinations, called organic compounds. The subject of carbon compounds is called organic chemistry because all known organisms, or living things, are made up of water and carbon compounds. Organic chemistry largely involves the synthesis, or formation, of organic products by chemical reaction using different reactants and reagents, the substances used up during a reaction. Several different areas of chemistry expand on the concepts and principles of organic chemistry, including biochemistry, microbiology, organometallic chemistry and medicine.

The term organic originates from Jons Jacob Berzelius, a 19th century Swedish scientist, who used the term to refer to substances present in living things. During Berzelius’ time, the vital force theory was popular. This theory stated that a life force was needed to produce the organic compounds found only in living things. The vital force theory began losing support after an 1828 experiment conducted by Friedrich Wöhler. His work showed that urea, an organic compound, could be created from ammonium cyanate, an inorganic compound.

The study of hydrocarbons is a very large part of organic chemistry.  Hydrocarbons are molecules containing only the elements carbon and hydrogen in the form of chains.  Hydrocarbons can be classified into two categories based on the presence of a benzene ring, a circular type of hydrocarbon.  Aliphatic hydrocarbons do not contain a benzene ring and aromatic hydrocarbons do.

Organic chemistry reactions happen because electrons are not shared evenly in a chemical bond. Some atoms or molecules, like oxygen, nitrogen, and negatively charged anions, are nucleophilic because they have extra electrons and want to be around positive charges. Others, such as H+ and other positively charged cations, are electrophilic and want to be around negative charges. When an organic molecule has a positive charge, it is called a carbocation. It is also an electrophile. When nucleophiles and electrophiles mix, a reaction can occur.

A reaction mechanism is a series of smaller reactions that form an overall reaction. Two basic mechanism types are substitution and elimination reactions. They are very important in the study of organic chemistry mechanisms because many more complicated mechanisms use them.

Nucleophilic substitution occurs when an atom or group of atoms detaches from an organic molecule and is replaced by another. If the leaving and adding happens at the same time, it is called a SN2 reaction. If the leaving group breaks away from the organic molecule and forms a carbocation before substitution occurs, it is called an SN1 reaction.

Elimination occurs when two groups are broken off of an organic molecule by a strong acid and the resulting charges form a double bond. Usually one of the groups is a nucleophile and the other is a hydrogen atom.  If both groups are pulled off at the same time, it is called an E2 reaction. If one group is pulled off first and forms a carbocation before the second group is removed, it is called an E1 reaction.

Stereochemistry is the study of molecules in space. It looks into the arrangement of atoms inside of molecules in space relative to one another and how they will interact. Molecules that have the same chemical make up but are arranged differently are called isomers. Famous chemist Louis Pasteur was an early researcher of stereochemistry.

A central part of the study of sterochemistry is chirality. Put simply, chirality looks at the symmetry in chemical molecules. If an object cannot be superimposed onto its mirror image, then it is a chiral object. If it can, it is called achiral.

Spectroscopy is the study of the interactions between light energy and matter. We are able to see colors because of energy absorption by organic and inorganic compounds. When a plant undergoes photosynthesis, it traps energy from the sun, and this is an example of an interaction between energy and organic compounds.

Spectroscopy is used to identify organic molecules in unknown compounds. There are many types of spectroscopy, but most important to organic chemistry are infrared spectroscopy and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.

A nose is a body part which allows animals to smell things. The nose also helps animals breathe. It has parts that make it work and send messages to the brain. The nose's parts include smell receptors and nerve connectors to receptors. In humans, the nose is on the front of the face. The power of the nose varies for animals. For example, dogs have a stronger sense of smell than humans do. It is part of the respiratory system which is the system in animals that help them to breathe. Your nose is very powerful and can remember up to 50,000 different scents.

The nose is important to health. It filters the air breathed in, removing dust, germs, and irritants. It warms and moistens the air to keep the lungs and tubes that lead to them from drying out. The nose also contains nerve cells that help the sense of smell. When there is a problem with the nose, the whole body can suffer. For example, the stuffy nose of the common cold can make it hard to breathe, sleep, or get comfortable.

Many problems besides the common cold can affect the nose. They include

Paul the Apostle, (born as Saul of Tarsus) and also often called Saint Paul (2BC–64/65), was a Messianic Jewish-Roman writer and rabbi. He was a convert to Christianity. It is believed that he wrote thirteen books of the Bible, together called the Pauline epistles. They are letters to Christian churches and Christians. He wrote these letters to encourage them, to help them receive salvation, understand Christian teaching, and live Christian lives.

Paul's name was originally Saul (not to be confused with King Saul from the books of Samuel in the Old Testament whom he was likely named after). Like the one he was named after, he was from the Tribe of Benjamin He grew up learning both the Jewish law and the Greek ways of discussing things. We are first introduced to Saul in the Bible near the end of Acts 7. The Christian movement had begun with the resurrection and ascension of Jesus. Saul was strongly against this, and he was happy as he watched Saint Stephen, the first martyr of Jesus, being killed by stoning after giving a speech that made the Jewish court angry.  He worked for the Jewish High Priest  and helped lead the arrests and killing of many Christians in Israel and the nearby area.

Later on, Saul was told to go to Damascus to find and bring back Christians there to be punished. On the way, God came down from heaven and spoke to Saul. The Bible tells of what happened like this:

When Saul reached Damascus, he was visited by Ananias (who was told by God to go pray for Saul), one of Jesus's disciples, where he got his sight back and was baptized as a Christian. He spent the next three years studying the Jewish scriptures again to find explanations for the Christian teachings. His experiences changed his view on Christianity completely. In Acts 13:9, he begins to be called Paul.  This was the Hellenized version of the name Saul. He used his earlier education to explain his new faith to other people and to discuss things with people who had other beliefs.

He travelled around the Roman Empire, teaching others about Christianity, and wrote letters back and forth with the churches he helped to begin. The letters contain many important parts of Christian teaching and have since been part of the New Testament of the Bible, coming between the Acts of the Apostles and the General Epistles. It is not known whether Paul actually wrote all of these letters, or whether other people could have helped write the letters. In some of them he refers to a co-author. In Catholic Churches parts of these letters are read at Mass as the second of two readings that come before the Gospel. Protestant Christians also use Paul's writings, especially the letter to the Romans to teach their ideas of Christian truth.

Although the Bible does not say how Paul died, various writers said Paul was put to death by orders of the emperor Nero in Rome, in 64/65 AD. He had the rights of Roman citizenship, which meant that he could be put to death by beheading with a sword, rather than by crucifixion. Some stories say he was decapitated.

The oat (Avena sativa) is a cereal grain. It is food for people and other animals, for example, chickens and horses. Oatmeal is made from oats. Oat straw is used as bedding for animals.

Porridge is made only from whole grain oats. It forms an excellent part of a balanced diet for the following reasons:

The wild ancestor of Avena sativa and the similar minor crop, A. byzantina, is the hexaploid wild oat A. sterilis. Science of DNA shows that the ancestor forms of A. sterilis grew in the Fertile Crescent of the Near East.

Domesticated oats appear later. They are also far from the Near East, in Bronze Age Europe. Oats are like rye. They are normally thought as a less important crop, i.e. coming from a weed out of the main cereals wheat and barley   As these cereals spread into cooler, wetter places, this may have favored the oat weed. This quickly leads to its common use.

Oats are grown all over temperate places. They have a lower summer heat need and are able to survive more rain than other cereals like wheat, rye or barley. Oats are an annual plant, and can be planted either in autumn (for late summer harvest) or in the spring (for early autumn harvest).

Historical  towards oats are very different. Oat bread was first made in England, where the first oat bread factory was made in 1899. In Scotland, are well liked, as a good part of the national diet. The English writer Samuel Johnson, famously wrote in A Dictionary of the English Language that the oat was a grain, which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people. Which the Scottish quickly said back "and England has the best horses, and Scotland the best men."

Oats have many uses in food. Most of the time they are rolled or crushed into oatmeal, or ground into oat flour. Oatmeal is also eaten as porridge, but may also be used in many of baked goods, such as oat cakes, oatmeal cookies, and oat bread. Oats are also an substance used in many cold cereals, in particular muesli and granola. Without cooking, oats may also be taken as food.

Oats are also sometimes used in drinks. In Britain, it is used for making beer. Oatmeal stout is one of many beers using some oats.  A cold, sweet drink made of ground oats and milk is a well liked drink in  Latin America. 'Oatmeal caudle', made of ale and oatmeal with spices was a usual British drink and well-liked by Oliver Cromwell.

In Scotland a dish called Sowans was made by putting the husks from oats in water for a week so that the fine, dusty part of the meal remained at the bottom to be strained off, boiled and taken as food (Gauldie 1981). Oats are also widely used there as a thickener in soups, as barley or rice might be used in other countries.

Oats and its hulls are also commonly used as feed for horses - as  whole or rolled oats or as part of  food bits. Cattle are also fed oats, either whole, or ground into a  flour using a mill.

Oat straw is prized by cattle and horse makers as bedding, because its soft, almost dust-free, and takes in liquid. The straw can also be used for making corn dollies. Tied in a cotton bag, oat straw was used to soften bath-water.

Things take out of oatscan also be used to make pain less sharp in the skin, as in skin lotions. It is the main substance in the Aveeno line of products.

Oats are mostly thought as "healthy" food. The finding of the healthy LDL cholesterol-lowering  has led to more liking of oats as human food.

Oat is the only cereal having a globulin or legume-like protein, avenalin, as the major (80%) storage protein. Globulins can be taken up by weak salt water. The more common cereal proteins are gluten and zein. The minor protein of oat is avenin.

Oat protein is almost the same in quality as soy bean protein, which has been shown by the World Health Organization to be equal to meat, milk, and egg protein. The amount of protein of the hull-less oat kernel ranges from 12 to 24%, which is the highest among cereals.

Prince Otto Eduard Leopold von Bismarck-Schönhausen Duke of Lauenburg, (1 April 1815 – 30 July 1898), was an aristocrat and statesman of the 19th century in Europe. As Prime Minister of Prussia from 1862 to 1890, he was most responsible for the uniting most of the many independent German countries into the new German Empire in 1871 and became its first chancellor until 1890.

He was Graf von Bismarck-Schönhausen (Count Bismarck-Schönhausen) in 1865. In 1871, he was Fürst von Bismarck (Prince Bismarck). In 1890, he became the Herzog von Lauenburg (Duke of Lauenburg). At first, he did not want to become a duke, but he accepted the title later.

In the 1860s, he engineered a series of wars that lasted until 1871 and unified most of the German states except Austria into the new German Empire, which was led by Prussia. He "remained undisputed world champion at the game of multilateral diplomatic chess for almost twenty years after 1871, [and] devoted himself exclusively, and successfully, to maintaining peace between the powers".

Bismarck conducted wars against Denmark (1864), Austria (1866) and France (1871) to make Prussia more powerful. The Franco-Prussian War was very significant in the long run. France lost AlsaceLorraine during the German victory, which was led by the brilliant Helmuth von Moltke. The war also made Germany the most important country in Central Europe.

After the death of Kaiser Wilhelm I and that of his son, Frederick III, who briefly replaced him in 1888, a new era began without Bismarck and Moltke, with Wilhelm II now on the throne.

Bismarck was very conservative, strongly connected to the monarchy and opposed to democracy. His most important goal was to make Prussia stronger, which he did by unifying Germany. Bismarck tried to stop the rise of socialism and to reduce the power of the Catholic Church.

One way to stop socialism was to make the working class happy. Bismarck did so by introducing many social reforms like public health and accident insurance, as well as pensions for old people. His 's pension scheme was the forerunner of the modern welfare state in Germany, and many other countries started similar systems.

Bismarck also repeated his emphatic warning against any German military involvement in Balkan disputes. Bismarck had first made this famous comment to the Reichstag in December 1876, when the Balkan revolts against the Ottoman Empire threatened to extend to a war between Austria-Hungary and Russia:

Only a year later [1876], he is faced by the alternative of espousing the cause of Russia or that of Austria-Hungary. Immediately after the last crisis, in the summer of 1875, the mutual jealousies between Russia and Austria-Hungary had been rendered acute by the fresh risings in the Balkans against the Turks. Now the issues hung upon Bismarck's decision. Immediately after the peace, he had tried to paralyse the Balkan rivals by the formation of the Three Emperors' League. "I have no thought of intervening," he said privately. "That might precipitate a European war.... If I were to espouse the cause of one of the parties, France would promptly strike a blow on the other side.... I am holding two powerful heraldic beasts by their collars, and am keeping them apart for two reasons: first of all, lest they should tear one another to pieces; and secondly, lest they should come to an understanding at our expense." In the Reichstag, he popularises the same idea in the words: "I am opposed to the notion of any sort of active participation of Germany in these matters, so long as I can see no reason to suppose that German interests are involved, no interests on behalf of which it is worth our risking—excuse my plain speaking—the healthy bones of one of our Pomeranian musketeers."

In February 1888, during a Bulgarian crisis, Bismarck addressed the Reichstag on the dangers of a European war:

He warned of the imminent possibility that Germany will have to fight on two fronts; he spoke of the desire for peace; then he set forth the Balkan case for war and demonstrated its futility: "Bulgaria, that little country between the Danube and the Balkans, is far from being an object of adequate importance... for which to plunge Europe from Moscow to the Pyrenees, and from the North Sea to Palermo, into a war whose issue no man can foresee. At the end of the conflict we should scarcely know why we had fought." {Ironically both of this prophies would come true in the Second World War of 1939-1945 (Fighting on 2 Fronts); a war which was brought about by World War I [Balkan dispute] which had been started by the Serbia killing of Archduke Franz Ferdinard in 1914]

Pablo Picasso (full name: Pablo Diego José Francisco de Paula Juan Nepomuceno María de los Remedios Cipriano de la Santísima Trinidad Ruiz y Picasso, October 25, 1881 – April 8, 1973) was a Spanish painter and sculptor. He created over 20,000 works of art. He was 91 when he died.

He is considered one of the greatest artists of the 20th century. He co-founded the style of art called cubism. In cubist art, the artist breaks objects into pieces and reassembles them in abstract and geometric form. Picasso could draw and paint when he was very young. His first word was "lápiz", the Spanish word for "pencil".

Perhaps his most famous painting is Guernica, which shows the horrors of war after the bombing of the town of Guernica. He spent most of his life in France when he was an adult.

He was 90 years old when the Louvre in Paris showed many of his works. He was the first living artist to have an exhibition at the Louvre.

Picasso had four children with three women. He died of heart failure in Mougins, France, on April 8 1973.

Pablo Picasso was born on October 25, 1881 in Málaga, Spain. His father was a painter and teacher José Ruiz Blasco and his mother was María Picasso López. Until 1898, he signed his pictures with the names of his father and of his mother. After around 1901, he only used his mother's name. At the age of eight, Picasso created his first oil painting called "The Picador". In 1891, Pablo moved with his family to Northern Spain, where his father taught at the Instituto da Guarda. One year later, Pablo studied at this . Pablo's father was his teacher at this time. In 1896, he started to attend the art school in Barcelona after passing the entrance examination. One year later in 1897, Picasso started to study at the Academia San Fernando in Madrid. In 1898, he left the academy and went to a rest to Horta de Ebro. In 1900, he published his first illustrations in a newspaper in Barcelona. This  had over 60 portraits.

Picasso first travelled to Paris in 1900. In Paris, he lived with Max Jacob, a poet and journalist. When Max was working during the day, Pablo slept and when Max slept at night, Pablo worked. Lovers in the Street and Moulin de la Galette are examples of his Paris work from this time. Both pictures were painted in 1900.

He went back to Madrid in 1901 where he worked for a newspaper called Arte Joven. He was responsible for illustrations. At this time, he shortened his signature from "Pablo Ruiz y Picasso" to "Picasso". This is the time his so-called Blue Period started. The two 1903 paintings, The Soup and Crouching Woman, are examples. His Blue Period ended in 1904 when he settled in Paris.

In 1905, Picasso made a trip to Holland. In the same year, Pablo's "Rosa Period" started. During this period, Picasso mostly painted circus performers. Girl Balancing on a Ball and The Actor are two early paintings from this time. This period lasted until 1907.

Picasso's Cubism period started in 1909 and ended around 1912. This period was inspired by the French painter Paul Cézanne. This period is called Cubism because of the use of cubes and other shapes. During this time, Picasso painted musical instruments, still life objects, and also his friends.

Picasso had his first exhibition in the United States in 1911. One year later in 1912, he had his first exhibition in Great Britain. Pablo's father died in May 1913.

From 1912 to 1919 was Picasso's so-called Synthetic Cubism Period. During this time, he started to use collages in his paintings. His works from this time are called papiers collés. He spent his time during the First World War in Rome. In 1914, Picasso spent the whole summer in Avignon. In 1915, he started to paint realistic again. At the end of 1915, his wife Eva died. During the World War, he also worked as a designer for Sergey Diaghilev.

In 1917, Picasso met Olga Koklova, a Russian dancer. In the same year, he painted several realistic portraits of her and their friends. One year later, he married her. The last summer of the wartime, Picasso and his wife spent in Barcelona and Biarritz.

In 1921, Picasso's son Paul was born. After this, he painted several paintings with his wife and his son. Paul was Picasso's only legitimate son (only son born to a woman he had married). In 1925, his art was in the first Surrealist exhibition in Paris. Between 1924 and 1926, Picasso preferred to paint abstract still lives. In 1927, he met Marie-Thérèse Walter. She became his model and mistress. In 1928, he began to make sculptural works. In 1931, he left his wife and moved with his mistress to Boisgeloup. There they lived in a country home. There, Picasso had a room for his sculptures only. Since 1932, he used Marie-Thérèse as a model. During a travel in Spain, he started to paint bullfights. In 1935, Picasso's daughter, Maïa, was born. At this time, he got divorced from his wife because of the birth of Maïa. In 1936, Picasso got a job as director of the Prado-Museum in Madrid. During this time, the Spanish Civil War started. German  bombs fell on Guernica in Spain on 6 April 1937. Picasso used this impact to paint one of his most famous paintings, Guernica. This painting was completed in about 8 months. It was first shown in the Spanish Pavilion in Paris in 1937.

In 1938, Picasso's mother died. When the Second World War started on the 1st of September 1939, Picasso returned to Paris. Around 1943, he met the painter Françoise Gilot. She bore him one son and one daughter. In 1941, he wrote his first play "Le désir attrapé par la queue" (English: Desire Caught by the Tail). It was first shown in 1944. Also in 1944, Picasso joined the communist Party. Picasso spent almost the full war time in Paris. :)

After the liberation of Paris, Picasso resumed exhibiting his work, notably at the Salon d’Automne of 1944 (“Salon de la Libération”), where his canvases of the preceding five years were received as a shock. That plus the announcement that Picasso had just joined the Communist Party led to demonstrations against his political views in the gallery itself. At the same time, Picasso opened up his studio to both new and old writer and artist friends, including Jean-Paul Sartre, Pierre Reverdy, Éluard, the photographer Brassaï, the English artist Roland Penrose, and the American photographer Lee Miller, as well as many American GIs.

On 28 April 1973, Pablo Picasso died due to heart failure at the age of 91 years in Mougins.

The Panama Canal is a waterway (a canal) in the country of Panama in Central America, that connects the Atlantic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. Because of the way Panama twists, the entrance to the Pacific Ocean is farther east than the entrance to the Atlantic Ocean. This is the opposite of what one would expect.

The Panama Canal is 77 km (48 miles) long and cuts across the Isthmus of Panama. At each end it uses three pairs of locks for lifting and lowering ships on different water levels. This saves ships 15,000 km (10,000 miles) compared to going around South America. Each year, about 14,000 ships come through the canal. By 2002, around 800,000 ships came through.

The old locks are 110 ft (33.53 m) wide by 1,050 ft (320 m) long and 41.2 feet (12.6 m) deep, with a usable length of 1,000 ft (305 m). The biggest ships that can go through the Panama Canal are called Panamax.

New locks opened in 2016 to allow ships more than twice as big, called New Panamax. They are 55 m (180 ft) wide by 427 m (1,400 ft) long, and 18.3 m (60.0 ft) deep. New channels connect to the new locks.

Ferdinand de Lesseps tried building a Panama Canal in 1880, but could not finish it. The project was started again in 1904 by the United States, under the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt, who spent ten years and 375 million dollars building it. The Panama Canal was finally finished in 1914, at the cost of approximately 25,000 lives. Most deaths were from disease, and before United States construction of the canal began. The US government owned and operated the canal until 1999 when the Panamanian government started controlling it.

The Ottoman Empire (), also called the Turkish Empire, and sometimes, Turkey (Türkiye) was a country in the Middle East between 1299 and 1923. Its most important city was Constantinople, in Anatolia. At its best years, it controlled a very big part of the Middle East, including Balkans, North Africa, and the Arabian Peninsula. The empire was founded by Osman I in 1299. It was highly successful between 1400 and 1600 and it controlled trade and politics in Southeastern Europe, Southwest Asia, and Northern Africa.

In the Ottoman Empire, there was a system called "millet". This meant that different religious groups were allowed to follow the rules of their own religion, and they could have their own leader. These leaders talked to the Sultan for them. This system helped people live more peacefully together, especially in big cities like Constantinople.

The empire was a group of conquered countries. The Sultan sent governors to manage these countries, or cities. These governors were called Pasha or Bey. The most famous one in the early 19th century was Muhammad Ali Pasha. The empire also had tributary states, which were states that gave money to the Ottoman Empire.

In the 1800s, other countries in Europe, like England, were becoming rich by following the Industrial Revolution: their machines could make a product faster and cheaper than a human could. On the other hand, the merchants of the Ottoman Empire did not have these machines, so they could not compete with the Europeans. Also, because of the nationalism movement, some people in the Empire wanted to have their own country. Since it had lots of war ships and guns from Germany, the Empire decided to support Germany in World War I, and it attacked Russia. It was defeated in the war, and the Ottoman Empire ended. After that, a modern republic was created by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, and it was called the Republic of Turkey.

The Ottoman Empire was started in 1299 by Osman I.  His son, Orhan, took over the empire's first capital, Bursa, from the Byzantine Empire after a . In the late 1300s, the Ottomans began combining territories, especially in the Balkans. There, Serbia was defeated in 1389 at the Battle of Kosovo Polje by Sultan Murad I. He died during the battle, and Bayezid I took control. At the 1396 Battle of Nicopolis, a large European Crusader army was defeated in Bulgaria by the military led by Bayezid. Even though he won this important battle, Bayezid was later defeated and taken prisoner by Tamerlane at the Battle of Ankara in 1402. His absence led to a civil war, called the Ottoman Interregnum where his sons fought each other for the Ottoman . Mehmed Çelebi won and became Mehmed I. His son, Murad II had to fight pretenders to the throne who were supported by the Byzantine Empire. He fought back with an attack on Constantinople, where an army from Venice helped the Byzantines. Murad defeated them at a battle in Thessaloniki.  At the Battle of Varna in 1444, he defeated a large European Crusader army made up of soldiers from the Karamanid state, Hungary, Poland, and Wallachia. In 1448, Hungarian general John Hunyadi tried to defeat the Ottomans with his own military. But he lost.

Mehmed the Conqueror started a time of military expansion, and conquered the Byzantine capital ofConstantinople on May 29, 1453. He later took over Albania, and allowed Orthodox Church to operate more freely throughout the empire. Mehmed's son Bayezid II continued this expansion.  In early 1517, Selim I conquered Egypt and the Levant, which were ruled by the Mamluks. He also defeated the Safavid Persians at the Battle of Chaldiran in 1514. The Ottomans fought with Portugal over their expansion as well. Suleiman the Magnificent, Selim's son, captured Belgrade and most of Hungary after the Battle of Mohács in 1526. His Siege of Vienna in 1529 failed to capture the Hapsburg Empire's capital, and was repulsed by the Holy Roman Empire  despite the Protestant Reformation's deep divisions. Transylvania, Wallachia, and Moldavia became tributary states to the Ottoman Empire soon afterwards.

In the East, the Ottomans captured Baghdad from the Safavids and partitioned the Caucasus with them. Meanwhile, Suleiman allied Francis I of France over their mutual hatred of the Habsburgs. That led to Ottoman activity in the Mediterranean, where Rhodes, Tunis, Algiers, and Tripoli would eventually be captured. Barbarossa Hayreddin led the Ottoman advance. In 1566, Suleiman died, and many historians consider that to be the start of the Ottoman stagnation.

The Ottomans lost the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 by Philip II of Spain and his Holy League. The Ottomans quickly recovered by capturing Cyprus from the Republic of Venice. However, the defeat shattered the myth of Ottoman invincibility. The Ottomans suffered many defeats under Murad III in the next 30 years. The Long War with the Austrian Empire ended a in stalemate, and the Safavids invaded the eastern Ottoman provinces. Murad IV recaptured Iraq and the Caucasus from Persia. The "Sultanate of Women" became an nickname for the Ottoman Empire after the consorts Kösem Sultan and Turhan Sultan became important in the empire and sometimes made even economic decisions in the Sultan's place. The Grand Vizier also took a greater role under the leadership of the Köprülüs. Crete was captured from Venice, and southern Ukraine was captured from Poland.

However, Grand Vizier Kara Mustafa Pasha carelessly opened up the empire to attack when he attacked Vienna and laid siege to the city. The Austrians, Poles, Russians, and Venetians all attacked the Ottomans back in the Great Turkish War. Austria and Poland attacked the overstretched Turks in Hungary and Transylvania while Russia hammered Crimea and eventually captured it from the Turks. Venice settled to attack Greece, which was entirely under Ottoman Turkish occupation. The warring sides signed the Treaty of Karlowitz, which ceded Hungary and Transylvania to Austria, Podolia (southern Ukraine) to Poland, Morea (southern Greece) to Venice, and Azov (a Black Sea port) to Russia.

Russia and Sweden went to war, and the Ottomans got involved by retaking Azov and then making peace. Austria, Russia, Venice, and the Ottomans would go to war several times. By 1739, the Ottomans had actually retaken the Morea and Serbia. In the 1740s and the 1750s, the Ottomans began to modernize their military, but in the 1760s, the Ottomans went to war with Russia again. Russia took over Crimea in 1783 and claimed that Orthodox Christians living in the Ottoman Empire were under Russian protection. Selim III continued modernising the military, but the elite Janissary corps troops revolted. Napoleon attacked Egypt but was repulsed by the British.

Serbia revolted and gained nominal independence in 1815, but it was still a vassal of the Ottoman Empire. Greece won its independence after a long war of independence from 1821 to 1829. The al-Saud family revolted in 1811 with the support of the Wahhabi sect. Egypt under Muhammad Ali then almost captured Constantinople, but the Russians repulsed them. The Egyptians settled with the Levant, and the Ottomans tried to retake it but were soundly defeated. The Ottomans was dubbed the "sick man of Europe" because of their incompetence in international affairs.

The Ottoman Tanzimat period brought political reform, from 1839 to 1876. This included starting conscription to the military, creating a new central bank, allowing homosexuality, overall secularisation of laws, and the use of factories instead of guilds for manufacturing. The Christian part of the empire became much more industrialised than the Muslim part, and that divide created tension. In the 1850s, the British and the French helped the Ottomans during the Crimean War. The Ottoman owed a lot of money to European countries and banks, which led to a state of bankruptcy. European countries began providing loans and controlling the finances of the empire. The Ottomans also began wars against Russia over Bulgarian independence. At the 1878 Congress of Berlin, Romania, Serbia, and Montenegro gained complete independence. Bulgaria remained a vassal of the Ottoman Empire. The British took Cyprus, followed by Egypt in 1882.

In 1908, the Ottomans underwent a revolution by the Young Turks. Due to the revolution, Abdul Hamid II abdicated, and Mehmed V was instated. Bulgaria gained independence, and Austria invaded and conquered Bosnia that same year. In 1912, the Ottomans lost Libya to the Italians. The ensuing Balkan Wars saw the Ottomans lose all of their European territories except eastern Thrace to a coalition of Balkan Christian states which included the combined forces of Serbia, Montenegro, Greece, and Bulgaria. The newly independent Bulgaria managed to conquer Edirne and reach a few kilometres from the capital Istanbul which they threatened. The Second Balkan War allowed the Ottomans to attack Bulgaria in conjunction with Romania, Serbia, Montenegro, and Greece and therefore recover Edirne and most of eastern Thrace. Their victory meant little since the unrest continued, with a 1909 countercoup to the Young Turk coup, followed by three countercoups.

Although the Ottoman Empire had signed a secret alliance with Germany in July 1914 it stayed at first neutral after the outbreak of World War I.  The turning point came when two German warships, the Goober and the Breslau, escaped British forces and arrived in Istanbul, still under German command. These warships attacked Russian ports in the Black Sea by which Russia responded with a declaration of war on the Ottoman Empire in October 1914, and soon Britain and France did the same. Thus the Ottoman Empire had now officially joined the war on the side of the Central Powers. The European allies of the Ottomans were Bulgaria and Germany. Its African allies were mostly Lij Iyasu, the Abyssinian emperor and Garad Diiriye Guure, the king of the Dervish Kingdom. Their ally Diiriye Guure's kingdom was destroyed in February 1920 in the first ever air raids on Africa in Taleh, Khatumo.

The Ottomans performed better than had been expected early in the war. They won the Battle of Gallipoli, partly because of the incompetence of the British and French commanders. However, they did not do so well against the Russians in the Caucasus sector and the majority of eastern Anatolia was conquered by Russia who installed an Armenian puppet state to rule the eastern parts of Anatolia. The Ottomans however won the Battle of Kut against the British during the Middle Eastern campaign though Iraq was lost later. In 1915, Armenians, Assyrians, Greeks, and others were targeted, and many as 1.5 million people were killed. The Ottoman Empire fell soon after the Arabs revolted in 1916 with British help. The empire fell after the Sinai, Palestine, Iraq, Syria, and eventually Anatolia itself fell. The Ottomans surrendered in 1918. After the official surrender of the Ottoman Empire during the end of World War I, the capital Istanbul began to be occupied by British, French, Italian and Greek troops who began entering the city in November 1918. Many parts of the Ottoman Empire in western Anatolia were occupied by Greece meanwhile southeast Anatolia was occupied by France and southwest was occupied by Italy. The First Republic of Armenia was also occupying the majority of eastern Anatolia during this time. Due to the desperate situation, one Ottoman military commander Mustafa Kemal Pasha decided to resign from the Ottoman army and gathered up a Turkish resistance force to push the occupying Allied armies out of Anatolia. Mustafa Kemal decided to set up his base of operations in Ankara.

The Turkish War of Independence was military campaign by the Turkish National Movement under Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, which led to the foundation of the modern Republic of Turkey.

The empire was a hereditary monarchy and followed a Turco-Mongol tradition in which all men in the leader's family could become rulers. The ruler's title was Sultan and was used in front of the name (for example, "Sultan Süleyman"). The title of Sultan was also used for the wives and the daughters of the monarchs. In this case, it was used at the end of the name (for example, Hürrem Sultan"). In the early years of the empire, shahzadahs, the sons of the Sultan, were sent to different parts of the empire (Sanjaks) to get experience of governing. Later, they might be candidates for the Sultanate and the Caliphate.

After Ahmed, the system changed. In the new system, the Sultan would keep his male family members locked in a small apartment called a kafes from which they would never be able to see the outside world and take power from him. Sometimes, a new Sultan would kill his male family members to make sure that no one else could be leader.

However, the women in his harem often sought greater status and influence, and the Sultan's mother might become a powerful political force in the Empire. Each mother in the harem would try to make her own son the next Sultan since they knew that he would probably be killed otherwise.

Bursa was the first capital of the Ottoman Empire. Edirne, in Thrace, became the capital of the Ottoman Empire in 1365. Constantinople became to last capital after the city was conquered by the empire in 1453.

Many places were vassal states to the empire, meaning they were not directly ruled by it. They were Transylvania, Moldavia, Wallachia (all of which later joined to form Romania), and the Caucasus region (Georgia, Dagestan, and Chechnya). Their rulers received some freedom to rule themselves. However, they had to pay more money (tax or tribute) to the sultan.

Nikola Tesla (Smiljan, July 10, 1856 - New York, January 7, 1943) was an American inventor and engineer of Serbian origin. He is best known for his contributions to the design of the modern alternating current (AC) electricity supply system. He was born in the village of Smiljan, in the part of former Austria-Hungary that is now Croatia. He later became an American citizen.

Tesla got his first job in Budapest in 1882, working at a telephone company. A few years later he moved to the United States. Even in his early life, he was inventing things. His best known invention was an electric motor that could run well on AC power. Tesla died of coronary thrombosis in a hotel room in Manhattan, New York City on 7 January 1943.

Tesla was born on 10th July 1856 in Smiljan, Austro-Hungarian Empire (modern-day Croatia), from a Serbian family. Tesla's father, Milutin Tesla, was a priest in the Serbian Orthodox Church. His mother, Đuka Mandić, could make useful household tools. Even she was a daughter of the Serbian Orthodox Church priest. Although very smart and with excellent memory, (she knew thousands of lines from "Gorski Vijenac" by Petar Petrovic Njegos) she had to take care of her siblings when her mother, Sofia Budisavljevic, died. Nikola Tesla's mother was a great influence on him. Both his parents were born in Lika, Croatia. He was the fourth child out of five. He had one older brother, Dane, who died when Tesla was 5, two older sisters, Angelina and Milka, and one younger sister, Marica.

Tesla, who loved science, was afraid that after his brother's accidental death he would have to continue the family tradition and become a priest.  After he graduated from a prestigious High School in Karlovac, Croatia, he went back to Gospic during summer to see his family and almost died of cholera. He asked his father if he could go study engineering if by miracle he survived, and the father promised his dying son to send him to the best school in the whole world.  Nikola's health improved quickly and his father sent him to study at the Technical College in Graz, Austria, in 1875.

Tesla had a job in telephony and electrical engineering before moving to the United States in 1884 to work for Thomas Edison. They quarrelled, and soon Tesla started working on his own with other people investing in his work. He set up laboratories and companies to develop a range of electrical devices. His patented AC electric motor (induction motor) and transformer were licensed by American industrialist George Westinghouse.

Westinghouse also hired Tesla for one year to help develop a power system using alternating current. The advantage that popularized alternating current is the use of transformers for long distance electric power transmission. Tesla is also known for his high-voltage, high-frequency power experiments in New York and Colorado Springs, Colorado which included inventions and ideas used in the invention of radio communication, for his X-ray experiments, and for his unsuccessful attempt at worldwide wireless transmission in his unfinished Wardenclyffe Tower project.

Tesla's achievements made him very famous. So did his abilities as a showman, demonstrating his seemingly miraculous inventions. Although he made a great deal of money from his patents, he spent a lot on his experiments. He lived for most of his life in a series of hotels in New York City. The end of his patent income and eventual bankruptcy led him to live in much poorer circumstances. Tesla still continued to invite the press to parties he held on his birthday to announce new inventions he was working and make (sometimes unusual) statements. Because of his wonderful pronouncements without results or proof, Tesla gained a reputation in popular culture as the archetypal "mad scientist". He died in room 3327 of the New Yorker Hotel on 7 January 1943.

Tesla's work fell into relative obscurity after his death, but since the 1990s, his reputation has experienced a comeback in popular culture. His work and reputed inventions are also at the center of many conspiracy theories and have also been used to support various pseudosciences, UFO theories and New Age occultism. In 1960, in honor of Tesla, the General Conference on Weights and Measures for the International System of Units dedicated the term "tesla" to the SI unit measure for magnetic field strength.

The Nile (النيل an-nīl) is a river in Africa. It is the longest river on Earth (estimated as 6,682 km or 4,152 miles), though other rivers carry more water.

Its longest section starts in Lake Victoria, and flows into the Mediterranean Sea near Alexandria. It gets its name from the Greek word "Νεῖλος" (Neil's).

This longest part is called the White Nile. It flows from Lake Victoria in Uganda, and through Sudan to Khartoum. There it is joined by the Blue Nile to form the Nile proper, which then flows through Egypt. The Blue Nile comes from Ethiopia near the Red Sea. The two branches meet near Khartoum, in Sudan. About 300 million cubic meters of water flow down the Nile each day.

The Nile is essential to the drier countries in the north of Africa. On the Nile there are many boats: it is one of the easiest ways to get around. Historically, most cities in Egypt are built next to the river, and the pyramids are close to the Nile. The Nile has always provided most of the water used to grow crops in Egypt: much of the rest of the country is a desert. In ancient times the Nile flooded every year and the people would starve if there was not enough water for the crops. The Ancient Egyptians got papyrus from the Nile to write on. Papyrus is made from a plant which grows near the Nile.

Many different types of animals live in or near the waters of the Nile, including crocodiles, birds, fish and many others. Not only do animals depend on the Nile for survival, but also people who live there need it for everyday use like washing, as a water supply, keeping crops watered and other jobs.

Pyramids were built close to the Nile because they needed the granite stones from Aswan to be transported by barges down the Nile.

The word "Nile" comes from Greek Neilos (). Neilos came from the word "river valley". In the ancient Egyptian language, the Nile is called Ḥ'pī or iteru, meaning "great river", represented by the hieroglyphs shown above (literally itrw, and 'waters' determinative). In Coptic, the words piaro (Sahidic) or phiaro (Bohairic) meaning "the river" (lit. p(h).iar-o "the.canal-great") come from the same ancient name.

One Thousand and One Nights is an old cycle (or group) of stories that mostly come from Arabia and Persia, and a few also from India, Central Asia and China. All these stories were later collected together. There are different layers of the stories:

It is similar to 101 Nights, also known as The Book with the Story of the 101 Nights, another Arabic story collection. The collections only have two stories in common - “The Ebony Horse” and “The King’s Son and the Seven Viziers,” popularly known as “The Book of Sinbad.”

Obesity is the condition of being much too heavy for one's height so that one's health is affected. In other words, it means to be too overweight. Also known as being fat. It is considered a disease and has been described as an epidemic.

To know if a person is overweight, the body mass index (BMI) is calculated, by dividing the person's weight (in kilograms), by their height (in metres) squared (multiplied by itself). (This is only meaningful for adults who are fully grown, and should not be used for children. Growth charts can be used to measure obesity in children.)

A BMI between 18.5 and 25 is considered normal. People with a BMI of 25 or more are said to be overweight; with 30 and above, they are considered obese, and with 35 and above, they are considered severely obese (this used to be called morbidly obese). In general, the BMI number is a good quantifiable measurement of a person's obesity. However, it is a poor predictor in people who are very athletic, because a person with a higher than average amount of muscle tissue will weigh more than an average person, thus resulting in a BMI that is higher than normal, even if that person is very large.

In 2024 a study of more than 220 million people in almost 200 countries, found that more than 1 billion people were obese. Between 1990 and 2022 obesity in women increased from 8.8% to 18.5% and for men from 4.8% to 14%.

The most common cause for obesity is eating more calories than are used by the body. Other factors that often contribute to obesity are:

Genetics are known to contribute to obesity. Low levels of leptin, a hormone, is linked to obesity.

Many health problems are associated with obesity. An example is Type 2 diabetes. A woman with a BMI higher than 35 is 93 times more likely to develop diabetes. A 2009 review found that people with a BMI between 40 and 50 were 22.5 times more likely to die from diabetes than people with BMIs between 22.5 and 25.

Risk is associated with where the excess fat is stored on the body. Abdominal obesity is particularly dangerous.

Some people think that the idea that obesity causes bad health is not completely true and has been exaggerated. An example is J. Eric Oliver. He wrote a book called Fat Politics: The Real Story Behind America's Obesity Epidemic. There is evidence for this belief.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said in 2003 that 400,000 people died because of being obese in 2000. Then in 2004 they said that the number was wrong. A 2013 review of scientific papers found that Grade 1 obesity (BMI 30-34.9) is not associated with increased deaths. Grades 2 (BMI 35-39.9) and 3 (40+) obesity are associated with much higher rates of death. It has been suggested that obesity is associated with mortality (death) because of mortality in Grade 2 and 3 obesity. People with grade 2 and 3 obesity are 29% more likely to die.

'Metabolically healthy obesity' is increasingly being recognized. Up to 40% of obese people are metabolically healthy. They are not more likely to get heart disease or die than metabolically healthy non-obese people.

The 'obesity paradox' is a term used to describe how obesity can lower the risk of death. Obesity increases the chance of getting heart disease. But obese people with heart disease are less likely to die in a 7-year period. The obesity paradox has also been found in patients with stroke, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Scientists have not yet found a cure for obesity that most people are willing to implement. It is common wisdom that people who lose weight will regain it all within 5 years.

However, this position has been scientifically challenged for over a decade. Additionally, modern research has achieved significantly higher success rates than the figure that dominates the popular internet. Therefore, diet and exercise is the most common recommended treatment for obesity - it has the potential for a very high treatment success rate.

Surgery can be used to treat obesity. Gastric bypass is the most common weight loss surgery. It makes a person's stomach smaller so they feel full after eating less food and causes their body to absorb less calories. People who have surgery are usually very obese. In Britain there are long waiting lists for this. It is very easy to get this surgery in Turkey. Seven Britons have died after having weight loss surgery there since 2019 and many more have had serious problems.

Some people think that obesity should not be treated at all. This position is contradicted by substantial medical research.

Weight loss medicines can make people want to eat less or make less of the energy from food be absorbed by their bodies. The only weight loss drug approved by the FDA for long term use is orlistat. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not approved other drugs because they may have side effects. Also they are worried that people who are not obese will take them.

In the West, people associate obesity with negative characteristics such as laziness, ugliness, stupidity, etc. Discriminating against someone because of their weight is legal in the United States. The fat acceptance movement says that this is wrong and is a kind of prejudice called fatphobia. In some cultures, obesity is viewed as positive. To those cultures, obesity is associated with wealth, beauty, and fertility.

The Parthenon is a temple in the middle of the Acropolis in Athens, Greece (Europe). It was a temple to honor the goddess Athena for nearly 900 years from the 5th century BC to the 5th century AD, and originally had a huge idol to her. It was a Christian church from the 5th century to the 15th when it became a mosque. The name Parthenon means the virgin's place in Greek. It was built between 447 BC and 432 BC during the reign of Pericles. It is considered one of ancient Greece's greatest architecture accomplishments.

The building was constructed using limestone foundations and 22,000 tons of marble. The building was designed by the architects Ictinus and Callicrates. It has 46 Doric columns which support the roof, with 8 across the front and back, and 17 on each side.

In 1687 a gunpowder explosion damaged the building. Thomas Bruce, 7th Earl of Elgin took some of the sculptures, now called the Elgin Marbles, from the Parthenon in 1759. They have been on display in the British Museum since 1816.

Nicolaus Copernicus (19 February 1473 – 24 May 1543) was a Polish astronomer. People know Copericus for his ideas about the sun and the earth. His main idea was that our world is heliocentric (helios = sun). His theory was that the sun is in the middle of the solar system, and the planets go around it.

published in his book, De revolutionibus orbium coelestium (On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres) in the year that he died.

Copernicus was born in 1473 in the city of Thorn (Toruń) in Royal Prussia, a mainly German-speaking state that was ruled by the Polish king since 1466. He was the son of the merchant Niklas Koppernigk and his wife Barbara Koppernigk (born Barbara Watzenrode). His native language was German. He was taught first in Cracow and then in Italy, where he graduated as a lawyer of the church. He also studied medicine to serve his fellow clerics. Copernicus spent most of his life working and researching in Frauenburg (Frombork), Warmia, Royal Prussia where he died in 1543.

Copernicus was one of the great polymaths of his age. He was a priest, mathematician, astrologer, jurist, physician, classical scholar, governor, administrator, diplomat, and economist . During all these jobs, he treated astronomy as a hobby. However, his doctrine of heliocentrism that the sun, rather than the earth, is at the center of the solar system, is one of the most important scientific hypotheses in history. It was the beginning of modern astronomy.

Nicotine is a chemical in tobacco, which is used in cigarettes, cigars, pipes tobacco, chewing tobacco, some vaping liquids and some e-cigarette products.

Nicotine is an addictive substance with stimulant effects. The high causes the heart to beat faster and makes blood pressure rise especially before smoking for a long time. It can also make a person feel less hungry and speeds up the metabolism. These effects are very unhealthy. Tobacco is addictive for many people. It is one of the most widely consumed substances by humans. It can be as addictive as cocaine or sex.

Nicotine is a substance found in most members of the nightshade family of plants. Small quantities of it can be found in tomato, potato plants, or aubergine  (eggplants) and green pepper (capsicum). Nicotine is also in the Coca plant.

In higher quantities it is a very efficient poison. It acts on the nerves. It is the main reason people are addicted to smoking.

Nicotine is named after Jean Nicot. Nicot was a French ambassador in Portugal. In 1560 he sent tobacco seeds to Paris for analysis as a potential drug.

The amount of nicotine in one cigarette varies greatly. Factors which influence the amount include the type of tobacco (rough or smooth), or brand. The country or region (because some markets restrict maximum average nicotine levels) the plant is grown in might also affect the levels of chemicals in the plant.

Different ways of smoking a cigarette change how much nicotine gets into the smoker. Unfiltered cigarettes, or using more tobacco, increases this.

Tobacco products and electronic cigarettes, the most popular form of nicotine worldwide, have become a public health concern. Leading to an increase in countries' governments' and public health organizations' efforts to regulate its use and sales. With 30 countries currently having banned the purchase of any form of these products.

Since 2022 legislation against e-cigarettes  is on the rise as more studies are released. A large contributor to this was the World Health Organization's concerns raised about how secondhand smoke affects children in the home. Highlighting the potential risks of exposure to nicotine, which is known to cause issues in brain development and lead to anxiety disorders, among other health problems.

While e-cigarettes have been marketed as a safer alternative to traditional cigarettes, there is still much debate about the potential risks and benefits of these products. As nicotine percentages are higher on average in many forms of e-cigarettes compared to traditional tobacco products.

Pieter Pauwel (Peter Paul) Rubens (28 June 1577 – 30 May 1640) was a painter.

He was born "in the German province of Westfalia, where his [... Calvinist]Flemish family had fled to escape religious persecution in Antwerp. In 1578, they moved to Cologne", according to media; The family moved back to Antwerp in 1589.

He was good at painting many subjects: portraits, stories from the bible or other books and landscapes. He painted in the Baroque style. Paintings in this style have a lot of action and color. Many of his paintings have a sensual touch. Some of them can be seen as erotic.

In 2024, the painting "Crucifixion of Jesus Christ" was authenticated as one of his paintings; Later it was auctioned for [c. 2 million euro or] 2.3 million euros ($2.7 million).

OPEC, the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries  is an international organization. Since 1965, the headquarters of OPEC has been in Vienna, Austria. OPEC was established in Baghdad, Iraq on 10–14 September 1960.

Its work is to "coordinate and unify the petroleum policies" of its members, and also to "ensure the stabilization of oil markets in order to secure an efficient, economic and regular supply of petroleum to consumers, a steady income to producers, and a fair return on capital for those investing in the petroleum industry".

According to the United States Department of Energy Energy Information Administration (EIA), OPEC crude oil production is an important factor affecting global oil prices. OPEC sets production targets for its member nations and generally, when OPEC production targets are reduced, oil prices increase.  Projections of changes in Saudi production result in changes in the price of crude oil.

OPEC was formed in 1960 when the international oil market was largely dominated by  multinational companies known as the 'seven sisters'. The formation of OPEC was a turning point in state control over natural resources. In the 1960s OPEC made sure that oil companies could not unilaterally cut prices. In December 2014, OPEC and the oil men were named in the top 10 most influential people in the shipping industry by Lloyds.

OPEC was established at a conference in Baghdad, Iraq in September 1960. Prior to the OPEC, the oil market in the world was dominated by a cluster of aggressive Western oil corporations referred to as the Seven Sisters. These companies included ExxonMobil, Chevron, Texaco, Gulf Oil, Shell, and BP. The oil-producing nations desired greater control of their own natural resources and the income they received out of the same.

The group relocated to Vienna, Austria in 1965 where it is located.

The principal function of OPEC is to coordinate and unify the oil policies of the members. Its three main goals are:

OPEC leaders have a minimum of two meetings every year to discuss the global economy. When the oil in the world is too much and the price is falling they might consent to reduce production (produce less oil) to allow the price to recover. In case the price is too expensive, they can produce more in the aim of reducing the price to the consumer.

12 countries are members of OPEC. The names of these countries are:

Note: Some countries like Qatar and Angola have left the group in recent years to focus on their own energy goals. And on 28 April 2026, United Arab Emirates has accounced to leave OPEC from 1 May 2026

OPEC began collaborating with other non-member states in 2016, such as Russia, Mexico and Kazakhstan. This larger alliance is known as OPEC+. This larger alliance is known as OPEC+. They jointly own approximately half of the oil resources in the world, which further gives them more power in control of the global energy prices. Together, OPEC+ countries produce about half of the world's oil supply, which gives them significant influence over global energy prices.

The significance of OPEC is that there are numerous applications of oil, which can be useful in the form of gasoline in automobiles, heating in residential houses, and plastic products. Since the members of OPEC control approximately 80 percent of the proven oil reserves on earth, their actions can determine the amount of money people worldwide will pay at the gas pumps.

Member countries of the OPEC came together to form this international organization with several aims. Some of the aims are:

However, OPEC has not always been able to achieve all these aims.

Nigeria, officially Federal Republic of Nigeria, is a country in Africa.

Nigeria shares its borders with Niger to the north, Benin to the west, Cameroon to the east, and Chad to the northeast.

The country gained independence on 1 October 1960, and became a republic in 1963.

It is the most populated country in both West Africa and the whole of Africa, with over 232,679,478 people.

The capital city is Abuja, while its economic center and most populated city is Lagos.

Nigeria has the fourth biggest economy in Africa, as of 2024.

From the 1500s to the 1800s, many people from the land now called Nigeria (and other parts of West Africa) were taken away and turned into slaves by Europeans, and they were sent to work in the Americas. These slaves were bought and sold in the Americas by Europeans who lived there.

Today, many people related to those that were enslaved still live in America, though they are no longer slaves. They are referred to as African Americans.

From 1901 to 1960, the United Kingdom ruled Nigeria. However, by 1960 the people wanted independence, and Britain finally let them have it. For some time after this, Nigeria was a dictatorship, where the leaders stayed in control even if the majority of people disliked them. At this time, the Nigerian Civil War was by separatist Christian Igbo people in the Southeast against the Nigerian government. They did not want to be a part of Nigeria, which was ruled by The Muslim north and mixed west. The war ended with a reunification of Nigeria.

In 1999, Nigeria became a democracy, where people choose their leaders. After that, Olusegun Obasanjo, a Yoruba Christian from the south, became President. In 2007, Umaru Yar'Adua, a Hausa Muslim, was elected to be the next President. Yar'Adua died in May 2009. Goodluck Jonathan, the vice president, then became president.

Goodluck Jonathan was re-elected as the president after wining the 2011 general elections under the political party, PDP.

In the early 21st century, there have been several armed conflicts. These include the armed rebellion by the Islamist group Boko Haram. The Boko Haram insurgency happens mostly in the northeastern part of the country. The group wants Sharia law for the country. Another is the Nigerian bandit conflict, in which gangs carry out attacks, mostly in the northwest.

There is also a separatist insurgency in the southeast where the armed group, IPOB, is seeking the restoration of the short-lived secessionist Biafra country that was defeated by federal forces in 1970.

There is also a conflict with a neighboring country; The Bakassi conflict involves Cameroon and Nigeria.

Nigeria has a total area of . It is the world's 32nd-largest country. It shares a border with Benin (773 km), Niger (1497 km), Chad (87 km) and Cameroon (1690 km). It has a coastline of at least 853 km.

The highest point in Nigeria is Chappal Waddi at . The main rivers are the Niger and the Benue River. They come together and empty into the Niger Delta, one of the world's largest river deltas. It is the location of a large area of Central African mangroves.

These are the cities in Nigeria with over 1 million people as of 2012.

In Nigeria, there are almost equal numbers of Muslims and Christians. Most of the Christians live in the south, and most of the Muslims live in the north.

Contrary to some beliefs, the Nigerian civil war was not only attributed to religious intolerance. The war which took place between 6 July 1967 and 15 January 1970, was a political conflict caused by the attempted secession of the southeastern provinces of Nigeria as the self-proclaimed Republic of Biafra. The conflict was the result of economic, ethnic, cultural and religious tensions among the various peoples of Nigeria.

Nigeria produces a large amount of oil, and some fighting has been going on because many people want a share of the oil profits. This fighting has been happening in the area called the Niger Delta, where the Niger River flows into the Atlantic Ocean.

The largest city in Nigeria is Lagos. Nigeria has both grasslands and rainforests, and can get very hot, because it is close to the Equator. Petroleum and agriculture make up the Nigerian economy.

Nigerian cuisine, like West African cuisine in general, is known for its richness and variety.

Many different spices, herbs and flavourings are used along with palm oil or groundnut oil. These make deeply flavoured sauces and soups often made very hot with chili peppers.

Examples are Okro soup(Ofé Okro), Egusi soup (Ofé egwusi),  Ọha soup (Ofé Ọha), Bitter leaf soup(Ofé Olugbo), naija jollof rice, afang soup, ewedu,  Ọgbọnọ soup(Ofé Ọgbọnọ) also called draw-soup)

Nigerian feasts are colourful and lavish. Good smelling market and roadside snacks cooked on barbecues or fried in oil are plentiful and varied.

Association football is Nigeria's national sport. The country has its own Premier League of football.

Nigeria's Men's national football team, known as the Super Eagles, has made the World Cup five times. These were in 1994, 1998, 2002, 2010, 2014, 2018 and most recently in 2022. They won the African Cup of Nations in 1980, 1994 and 2013. They also hosted the Junior World Cup. They won the gold medal for football in the 1996 Summer Olympics.

Nigeria is also involved in other sports such as basketball, cricket, sprints and track and field. Boxing is also an important sport in Nigeria; Dick Tiger and Samuel Peter are both former World Champions.

Penicillin is a group of common antibiotics (penicillins), made to treat bacterial infections. It was one of the first antibiotics to be discovered, and worked well against staphylococci and streptococci. Many strains of bacteria are now resistant. Chemists and many businesses keep changing part of its structure in the effort to keep it working against the bacteria. Penicillin is sometimes made to treat syphilis, tonsillitis, meningitis, and pneumonia as well as other diseases.

Penicillin can be used to enter and kill two types of bacteria, Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. It does this by lysis of the cell membrane. Gram-positive bacteria have no outer cell membrane (protective layer around the bacteria cell) and have large pores (holes) which allows penicillin to enter easily and kill the cell from the inside. Gram-negative bacteria are harder for penicillin to enter as they have smaller pores and an outer cell membrane so penicillin has to enter through smaller aqueous pores (holes in the membrane where water enters and leaves the cell). This means that killing Gram-negative bacteria takes a longer amount of time and some penicillin drugs may not work against them.

Once the penicillin is inside the bacteria, it destroys the cell wall by stopping new chains in the outer membrane from forming and so the structure of the membrane collapses. This means that there is no longer a structure to support the cell and control how much of substances can enter and leave so a large amount of water from the surroundings enters the cell until it can no longer function and so the cell dies.

Penicillin was discovered by Scottish scientist Sir Alexander Fleming in 1928, but it was not mass-produced until 1940 when it was first used widely during World War II.

Penicillin was discovered when Fleming noticed a mold that was stopping bacteria from growing in a petri dish. Australian scientist Howard Walter Florey made the penicillin mold into a medicine. Together with another scientist Ernst Boris Chain, Fleming and Florey were given the Nobel Prize for Medicine in 1945. The first time penicillin was used in medicine to treat a bacterial infection was in 1930.

The antibiotic penicillin is naturally produced by fungi of the genus Penicillium. There is now a whole group of antibiotics derived from Penicillium including penicillin G (by Pfizer), procaine penicillin, benzathine penicillin, and penicillin V which are effective against different bacterial diseases.

Some people are allergic to penicillin. Side effects of taking antibiotics may include nausea, diarrhea, or a . Rarely, patients who are allergic to penicillin get a fever, vomit, or have serious skin irritation. Because it is such a popular antibiotic, penicillin is the most common cause of serious allergic reactions to a drug. The amount of penicillin allergies out there is said to be overstated (they think there are more than there are).

They are now used regularly in hospitals but because its use is so common in modern medicine, strains of bacteria have developed resistance against the antibiotic. This means the antibiotic can no longer kill those bacteria.

Chemist John C. Sheehan at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) did the first chemical synthesis of penicillin in 1957.

Nuclear power is the controlled use of nuclear energy.  Nuclear energy can be released by nuclear reactions in a machine called a nuclear reactor.   This energy boils water for a steam engine to make electricity, which then can be used to power machines and homes.  In 2023, 10% of the world's electricity came from nuclear power. Nuclear power plants also make radioactive waste that could be harmful if it is not stored properly.

Enrico Fermi made the first nuclear reactor in the year 1941.  Many reactors were built in the U.S. during World War II during the Manhattan Project.  In 1954 the first nuclear power plant started in Obninsk near Moscow.  Most nuclear power plants in the U.S. were built during the 1960s and 1970s.  Nuclear reactors also power some large military ships and submarines and a few icebreakers (a kind of ship).

Nuclear reactors use a process called nuclear fission, which uses atoms like uranium or plutonium (In particular the isotope Uranium 235) and splits them apart with particles called neutrons. This converts some of the mass into energy, according to Einstein's equation E=mc2. The fissionable elements are placed into rods called 'fuel rods'. The fuel rods are submerged in water, and the energy released in the fission reaction heats up the water which turns into steam.

The steam then turns a turbine, which generates electricity. The steam is then condensed in huge cooling towers, and it turns back into water and is sent into the reactor again.

The reaction can be controlled by putting 'control rods' in between the fuel rods. The control rods are generally made of boron, which absorbs neutrons and stops the reaction.

A nuclear meltdown can happen when the reaction is not controlled, and starts to generate dangerous radioactive gases (like Krypton). Contrary to popular belief, nuclear reactors can't explode like a nuclear bomb, but it is a danger when radioactive materials escape.

Some serious nuclear accidents have occurred. A scale was made to measure how dangerous accidents are. It is called the International Nuclear Event Scale. The scale has 8 levels (0-7), and 7 is the worst.

Nuclear-powered submarine mishaps include the Soviet submarine K-19 reactor accident (1961), the Soviet submarine K-27 reactor accident (1968), and the Soviet submarine K-431 reactor accident (1985).

The economics of nuclear power is challenging, and following the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster, costs are likely to go up for currently operating and new nuclear power plants, due to increased requirements for on-site spent fuel management and elevated design basis threats.

There is a debate about the use of nuclear power.  Supporters, such as the World Nuclear Association and IAEA, argue that nuclear power is a sustainable energy source that reduces carbon emissions. Additionally, it does not contribute to smog or acid rain. It is believed that thousands of lives have been saved by using nuclear energy instead of more dangerous fuels such as coal, oil and gas.

Anti-nuclear opponents, such as Greenpeace International and the Nuclear Information and Resource Service, believe that nuclear power poses threats to people and the environment.

Nuclear power generates radioactive waste materials, both as fission products (broken atoms) and by inducing radioactivity in existing materials.

People have also been studying since the middle of the 20th century to use fusion power which produces much more energy and does not produce radioactive waste. Nuclear fusion reactors do not exist yet and are still being developed.

In 2007, nuclear power plants made some 2600 TWh of electricity and provided 14 percent of the electricity used in the world, which represented a fall of 2 percent compared with 2006. As of May 9, 2010, there were 438 (372 GW) nuclear reactors operating globally. A peak was reached in 2002 when there were 444 nuclear reactors operating.

The nuclear emergencies at Japan's Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant and other nuclear facilities raised questions about the future of nuclear power. Platts has said that "the crisis at Japan's Fukushima nuclear plants has prompted leading energy-consuming countries to review the safety of their existing reactors and cast doubt on the speed and scale of planned expansions around the world". Following the Fukushima nuclear disaster, the International Energy Agency halved its estimate of additional nuclear generating capacity to be built by 2035.

The nervous system is a body system which sends signals around the body. It lets animals  to what is around them. The central nervous system is the brain and the spinal cord. It is present in almost all animals. It is there to process the input from the senses, and to coordinate movement. Neuroscience is the scientific study of the nervous system.

The nervous system is made up of neurons. Other cells, such as glial cells keep the neurons safe and in good condition.

The structure of the system includes the brain and spinal cord, which together are called the central nervous system.  The brain has billions of nerve cells to help think, walk, and breathe. The nervous system can react in 1/100 of a second to a stimulus, like a pain signal.

The system of nerves in your body that sends messages for controlling movement and feeling between the brain and the other parts of the body anatomy of nervous systems can be sub-divided as follows:

A pandemic (from Greek παν pan all + δήμος demos people) is an epidemic (an outbreak of an infectious disease) that spreads across a large region (like a continent), or even worldwide.

According to the World Health Organization, a pandemic exists when three conditions have been met:

A disease or condition is not a pandemic merely because it is widespread or kills many people. It must also be infectious. For example, cancer causes many deaths, but it is not a pandemic because it is usually not infectious.

The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed a plan to prepare the global fight against influenza. It defines the stages of a pandemic and makes recommendations about what countries should do before and during a pandemic. The phases are:

The Niger River  is the main river of western Africa. It is over 4180 km (2500 miles) long.

The river has a crescent shape and it goes through Guinea, Mali, Niger, on the border with Benin and then through Nigeria. Finally, it reaches the sea at a large delta, called the Niger Delta. This part of the Atlantic Ocean is called the Gulf of Guinea. The Niger is the third-longest river in Africa. Only the Nile and the Congo are longer. Its main tributary is the Benue River.

No-one knows the origin of the name Niger. Many people think that it comes from the Latin word for "black", niger, but there is no evidence for this, and Portuguese explorers would probably have used their own word (negro) on their maps. Also, the Niger is not a blackwater river (see Rio Negro). Some people think that 'black' may mean the color of the people in this area, but this did not happen with any other river in Africa.

Therefore, most people think the name is from the original people of the area in the middle of the river where early European maps used the name "Quorra". One possibility is the Tuareg phrase gher n gheren "river of rivers", shortened to ngher or "niger", from the middle of the river near Timbuktu.

The Tabula Peutingeriana says "Flumen Girin" (River Girin) and "Hoc flumen quidam Grin vocant, alii Nilum appellant dicint enim sub terra Etyopium in Nilum ire Lacum.", which means "This river which some are naming Grin is called Nile by others and is thought to flow under the ground of Ethiopia (i.e. modern Africa) into the Nile Lake."

Nigeria and Niger take their names from the river. The people who live beside the river have many names for it, such as Jeliba or Joliba ("great river" in Manding), Isa Ber ("big river" in Songhay), Oya, (a Yoruba River Niger goddess), and Kworra or Quorra. The last name was the name that Europeans used for the lower part of the river before they knew that the upper and lower parts were connected.

The Niger River is quite a clear river. It has only 10% as much sediment as the Nile because the Niger's source is in very old rocks that have little silt. Like the Nile, the Niger River has a flood every year; this starts in September, becomes strongest in November, and finishes by May.

An unusual feature of the river is the Niger Inland Delta. This forms where the river suddenly becomes less steep. This makes a region of connected streams, marshes, and lakes over an amount of land the same size as Belgium. The yearly floods make the delta very good for fishing and farming.

The Niger takes an unusual route. It is a boomerang shape and this confused Europeans for 2000 years. Its source is only 240 km (150 miles) from the Atlantic Ocean, but the river flows away from the sea into the Sahara Desert, then turns near the ancient city of Timbuktu (Tombouctou). From here, it goes southeast to the Gulf of Guinea.

Ancient Romans thought that the river near Timbuktu was part of the Nile River and Ibn Battuta had the same opinion. Early 17th-century European explorers thought that it flowed west and joined the Sénégal River. Many local people probably knew the real route, but Europeans only knew it in the late 19th century, when it was mentioned in the book Travels in the Interior of Africa by the Scottish explorer Mungo Park. This unusual route happened because the Niger River is two ancient rivers which are joined together. The upper Niger, from the source, past Timbuktu, to the bend in the river, used to empty into a lake, but the lake has now gone. However, the lower Niger started in hills near the lake and flowed south into the Gulf of Guinea. The Sahara Desert dried up in 4000-1000 BC, and the two rivers changed their routes and they joined (some people disagree, but most people think this is true).

The northern part of the river, which is called the Niger bend, is important because it is the Sahara Desert's closest big river. Therefore, trade across the west of the Sahara came here, and it became the center of the Sahelian kingdoms of Mali and Gao.

Avram Noam Chomsky (born December 7, 1928) is an American linguist, philosopher, political activist, author, and lecturer. He was an Institute Professor and professor emeritus of linguistics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Chomsky created the theory of generative grammar. This is one of the most important contributions to the field of linguistics made in the 20th century. He also helped start the cognitive revolution in psychology through his review of B. F. Skinner's Verbal Behavior. He challenged the behaviorist way of looking at behavior and language. This was the main approach used in the 1950s. His natural approach to the study of language also changed the philosophy of language and mind. He also invented the Chomsky hierarchy, a way of looking at formal languages in terms of their power to explain language.

According to the Arts and Humanities Citation Index in 1992, Chomsky was cited as a source more often than any other living scholar during the 1980–1992 time period. He was the eighth-most cited scholar in any time period.

In the 1960s he criticized the Vietnam War. Because of that, Chomsky became more widely known for his media criticism and politics. He is a key intellectual figure within the left wing of United States politics. Chomsky is widely known for his political activism, and for his criticism of capitalism and the foreign policy of the United States and other governments. Chomsky often calls himself a libertarian socialist and an anarcho-syndicalist, and he has talked and written extensively on these subjects. He is a member of the Industrial Workers of the World, following his father William Chomsky who was also a member.

In 2015, Chomsky announced his support for Vermont U.S. senator Bernie Sanders in the 2016 United States presidential election.

Chomsky had a massive stroke in June 2023 and was hospitalized in São Paulo, Brazil. His wife talked about his health issues a year late in June 2024, where he remained hospitalized in Brazil.

He was elected a member of the  American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1963, a member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1972, a foreign member of the Academia Europaea in 1995, a foreign member of the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts in 2003 and a member of the American Philosophical Society in 2004.

He received honorary degrees from the University of Uppsala, the University of Chicago, the University of Delhi, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of London, the Loyola University Chicago, the Swarthmore College, the Bard College, the University of Cambridge, the Columbia University, the Harvard University, the Georgetown University, the Amherst College, the McGill University, the National University of Colombia, the University of Toronto, the University of Calcutta, the Scuola Normale Superiore, the Western University in Ontario and the University of Buenos Aires.

Opera is a drama set to music. An opera is like a play in which everything is sung instead of spoken. Operas are usually performed in opera houses. The singers who sing and act out the story are on the stage, and the orchestra is in front of the stage but lower down, in the orchestra pit, so that the audience can see the stage.

An opera is normally divided into two, three, four or even five acts. In older operas the music was mostly recitative and arias. During the recitative things would happen in the story. The aria was a song for a solo singer, a setting of a lyric. As well as recitative and aria there would be choruses. The chorus were a group of singers who sing in the crowd scenes. The opera would start with an overture for the orchestra. The overture would usually include tunes that are going to be heard later in the opera.

In operas from the 19th century onwards there is often little or no difference between recitative and aria. Composers like Wagner wanted to get away from operas which had lots of separate arias in which the singers showed off, with the audience clapping loudly after each one. He wanted continuous music so that the mood would not be broken.

Sometimes operas have a lot of dancing in them. French opera especially would often have one act which was full of dances.

Opéra bouffe (French) or Opera buffa (Italian) is comic opera. The story is very light-hearted and funny.

Opéra comique is a French term for opera which has some spoken words. Surprisingly it does not mean a “comic” opera. An opera like Carmen, which is a tragedy, is still an opéra comique due to the fact that it uses spoken dialogues instead of recitatives.

Singspiel is a German term for a type of opera with lots of magic and fantasy in the story. There were spoken words between the songs. Mozart’s Magic Flute is an example.

Operetta is a short opera which is light-hearted and usually has some spoken words.

Opera singers have to have powerful voices as well as a good technique. Most opera houses are very big, and the singers need to be heard at the back. They also need to be good at acting. They need to be able to learn their music quickly and to sing from memory. It is a help to be good at languages because operas are often in Italian, German, French, English or Russian etc. Some opera companies, like the English National Opera, sing their operas in English. Others, like the Royal Opera House, sing operas in whatever language they were composed in. Translations are printed on a screen above the front of the stage ("surtitles") so that the audience can understand what is being sung.

Although singers train to get a wide range (good top and bottom notes) they cannot be expected to sing any role in their voice range. For example: some sopranos may have big, dramatic voices, suitable for parts like Tosca in Puccini’s opera Tosca. Some may have a very light and high voice, called “coloratura”, suitable for parts like the Queen of the Night in Mozart’s Magic Flute. Some may have a medium range, called mezzo-soprano, suitable for parts like Carmen in Bizet’s opera Carmen.

Very often in opera the heroine is a soprano and the hero is a tenor. Basses may often have the part of a powerful king, or he may be the bad guy.

The 18th century lexicographer and critic Dr Johnson  described opera as an “exotic and irrational entertainment”. By “exotic” he meant that it came from a foreign country (which in those days was true: all opera at the time came from Italy). By “irrational” he meant that the things which happened in the stories were strange and not like real life. A play can be like real life, but an opera is being sung, so things are not going to happen like they normally do in real life. A singer might be singing “I must go, I must go!” and he may stand on the stage and sing this for several minutes before at last he goes! A singer may be pretending to die, and will sing a beautiful song before he or she finally dies. These things are “conventions”, which means that they are a kind of habit we have to accept when watching and listening to opera. Another convention of earlier operas was to have the part of young men sung by women. This is sometimes called a breeches role or trouser role. They are often small parts such as page boys, or teenagers who flirt with older women, such as the part of Cherubino in Mozart’s  The Marriage of Figaro or Oktavian in Richard Strauss’s Der Rosenkavalier. It should be remembered that in the 18th century it was usual for the main female part to be sung by a man who was a castrato.

There are lots of famous operas, and the best ones have some of the greatest music ever written. The music could not have been written like that if it had not been written for opera. For example: Mozart is very clever at writing music where maybe six people are all singing different things at once because they all have different ideas about the situation in the story.

One of the first operas ever written was Ordo Virtutum by  Hildegard of Bingen. Ordo Virtutum (Latin for Order of the Virtues) is an allegorical morality play, or liturgical drama,  composed c. 1151, during the construction and relocation of Bingen's Abbey at Rupertsberg. It is the earliest morality play by more than a century, and the only Medieval musical drama to survive with an attribution for both the text and the music.

A short version of Ordo Virtutum without music appears at the end of Scivias, Hildegard's most famous account of her visions. It is also included in some manuscripts of the Symphonia armoniae celestium revelationum ("Symphony of the Harmony of Celestial Revelations"), a cycle of more than 70 liturgical songs. It may have been performed by the convent nuns at the dedication of the St. Rupertsberg church in 1152 or possibly before the Mass for the Consecration of Virgins at the convent .

The first Baroque opera ever written was performed in 1597 in Florence in Italy. It was called Dafne and the composer was Jacopo Peri. This opera is now lost, but three years later, in 1600, he worked together with another composer called Giulio Caccini to write an opera called Euridice. The music for this still exists. It was nearly all recitative. This kind of writing was new, but if opera was to tell a story it was important to have a solo voice singing words that could be heard. They were trying to produce something like an ancient Greek tragedy. It was performed at a kind of club, called “camerata”, for intellectual (clever) people to a small audience. It was not great music, but the amazing thing was that there was a composer of genius around. His name was Claudio Monteverdi, and only seven years later, in 1607, he wrote the first really good opera: Orfeo, which was produced in Mantua. Monteverdi must have realized that opera had the possibilities of putting poetry, music, scenery and acting all together. He took the kind of songs that were popular at the time and joined them with speaking or recitative. Later in life he joined these so that the music flowed more dramatically.

In 1637 the first public opera house was opened in Venice. Soon lots of theatres in Italy started to produce operas. The stories were usually about ancient times, like the Roman Empire or Greek myths. They started to put in comic (funny) bits to make people laugh. Soon there was opera in Paris, Vienna, Hamburg and in the small courts of Germany which in those days was lots of little countries, each with their own prince who ruled and who kept musicians at court. The composers who are best remembered today include Jean-Baptiste Lully (1632-1687) who was an Italian who moved to France and wrote operas for the French king, and George Frideric Handel (1685-1759) who was a German who moved to England and wrote operas for the opera houses in London. In Italy there were composers like Francesco Cavalli (1602-1676) who had been a choirboy in Monteverdi’s church choir in Venice, and Alessandro Scarlatti 1660-1725 who lived in Naples.

During this period, known as the Baroque period, the opera was an entertainment for the upper classes who went to the opera to be seen in public. Opera was a social occasion where you could meet people and talk, even during the music. Both the singers and the audience behaved in ways that we would think were bad manners.

Christoph Willibald Gluck was a composer who tried to make people take opera more seriously. In 1762 he wrote an opera called  which was performed in Vienna. It had lots of choruses and ballet numbers, like French opera, but the words were in Italian and the music really concentrated on the story rather than being just a display for clever singers to show off. Some of its music is very famous today, e.g. the Dance of the Blessed Spirits which is played on a flute, and Orfeo’s aria "Che faró senza Euridice?" ("What shall I do without Euridice?").

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart learned from Gluck’s ideas about opera. This can be seen in his opera Idomeneo which is about a Greek story. Other Italian operas by Mozart include: Don Giovanni, Le Nozze di Figaro and Cosi fan tutte. He also wrote operas in German: The Abduction from the Serail and The Magic Flute. These are Singspiel: operas which tell magic and fantasy stories.

Ludwig van Beethoven (1770-1827) only wrote one opera: Fidelio. It is a story of a woman who rescues her lover from prison. Rescue operas were popular in France, but this one is in German. It is a serious opera about how a woman can save a man by being true and faithful.

In the 19th century Richard Wagner (1813-1883) continued Gluck’s ideas. Wagner had very personal ideas about how his operas should be performed, and he liked to train the singers himself. He wanted them to take the drama of his operas seriously instead of treating the music as a way of showing off their voices. He always wrote the libretti (words for the opera) himself, and they were always in German. They are mostly about serious subjects from German folklore and myths, although he did write one comic opera: The Mastersingers of Nürnberg. Wagner used “leitmotifs” which means that there are tunes which are used for particular characters or ideas in the opera. This allows the music to develop with the story, and can be used in interesting ways. For example: when Sigmund (in the opera Die Walküre) says that he does not know who his father is, we hear his father’s tune in the orchestra! The audience, of course, know (this is called: dramatic irony).

In Italy Gioachino Rossini (1792-1868) wrote lots of operas. There was no difference in style between his comic and his serious operas. Often the same overture was used for both. He wrote exactly all the notes that the singers were to sing, he did not want to leave it to them to improvise their own ornamental notes. Everything was carefully thought out. Musicians are not sure whether to call him a Classical or Romantic composer. Composers like Vincenzo Bellini (1801-1835) and Gaetano Donizetti (1797-1848) are definitely Romantic. They had the ability to write lovely lyrical tunes. The most famous Italian opera composer of the 19th century was Giuseppe Verdi (1813-1901). His music is not always continuous like Wagner’s. Sometimes it stopped for the audience to applaud. Verdi had a wonderful sense of drama, and could write beautiful melodies which captured people’s hearts. He loved Shakespeare, and based several of his operas on Shakespeare plays: Othello, Macbeth and Falstaff.

The 19th century was the time when Nationalism was important. Composers were writing music typical of their own countries. Wagner, as we have seen, took German myths for his opera stories. In Spain they had their own kind of opera called “zarzuela”. In Russia Mikhail Glinka (1804-1857) wrote Ruslan and Lyudmila which was based on a Russian fairy tale. Other Russian composers include Alexander Borodin who wrote Prince Igor, and Modest Mussorgsky (1839-1881) who wrote Boris Godunov. Both these operas are about stories from Russian history. Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov (1844-1908) wrote a fairy tale opera Sadko, and Pyotr Tchaikovsky (1840-1893) used some very Russian tunes in Eugene Onegin and The Queen of Spades.

Czech composers wrote national operas. The most famous Czech opera composers were Antonín Dvořák (1841-1904), Bedřich Smetana (1824-1884) and Leoš Janáček (1854-1928). In France the most famous composer was Charles Gounod (1818-1893) who wrote an opera called Faust.

In the 20th century composers had many different styles of composing. This was true of all kinds of music, including opera. Richard Strauss (1864-1949) was really a Romantic, although almost all his operas were written in the 20th century. His harmonies show that he had studied Wagner’s operas. Der Rosenkavalier (1909) has lots of romantic tunes, although it is a story about Vienna in the Classical period. In Italy composers like Giacomo Puccini (1858-1924) wrote operas in the verismo style. This meant operas with stories that felt like real life. The characters in the stories were usually from the lower classes.

Alban Berg (1885-1935) also wrote operas about poor or simple people. He wrote an opera called Wozzeck which is the tragedy of a man who is too simple to understand that people are being unkind to him and using him. Berg’s music is often built on the twelve tone series which he had learned from Schoenberg. Stravinsky’s (1882-1971) The Rake's Progress is in yet another style called Neo-classical because the music is made to sound a bit like music of the Classical Period. In England Britten wrote many great operas like Peter Grimes and Billy Budd. In Russia Dmitri Shostakovich wrote Lady Macbeth of the Mtsensk District. Most of them are about unfortunate people who want to be part of society but are not accepted.

More recent composers who wrote operas include the Hungarian György Ligeti (1923-2006), the Polish Krzysztof Penderecki (b.1933), the English Sir Harrison Birtwistle and the Americans Philip Glass (b.1937) and John Adams (b.1947).

A nut is a hard-shelled fruit of some plants. They are an important part of the diet. Many dried seeds and fruits are called 'nuts' in English, but only some are nuts to a botanist.

Nuts are made of the seed and the fruit. Most seeds come from fruits, and the seeds are released from the fruit. But nuts have a stony fruit wall which keeps the seed inside.

In common speaking, many so-called nuts, like pistachios and Brazil nuts, are not nuts in a biological sense. Everyday usage of the term often means any hard-walled, edible kernel.

A nut in botany is a simple dry fruit with one seed (rarely two). The ovary wall is hard (stony or woody) when it matures, and the seed is stuck to the ovary wall.

Types of nuts include the oak, hickory, chestnut, stone-oak, birch, hazelnut, and acorn. The peanut, coconut, almond, macadamia, pistachio, pecan, walnut and cashew are not true nuts, but are used like nuts in cooking.

Nuts have nutrients that are important for growing a new plant. They have protein, fats, vitamins, and minerals. Nuts also give these nutrients to humans and wildlife that eat them. However, some people are allergic to nuts.

Publius Ovidius Naso. better known as Ovid in the English-speaking world, was an Ancient Roman poet. He was born on March 20, 43 BC in Sulmona, then called Sulmo. People today  do not know when he died. It was probably either 17 AD or 18 AD. He died in Tomis, which is modern-day Constanţa in Romania.

With Virgil and Horace he is considered among the three great poets of Latin literature. Ovid usually wrote in verses. Ovid was the most widely read classical author in medieval times and the Renaissance.

Numerical analysis studies different algorithms to get approximations for  problems of mathematical analysis. Approximations are used for the following reasons:

One of the earliest known uses of numerical analysis is a Babylonian clay tablet, which approximates the square root of 2. In a unit square, the diagonal has this length. Being able to compute the sides of a triangle is extremely important, for instance, in carpentry and construction.

Numerical analysis continues this long tradition of practical mathematical calculations. Much like the Babylonian approximation of , modern numerical analysis does not seek exact answers, because exact answers are often impossible to obtain in practice. Instead, much of numerical analysis is concerned with obtaining approximate solutions while maintaining reasonable bounds on errors.

Numerical analysis naturally finds applications in all fields of engineering and the physical sciences, but in the 21st century, the life sciences and even the arts have adopted elements of scientific computations. Ordinary differential equations appear in star movement; optimization occurs in portfolio management; numerical linear algebra is important for data analysis; stochastic differential equations and Markov chains are essential in simulating living cells for medicine and biology.

Computers greatly helped this task. Before there were computers, numerical methods often depended on hand interpolation in large printed tables. Since the mid 20th century, computers calculate the required functions instead. These same interpolation formulas nevertheless continue to be used as part of the software algorithms for solving differential equations.

In order to support numerical analysts, many kinds of numerical software has been created:

Philosophy is the study of wisdom.  is the Ancient Greek word for the "love of wisdom".

A person who works in the field of philosophy is called a philosopher. A philosopher is a kind of thinker and researcher.  Philosophers ask general and fundamental questions. The topics of these questions include existence, knowledge, mind, reason, language, and value.

A "philosophy" can also mean a group of ideas or a way of living. However, philosophy as an area of study mostly refers to asking fundamental questions, rather than creating ways of living.

Philosophy is a way of thinking about the world, the universe, and society. In the past, natural sciences like physics and psychology were a part of philosophy. Philosophy also used to be studied with religion. In the past few centuries, the difference between philosophy, sciences and religion has become much greater. Now, they are regarded as separate academic disciplines.

The ideas in philosophy are often general and . However, this does not mean that philosophy is not about the real world. For example, ethics talks about how to be good in our day-to-day lives. Metaphysics questions how the world works and what it is made of. Sometimes, people talk about how they have a ‘personal philosophy’, which means the way a person thinks about the world. This article is not about people's ’personal philosophies’. This article is about the ideas that have been discussed by philosophers..

Questions related to philosophy are called philosophical questions. Most philosophical questions can never be answered with certainty. They focus on important topics, such as the meaning of life, death, and morality. An example of a philosophical question is this: "Is there any knowledge in the world which is so certain that no reasonable man could doubt it?". Other questions asked by philosophers are:

The word 'Philosophy' directly translates to 'love of wisdom'. It comes from the Greek word 'Philosophia', with 'Philo' meaning 'lover' and 'Sophia' meaning 'wisdom.

There are different types of philosophy from different times and places. Some philosophers came from Ancient Greece, such as Plato and Aristotle. Others came from Asia, such as Confucius, Buddha, Adi Shankara, and Laozi. Some philosophers were from the Middle Ages in Europe, such as William of Ockham or Saint Thomas Aquinas.

Influential philosophers from the 1600s and 1700s include Thomas Hobbes, René Descartes, John Locke, Gottfried Leibniz, David Hume, and Immanuel Kant. Some major philosophers from the 1800s are Georg Hegel, Søren Kierkegaard, and Friedrich Nietzsche,  the 1900s gave us Martin Heidegger and Ludwig Wittgenstein.

Philosophy seeks to understand truths about the world and how we see it. It tries to answer important questions by making  based on observations of human nature and the real world.

Sometimes, philosophy tries to answer the same questions as religion and science. Philosophers give different answers to the same question. Many types of philosophy criticize or even attack the beliefs of religion.

In his work Critique of Pure Reason, Immanuel Kant asks the following questions:

The answers to these questions give the different categories of philosophy.

Philosophy can be divided into different groups based on the types of questions asked. Below is a list of the questions split into groups. One possible list of answers to these questions can be called a 'philosophy'. There are many different philosophies, because all of these questions have different answers according to different people. Not all philosophies ask the same questions. These are the questions that are usually asked by philosophers from the Western world:

Metaphysics is sometimes split up into ontology (the philosophy of real life and living things), the philosophy of mind and the philosophy of religion; but these sub-branches are very close together.

Epistemology is the study of knowledge and involves studying what knowledge is, where it came from, what its limitations are.

Ethics is the study of moral phenomena. It asks questions about what right and wrong actually is (metaethics), what should be consider right and wrong (normative ethics), and how this is related to issues in the world (applied ethics).

Other divisions include eschatology, teleology and theology. In past centuries, natural science were included in philosophy, and called "natural philosophy".

It is easy to argue that philosophy is a good thing because it helps people understand the world better. Philosophy helps people learn how to act and think. Philosophers believe that asking philosophical questions is useful because it helps people learn about themselves, the world, and others. It can be argued that "Is philosophy good or bad?" is a philosophical question itself.

However, some people think philosophy is harmful because it encourages free-thinking and questions the beliefs that others hold. Some philosophies also clash with religion, and oppose religious beliefs. For example, philosophies such as some existentialist views say that there is no meaning to life or human existence, except the meaning that we make up or invent. Most religions disagree with this belief.

Many major sciences, including physics, biology, psychology, and chemistry, were once considered a part of philosophy. As facts about nature became more understood, these subjects separated into their own fields. In modern times, subjects such as consciousness, decision theory, and applied ethics have found independence from philosophy. It can be argued that philosophy helped promote the development of these sciences, and that it has historically been an important field of study.

A Philosopher asks questions about ideas, and tries to find answers to those questions. A philosopher also analyzes concepts, arguments, and problems in philosophy.

Some are academics that work for universities or colleges. These philosophers may write books and articles about philosophy and teach classes about the subject to university or college students.

Some are also monks, artists, or scientists. They also think about philosophical ideas and questions.

Philosophers often use both real and imaginary examples to make a point. For example, they may write about a real or fictional person in order to show what they think a good person or a bad person is like.

Some philosophers look for the simplest way to answer a question and say that is probably the right answer. This is a process called Occam's razor. Others believe that complicated answers to questions can also be right. For an example of a philosophical problem, see the God paradox.

Philosophers use logic to solve problems and answer questions. Logical consistency is a cornerstone of any acceptable theory. Philosophers who disagree with a theory will often try to find a logical contradiction in a theory. If they find a contradiction, this gives them a reason to reject that theory. If they do not find an inconsistency, the philosopher might show that the theory leads to a conclusion which is either unacceptable or ridiculous. This second approach is called reductio ad absurdum.

People listed here should be genuine  real good philosophers, rather than social or political campaigners. The lists are not meant to be complete.

Politics (from Ancient Greek πολιτικά (politiká) 'affairs of the cities') is the way that people living in groups make planned decisions.

Politics is about making agreements between people so that they can live together in groups such as tribes, cities, or countries. In large groups, such as countries, some people may spend a lot of their time making such agreements. These people are called politicians. Politicians, and sometimes other people, may get together to form a government. The study of politics in universities is called political science, public affairs, government, political studies, or public administration.

In everyday life, the term "politics" refers to the way that countries are governed, and to the ways that governments make rules and laws to manage the human society properly. Politics can also be seen in other groups, such as in companies, clubs, schools, and churches.

The government  tries to lead the whole group. Governments do things such as:

One of the ways the government leads the group is by making laws and rules which tell everybody what they can and can not do. The government makes these laws so that society will be safe and well-ordered. The law that says "you must not drive a car when you have been drinking alcohol" stops people from drunk driving, which could kill people. The law that says "you must wear a helmet on a motorcycle" makes sure that people protect themselves when riding their motorcycles.

The government can also control people and what happens in a country in other ways besides making laws.

Politics is often compared to ethics (ideas about right and wrong). Ethics is a more abstract study of right and wrong. Ethics is usually more concerned with principle than law or politics or diplomacy, so many people think ethics is not practical. But without some agreement on ethics, there is probably no way to even have a debate, laws or an election. There is always some agreement on ethics and personal conduct in a political system.

In most countries, people have formed political parties to put forward their ideas. There is usually some disagreement between people within a party, but they work together because they feel that they agree on enough things, and they will have more power if they join together. They agree to take the same position on many issues, and agree to support the same changes to law and the same leaders. An election is usually a competition between different parties. Some examples of parties are the , , and the  of Australia.

The Greek philosopher Aristotle wrote that humans are a political animal and that ethics and politics are closely linked.

Niccolò Machiavelli wrote, in his 1532 book, The Prince, that politics was firstly about having and keeping power. He said that without power, a leader could do nothing.

In 1651, Thomas Hobbes wrote Leviathan, a book about politics. Hobbes wrote that people living in groups often give up some of their rights in exchange for some protections from a government. This is the basis of the social contract theory.

In the 1800s, John Stuart Mill developed the "liberal" idea of politics. Mill said that democracy is the most important political development of the 1800s. He said that there should be more protection for individual rights against the government.

Bernard Crick wrote a list of the political virtues, which were about best practices of politics itself.

There are also disagreements between different countries. Attempts to solve the problem with meetings are called diplomacy. This is politics between nations instead of politics within nations. If the problems are not resolved by diplomatic meetings they can lead to war or terrorism.

A political party is an organized group of people or bodies who seek to capture political power through an election in order to run the affairs of a country. It often puts forward candidates for public office. In a democracy, leaders must "run for office" in an election. In a dictatorship, there is generally only one party allowed, that can approve a new leader without non-members having a choice.

A political party is similar to a faction, and can be the same thing. In some systems, members of one party in the legislature are all expected to vote the same way. The laws written by the party or faction with the majority of votes become adopted by the country, so this means whatever party is elected to over half the seats, gets to run the government. The next largest party is often called the "opposition". Sometimes when there are more than two parties with seats, no one party has over half of the seats. Then two or more parties might join to form what is called a "coalition".

Some parties are formed around a single issue or interest group. Others form policies to address all matters of government, known as a "platform".

Many political parties have a set of ideas and beliefs (called its "ideology"). People often describe these ideologies using words such as "conservative" and "liberal".

Common ideologies include environmentalism, socialism (ranging from social democracy to Marxism and Communism), conservatism, democracy, liberalism, and nationalism.

Political parties can be against the law in some places. When some parties get a lot of power, they can make all other political parties illegal. For example, the Nazi Party did this in Germany, and the Communist Party did it in several countries. Some countries make extreme-right parties illegal (such as Vlaams Blok in Belgium). At other times, countries have outlawed far-left parties. For example, West Germany banned the Communist Party in 1956.

A handful of countries like China, North Korea and Cuba still have one-party dictatorships. In some countries, such as Saudi Arabia, all political parties are banned and there is no parliament at all.

In all big democratic countries, parties are very important. But there are a few very small countries, such as the island of Jersey, where most politicians do not belong to any party and where parties do not matter much.

In some democracies, there are only two big political parties. For example, in the United States, there is the Democratic Party and the Republican Party. Some other parties exist but are very small and do not hold seats in Congress.

In other countries there are larger numbers of parties. In the German federal Parliament (or Bundestag), six parties have seats. In the United Kingdom, there are two big parties, one medium-sized party, and many small ones.

A potato is a vegetable, the Solanum tuberosum. It is a small plant with big leaves. The part of the potato that people eat is a tuber that grows under the ground.

Potatoes have a lot of starch and other carbohydrates. Potatoes usually have light-brown or yellowish skins and are white or yellow inside. If the potato gets light on it, the tuber turns green and will be poisonous.

The potato came from the high and cool areas of the Andes mountains. It was grown as a food crop thousands of years ago. When Spanish conquistadores came to South America in the 1500s, they took potatoes back to Europe.

It took nearly 200 years for the potato to become a widely grown crop. In the 1630s the farmers in Ireland began growing potatoes because they grew well in the poor soils. They also have most of the vitamins that people need to live. When a potato plague destroyed the crop in 1845, the Irish Potato Famine killed many people.

The potato plant is now grown in many parts of the world. Captain William Bligh planted potatoes on Bruny Island, Tasmania in 1792. In Australia they are now the largest vegetable crop. Shoestring potatoes are "potatoes cut into very thin long pieces and fried in deep fat : very thin french fries." They are crisp all the way through, whereas potato chips are

The English word "potato" comes from the Spanish word "patata." The Royal Spanish Academy says the Spanish word is a hybrid of the Taíno  ('sweet potato') and the Quechua  ('potato').

Scientists in Germany have used genetic engineering to make a potato called the Amfloratus, which could be grown to make starch for making other things in factories.

Potatoes are almost always eaten cooked. People cook potatoes by boiling, baking, roasting, or frying. Baked potatoes are potatoes cooked in an oven and are soft on the inside. French fries or "chips" are potatoes cut into long strips and fried until soft. Potato chips or “crisps” are potatoes cut into very thin round slices and fried until hard. Shoestring potatoes are "potatoes cut into very thin long pieces and fried in deep fat : very thin french fries" They are crisp all the way through, whereas potato chips are soft inside.

Plants are one of six big groups (kingdoms) of living things. They are autotrophic eukaryotes, this means they have complex cells, and make their own food. Usually, they cannot move (not counting growth). Plants need sunlight, soil and water whereas seeds need warmth.

Plants include familiar types such as trees, herbs, bushes, grasses, vines, ferns, mosses, and green algae. The scientific study of plants, known as botany, has identified about 391,000 extant (living) species of plants.

Most plants grow in the ground, with stems in the air and roots below the surface. Some float on water. The root part absorbs water and some nutrients the plant needs to live and grow. These climb the stem and reach the leaves. The evaporation of water from pores in the leaves pulls water through the plant. This is called transpiration.

A plant needs sunlight, carbon dioxide, minerals from the soil and water to make food by photosynthesis. A green substance in plants called chlorophyll traps the energy from the Sun needed to make food. Chlorophyll is mostly found in leaves, inside plastids, which are inside the leaf cells. The leaf can be thought of as a food factory. Leaves of plants vary in shape and size, but they are always the plant organ best suited to capture solar energy. Once the food is made in the leaf, it is transported to the other parts of the plant such as stems and roots.

The word "plant" can also mean the action of putting something in the ground. For example, farmers plant seeds in the field.

At least some plant cells contain photosynthetic organelles (plastids) which enable them to make food for themselves. With sunlight, water, and carbon dioxide, the plastids make sugars, the basic molecules needed by the plant. Free oxygen (O2) is produced as a by-product of photosynthesis.

Later, in the cell cytoplasm, the sugars may be turned into amino acids for proteins, nucleotides for DNA and RNA, and carbohydrates such as starch. This process needs certain minerals: nitrogen, potassium, phosphorus, iron and magnesium.

Plant nutrition is the study of the chemical elements that are necessary for plant growth.

The roots of plants perform two main functions. First, they anchor the plant to the ground. Second, they absorb water and various nutrients dissolved in water from the soil. Plants use the water to make food. The water also provides the plant with support. Plants that lack water become very limp and their stems cannot support their leaves. Plants which specialise in desert areas are called xerophytes or phreatophytes, depending on the type of root growth.

Water is transported from the roots to the rest of the plant through special vessels in the plant. When the water reaches the leaves, some of it evaporates into the air. Many plants need the help of fungi to make their roots work properly. This plant/fungi symbiosis is called mycorrhiza. Rhizobia bacteria in root nodules help some plants get nitrogen.

Flowers are the reproductive organ only of flowering plants (Angiosperms). The petals of a flower are often brightly colored and scented to attract insects and other pollinators. The stamen is the male part of the plant. It is composed of the filament (a stalk) that holds the anther, which produces the pollen. Pollen is needed for plants to produce seeds. The carpel is the female part of the flower. The top part of the carpel contains the stigma. The style is the neck of the carpel. The ovary is the swollen area at the bottom of the carpel. The ovary produces the seeds. The sepal is a leaf that protects a flower as a bud.

How pollen moves from one flower to another flower is called pollination. This transfer can happen in different ways. Insects such as bees are attracted to bright, scented flowers. When bees go into the flower to gather nectar, the spiky pollen sticks to their back legs. The sticky stigma on another flower catches the pollen when the bee lands or flies nearby it.

Some flowers use the wind to carry pollen. Their dangling stamens produce lots of pollen that is light enough to be carried by the wind. Their flowers are usually small and not highly coloured. The stigmas of these flowers are feathery and hang outside the flower to catch the pollen as it falls.

A plant produces many spores or seeds. Lower plants such as moss and ferns produce spores. The seed plants are the Gymnosperms and Angiosperms. If all the seeds fell to the ground beside the plant, the area might become overcrowded. There might not be enough water and minerals for all the seeds. Seeds usually have some way to get to new places. Some seeds can be dispersed by the wind or by water. Seeds inside juicy fruits are dispersed after being eaten. Sometimes, seeds stick to animals and are dispersed that way.

The question of the earliest plant fossils depends on what is meant by the word "plant".

By the Silurian, fossils of whole plants are preserved, including the lycophyte Baragwanathia. From the Devonian, detailed fossils of rhyniophytes have been found. Early fossils of these ancient plants show the individual cells within the plant tissue. The Devonian period also saw the evolution of the first tree in the fossil record, Wattieza. This fern-like tree had a trunk with  fronds, and produced spores.

The coal measures are a major source of Palaeozoic plant fossils, with many groups of plants in existence at this time. The spoil heaps of coal mines are the best places to collect; coal itself is the remains of fossilised plants, though structural detail of the plant fossils is rarely visible in coal. In the Fossil Forest at Victoria Park in Glasgow the stumps of Lepidodendron trees are found in their original growth positions.

Probability is a part of applied mathematics. It has to do with chance, the study of things that might happen or might not happen.

For example, using probability, one can show that by throwing a coin up in the air and letting it land, half of the time it will land with one side facing up, and half of the time with the other side facing up. Many coins have a picture of the face of a famous person on one side, and something else on the other side. Often people call the side with the face "heads", and the other side "tails".

The probability (p) of an event E, written , is always between zero (impossible) and one (certain).

If we roll a die (plural: dice), then the chance that it will land on 1 is 1/6 (because there are 6 numbers on a die). Similarly, the chance it will land on 2 is also 1/6. The chance it will land on any number between 1 and 6 is 1, because every time we roll the die, it will always land on a number between 1 and 6.

Probability can be figured out using mathematics. For example, if one rolls six dice, the chance of them getting a number more than ten is not obvious, but can be figured out using math and science.

One of the most interesting things about chance is that to figure out the probability that two things will both happen, one usually multiply their two probabilities together. For example, suppose that one wants to know the probability of rolling two dice and getting a certain combination (it could be two 6s or a 3 then a 5, just any two). The possibility of getting a 3 is one in six (), and the possibility of getting a 5 is also one in six, so the chances of getting a 3 then a 5 is ×=⅟36. If that number is expressed as somewhere between 0 and 1, it equals 0.027...7, which is fairly low. The possibility of getting a 3, then a 5, and then a 2 would be ××=⅟216 or 0.00463, which is a much lower probability.

People like Jacob Bernoulli, Pierre-Simon Laplace, or Christiaan Huygens used the word probability, as described above. Other people thought about frequencies; the notion of probability is usually called frequency probability.

Proteins are long-chain molecules built from small units known as amino acids, which are joined in a sequence by peptide bonds. Every sequence of amino acids becomes a specific final shape, allowing living things to use proteins as tiny machines to do work.

They are biochemical compounds.They have one or more polypeptides folded into a round or fibrous shape.

A polypeptide is a single linear polymer chain of amino acids. The sequence of amino acids in a polypeptide comes from the DNA sequence of a gene. The genetic code specifies 20 standard amino acids. Shortly after synthesis, some amino acids are chemically modified. This alters the folding, stability, activity, and function of the protein. Sometimes proteins have non-peptide groups attached, as cofactors.

Proteins are essential to all cells. Like other biological macromolecules (polysaccharides and nucleic acids), proteins take part in virtually every process in cells:

Proteins are formed by a process called "protein synthesis". The cell reads the genetic information of the DNA and translates it into a protein. In eukaryotes, this process begins in the cell nucleus and ends in the ribosome. In prokaryotes all of it is done in the cytoplasm.

Proteins have different functions depending on their shape and sequence. They can be found in meat or muscle. They are used for growth and repair, as well as for strengthening the bones. They help to make tissue and cells. They are in animals, plants, fungi, bacteria, and in the human body.

Muscles are mostly made of protein. When protein is digested, it is broken down into amino acids. These amino acids can then be used to build new protein. Proteins form an important part in foods like milk, eggs, meat, fish, beans, spinach, and nuts. There are four factors that determine what a protein will do. The first is the order of the amino acids. There are 20 different types of amino acids. The second is the little twists in the chain. The third is how the entire structure is folded up. The fourth is whether it is made up of different sub-units. Haemoglobin molecules, for example, are made of four sub-units.

Most proteins are enzymes, and mutations may slow them or stop them working. 50% of human cancers are caused by mutations in the tumour suppressor p53. p53 is a protein which regulates cell division.

Once formed, proteins only exist for a certain period. Then they are and recycled by the cell's machinery. A protein's lifespan is measured by its half-life. This covers a wide range. They can exist for minutes or years with an average lifespan of 1–2 days in mammalian cells.

Proteins are necessary in an animal's diet, since they cannot make all the amino acids they need (they can make most of them). They must get certain amino acids from food. These are called the essential amino acids. Through digestion, animals break down ingested protein into free amino acids. The amino acids are then used in metabolism to make the enzymes and structures the body needs.

There are nine essential amino acids for humans, which are obtained from food. The nine essential amino acids are: histidine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, methionine, phenylalanine, threonine, tryptophan, and valine. Meat contains all the essential amino acids humans need; most plants do not. However, eating a mixture of plants, such as both wheat and peanut butter, or rice and beans, provides all the essential amino acids needed. Soy products like tofu provide all the essential amino acids—as does quinoa—but these are not the only way to get the protein humans need.

Proteins were first described by the Dutch chemist Gerardus Johannes Mulder. Jöns Jacob Berzelius gave proteins their name. Hundreds of other scientists have studied proteins since him.

A planet is a large object such as Venus or Earth that orbits a star. Planets do not make light but can reflect light. Planets are spherical (that is, ball-shaped), because their gravity compresses them into a sphere.

Jupiter is the biggest planet in the Solar System, while the smallest planet in the Solar System is Mercury.

Planets are shaped like a slightly squashed ball (called a spheroid). Objects that orbit planets are called satellites. A star and everything which orbits it are called a star system.

There are eight planets in the Solar System. Pluto used to be called a planet, but in August 2006, the International Astronomical Union decided it was a dwarf planet instead. Because of its similar size to other things in space that were not planets. There are eight more known dwarf planets in the Solar System, Ceres, Eris, Makemake, Haumea, Quaoar, Orcus, Gonggong, and Sedna.

The name "planet" is from the Greek word πλανήτης (planetes), meaning "wanderers", or "things that move".

Until the 1990s, people only knew the planets in the Solar System. Since then 4,905 extrasolar planets (exoplanets) have been discovered in 3,629 planetary systems (January 2022 data). The count includes 808 multi-planetary systems. Known exoplanets range in size from gas giants about twice as large as Jupiter down to just over the size of the Moon. About 100 of these planets are roughly the size as Earth. Nine of these orbit in the habitable zone of their star. Also extrasolar moons (moons orbiting extrasolar planets) have been observed.

The planets are made of elements that are very different from the Sun (which is mostly hydrogen). The Sun is mostly made up of hydrogen, with some helium. Its energy comes from converting hydrogen to helium. In contrast, the planets are mostly made up of larger atoms and molecules which could not have come from the Sun. The materials of planets must have come from another source or sources. Those sources were atoms made in earlier supernovae explosions near the Sun's path as it moved through its part of the Milky Way. The material captured by the Sun's gravity formed the planets. The same thing happened in other planetary systems in the galaxy.

The gas giants are made up of hydrogen gas like the Sun, plus (at their centres) metallic elements like the terrestrial planets.

The planets in the Solar System have names of Greek or Roman gods, except for Earth, because people did not think Earth was a planet in old times. However, Earth is occasionally referred by the name of a Roman god: Terra. Other languages, for example Chinese, use different names. Moons also have names of gods and people from classical mythology. The names of the moons of Uranus are from the plays written by Shakespeare.

Here is a list of planets in the Solar System from the closest to the farthest

There are planets, and smaller objects that also go around the Sun. Some examples of smaller objects are asteroids, comets, and trans-Neptunian objects.

There are three types of planets in the Solar System. They are:

Pi () () is a mathematical constant that is the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter  This produces a number, and that number is always the same. However, the number is rather strange. The number starts as 39793... and continues without end. Numbers like this are called irrational numbers.

3.141592653589793238462643383279502884197169399375105820974944592307816406286208998628034825342117067...

The diameter is the largest chord (line between two points on a circle) which can be fitted inside a circle. It passes through the center of the circle. The distance around a circle is known as the circumference. Even though the diameter and circumference are different for different circles, the number pi remains constant: its value never changes. This is because the relationship between the circumference and diameter is always the same.

pi is defined as the ratio of a circle's circumference  to its diameter :

Pi is often written as "π". It is also an irrational number, meaning it cannot be written as a fraction , where  and  are integers (whole numbers). This basically means that the digits of pi that are to the right of the decimal go forever—without repeating in a pattern, and that it is impossible to write the exact value of pi as a number. Pi can only be approximated, or measured to a value that is close enough for practical purposes.

A value close to pi is 3.14. A common fraction approximation of pi is , which yields approximately 3.14285714. This approximation is 0.04% away from the true value of pi. While this approximation is accepted for most of its use in real life, the fraction  is more accurate (giving about 3.14159292), and can be used when a value closer to pi is needed. Computers can be used to get better approximations of pi.

In March 2019, Emma Haruka Iwao calculated the value of pi to 31.4 trillion digits.

Mathematicians have known about pi for thousands of years, because they have been working with circles for the same amount of time. Civilizations as old as the Babylonians have been able to approximate pi to many digits, such as the fraction  and . Most historians believe that ancient Egyptians had no concept of pi, and that the correspondence is a coincidence.

The first written reference to pi dates to 1900 . Around 1650 , the Egyptian Ahmes gave a value in the Rhind Papyrus. The Babylonians were able to find that the value of pi was slightly greater than 3, by simply making a big circle and then sticking a piece of rope onto the circumference and the diameter, taking note of their distances, and then dividing the circumference by the diameter.

Knowledge of the number pi passed back into Europe and into the hands of the Hebrews, who made the number important in a section of the Bible called the Old Testament. After this, the most common way of trying to find pi was to  a shape of many sides inside any circle, and use the area of the shape to find pi. The Greek philosopher Archimedes, for example, used a polygon shape that had 96 sides in order to find the value of pi, but the Chinese in 500  were able to use a polygon with 16,384 sides to find the value of pi. The Greeks, like Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, were also busy with finding out other properties of the circle, such as how to make squares of circles and squaring the number pi. Since then, many people have been trying to find out more and more precise values of pi.

In the 16th century, better and better ways of finding pi became available, such as the complicated formula that the French lawyer François Viète developed. The first use of the Greek symbol "π" was in an essay written in 1706 by William Jones.

A mathematician named Lambert also showed in 1761 that the number pi was irrational; that is, it cannot be written as a fraction by normal standards. Another mathematician named Lindeman was also able to show in 1882 that pi was part of the group of numbers known as transcendentals, which are numbers that cannot be the solution to a polynomial equation.

Pi can also be used for figuring out many other things beside circles. The properties of pi have allowed it to be used in many other areas of math besides geometry, the study of shapes. Some of these areas are complex analysis, trigonometry, and series.

There are different ways to calculate many digits of pi. This is of limited use though.

Pi can sometimes be used to work out the area or the circumference of any circle. To find the circumference of a circle, use the formula  (Radius). To find the area of a circle, use the formula  (radius squared). This formula is sometimes written as , where  is the variable for the area.

To calculate the circumference of a circle with an error of 1 mm:

People generally celebrate March 14 as Pi Day, because March 14 is also written as "3/14", which represents the first three numbers 3.14 in the approximation of pi. Pi Day was started in 1988 by physicist Larry Shaw at the San Francisco Exploratorium. On March 11, 2009, almost 21 years later, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a resolution proclaiming March 14 to be celebrated as National Pi Day every year.

People have contests to see who can memorize the most digits of pi, and records are kept by Guinness World Records. The current world record was set by Rajveer Meena in 2015.

Religion is a set of beliefs and social-cultural systems, including certain practices, morals, beliefs and worldviews, that relate humanity to supernatural or spiritual elements—though there is no current fully agreed definition on what a religion exactly is. Different religions may or may not have different parts about the divine, sacredness, faith and a supernatural being or beings.

Religion often answers questions about the origin, nature, and purpose of existence, usually including a belief in supernatural entities, such as deities or spirits that have power in the natural world. Religious practices include the rituals and devotions directed at the supernatural. Often religions believe in the spiritual nature of humans. There are many different religions, denominations or sects, each with a different set of beliefs. Some beliefs are also concerned with the moral behavior of humans.

Each religion has different ideas about these things. Each religion also has a "moral code" which is a set of beliefs about how humans should act. Each religion usually has their own type of "devotions" when people worship or pray. They often have rituals (special things that are always done in the same way) for certain times of the year or certain times of a person's life. Other words that are used for religion are "faith" and "belief system". Altogether, followers of religion can be known as 'believers', or 'the faithful'. Few people follow more than one religion at a time.

The largest religions are Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Sikhism, Judaism and Jainism. There are many other religions. People who do not believe in any gods are called atheists. People who say that there is no evidence are called agnostics.

In many religions, one of the main beliefs is that there is a "deity" (or god) who is a great creator spirit. In many religions, there is just one deity that the people believe in. In other religions, there are many deities who each have different roles in the universe. In many religions, there are other types of spirits. These may include angels, devils and other such things which can be both good and bad. The Buddha is considered more of a teacher than a god but still worshipped.

Giving honour to God, the gods or the spirits is an important part of most religions. While this may often be done privately, it is also often done with gatherings of people and rituals. These rituals are often based on old traditions, and may have been done in almost the same way for hundreds, or even thousands of years.

Another main belief is that humans have a "soul" or spirit which lives on after their body has died. The person's spirit is on a journey through life that continues after death. Most religions believe that what a person does during their lifetime will affect what happens to their spirit in the afterlife. Many religions teach that a good person's spirit can reach a special place of peace and happiness such as Heaven or Nirvana, and that a bad person's spirit can travel to a place of pain and suffering such as Hell. Still other religions believe in reincarnation - that instead of going either to Heaven or Hell, spirits of the dead return to earth in a new body.

"Morals" are the way a human behaves to other humans. Most religions make rules about human morals. The rules of how people should act to each other are different in different religions.

For some religions, following a "path" of goodness, truth and duty is very important. This is called Tao in China. In the teachings of Judaism, people were told to "love your neighbour as yourself". In the teachings of Jesus, people were told to think of every single person as their "neighbour" and treat them with love.

Not every religion teaches people to be kind to all other people. In many religions, it has been common for people to believe that they have to act kindly only to some people and not to others. In some religions, people believed that they could please a god by killing or sacrificing another person.

A religion is passed on from one person to another through teachings and stories (which are often called "myths") which may be written down like the Bible, or told from memory like the Dreamtime stories of Australian Aboriginal people. In many religions, there are people who take the role of "priest" and spend their lives teaching others about the religion. There are also people who take the role of "pastor" and spend their life caring for other people. A person may be both a priest and a pastor. They are called by different names in different religions.

Symbols are used to remind people of their religious beliefs. They are also used or worn as a sign to other people that the person belongs to a particular religion. A symbol might be something that is drawn or written, it might be a piece of clothing or jewellery, it might be a sign that a person makes with their body, or it might be a building or monument or artwork. Picture symbols for different religions are shown in the box in the introduction to this article.

In many religions, it is thought important that people should show other people that they are following a particular religion. This might be done in a general way by wearing a symbol or a type of clothing. Many people believe that it is important to tell other people about their religion, so that they can believe as well. This is called "witnessing".

There are many ways to witness. A young person might simply say to their friends "I do not use drugs or get drunk because of my religion". This is a witness. A person may tell their classmates, workmates and friends about their beliefs. A person might go to other people's houses and talk about their beliefs, or invite the people to join in the rituals of the religion, such as going to church or to a religious festival. A person might have printed material such as books or leaflets that they give to other people to read. A person might travel to a different country to teach, to work in a health service or to help people in some other way. (People who do this are called "missionaries".) These are different ways that people witness to their religion.

When a person hears a witness and decides that they will join the religion, this is called a "conversion". Usually a person decides to join a religion because they like what they have read or been told, and they believe that they are hearing the truth. They join the religion because they choose. However, throughout history there have been many times when people have been forced to join a religion by violence and threats. This is still happening today.

In most countries of the world, people are free to belong to whatever religion they choose. This is generally thought of as a basic human right. However, there are parts of the world where it is illegal (against the law) to witness to any religion except the one accepted by the government of the country. People who belong to other religions may be threatened, put in jail or murdered.

Rituals are an important part of the tradition of many religions. In many religions, it is the tradition for people to meet for a celebration on one day in every week. There are also major celebrations that may be held only at certain times of the year, for example, on the birthday of a person who is honoured in that religion. Some religions have celebrations for different seasons of the year, or when the sun or moon is in a certain part of the sky.

In nearly every religion, the important stages of a person's life have a religious celebration. Birth, naming, reaching an age to think for oneself, reaching adulthood, marriage, childbirth, sickness and death are all celebrated by some religions. Having a celebration or special traditions when a person dies is very common.

It is the traditions that are about death that give the earliest evidence of religious beliefs. Scientists have discovered that 120,000 years ago, Neanderthal people started burying their dead. Early Homo sapiens put tools and other things into graves with the bodies, as if they could use them in the afterlife. From 40,000 years ago, many of the objects in graves are small artworks. Scientists believe that these objects were put there for religious reasons.

An institution is one name for an organization. Many religions have organizations that manage the way that people who follow the religion are to act. The organization might employ religious leaders, educate people into the ideas of the religion, manage money, own buildings and make rules. Many religions have sub-groups which are called denominations. In Islam, for example, there is Ahmadiyya, Sunnism, Shi'ism and Sufism.

Most religions have special buildings where people meet. They are often called temples. In Judaism, they are called synagogues. In Christianity, they are called churches. In Islam, they are called mosques. In Buddhism there are pagodas, temples and monasteries. In Hinduism they are called Mandirs. People often try to make their religious building as beautiful as possible. Some religious buildings are great works of architecture.

People often make artworks that are about their religion, or that are used in religious celebration, or are put in a religious building. Religious art comes in all shapes and sizes, from tiny pieces of jewellery to huge statues and paintings. Artworks often give important clues to historians about different ancient religions that are not well understood.

Music is often important in religious celebrations. Singing, chanting and playing musical instruments are often part of regular religious gatherings of people. Special music is often used on special occasions. Many famous composers have written religious music. The words of songs that are 3,000 years old are used every day in Christian churches and Jewish synagogues.

Propaganda is a form of communication to distribute information. It is usually biased. The information is designed to make people feel a certain way or to believe a certain thing. The information is often political.

Often, propaganda is confusing and unfair, which makes it hard to tell whether the information is true or false. Propaganda tends to make disputes last longer and be more difficult to resolve. It can take the form of posters, TV advertisements, and radio announcements.

The word 'propaganda' comes from Latin. At first, it meant 'ideas to be spread around'. But in the First World War, it came to mean political ideas that are supposed to be misleading.

Propaganda is like advertising in some ways. For example, it uses the mass media to spread its ideas. But advertising is usually trying to sell something, whereas propaganda is about ideas. It is often political, and used by states or political parties, not private companies.

Propaganda is often used during wars.  There it can be very useful.  Sometimes it keeps the people of a country happy  telling them that their country is fighting well and telling them how important it is that the enemy is defeated. Sometimes it tries to make people hate the enemy. The information could tell people that the enemy is evil or make them seem not human. Sometimes a government gives propaganda to the enemy  telling them that the war is going badly for them and that they should stop fighting.

When a country is not at war, propaganda can still be used. The government may use propaganda to change what people think about a political situation. A group may try to change the way people act towards an issue.

Propaganda under some countries, like dictatorships, is used along with censorship. While propaganda tries to give people false ideas, censorship forces the ones who disagree with propaganda to keep quiet. Then the propaganda can say everything, because nobody can question it in public.

Propaganda is also used to win people by tricking them. Some people say that cults use propaganda to get people to join them.

Propaganda has been used in every known civilisation. It was used by Rameses II on his monuments in Ancient Egypt; it was used by Ancient Greek orators; it was used by Julius Caesar, and all Roman Emperors. The word itself is formed from propagate, meaning to multiply.

The Catholic Church's Sacra Congregatio de Propaganda Fide carried propaganda much further. This committee, founded in 1622 by Pope Gregory XV, had action branches in most European countries. These were the local branches of the Inquisition, which sought out heretics. With torture and the threat of death by burning at the stake, they forced "heretics" to recant (to publicly withdraw their beliefs). The objective was to remove all challenges to the supremacy of the Church in matters of belief. The 1578 handbook for inquisitors noted  "Punishment does not take place primarily and for the correction and good of the person punished, but for the public good in order that others may become terrified and weaned away from the evils they would commit".

Poland is a country in the eastern region of Central Europe. Its official name is Republic of Poland. It is on the east of Germany (along Oder and Lusatian Neisse). The Czech Republic and Slovakia are to the south, Ukraine and Belarus to the east, and the Baltic Sea, Lithuania, and the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad to the north. The total land area of Poland is about 312,679 km2 (120,728 mi2), slightly larger than Oman. That makes Poland the 77th-largest country in the world, with over 38.5 million people. Most Polish people live in large cities, including the capital, Warsaw (Polish: Warszawa), Łódź, Cracow (Polish: Kraków), the second capital of Poland (first was Gniezno), Szczecin, Gdańsk, Wrocław and Poznań.

The word "Poland" was written officially for the first time in 966. In 1569, Poland formed a strong union with Lithuania called the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. At some point in its history, it was the largest state in Europe and became very influential. Eventually, after a slow decline, the Commonwealth collapsed in 1795. After 123 years of fighting for independence, Poland regained its independence in 1918, after World War I. In 1921, Poland defeated Soviet Russia in the Polish-Soviet War that started in 1919.

However, Poland lost independence again not long after the beginning of World War II, after suffering a defeat by both the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany. Although the government collapsed, the Polish people fought on by forming the largest and most effective resistance movement in German-occupied Europe. It is most notable for disrupting German supply lines to the Eastern Front of World War II, providing military intelligence to the British, and saving more Jewish lives in the Holocaust than any other Allied organization or government. After the war, Poland theoretically regained its independence but became a communist country within the Eastern Bloc. The new government was appointed by Joseph Stalin and was under the control of the Soviet Union.

In 1989, Poland ceased being a communist country and became a liberal democracy. Its change of government was the first in a series of events that led to the states of Eastern and Central Europe regaining their independence and the fall of the USSR in 1991. After the democratic consolidation, Poland joined the European Union on 1 May 2004. Poland is also a member of NATO, the United Nations, and the World Trade Organization.

The first sign of humans in Polish lands was 500,000 years ago. The Bronze Age started around 2400-2300 BC. The Iron Age started around 752-700 BC. At that time the Polish lands were under the influence of the Lusatian culture. About 400 BC Celtic and Germanic tribes lived there. Those people had trade contacts with the Roman Empire.

Over time, Slavs came to Polish lands. Some of those Slavs, now commonly referred to as Western Slavs (though in reality a diverse group of tribes with shared ethnic and cultural features), stayed there and started to create new nations. The most powerful tribe was called the Polans, who united all of the other Slavic tribes living there and is the origin of the name "Poland."

Poland began to form a country around the mid-10th century, during the Piast dynasty. In 966, Prince Mieszko I became a Christian and so the Polish people also became Christians. The next king was Bolesław I of Poland, nicknamed Bolesław the Brave. He conquered many lands and became the first King of Poland. Casimir I of Poland changed the Polish capital from Gniezno to Kraków. In the 12th century, Poland broke into some smaller states after the death of King Bolesław III Wrymouth in 1138 because of his will. Those states were later attacked by Mongol armies in 1241, which slowed down the unification of the small states into the large country of Poland. That finally happened eighty years later, in 1320 when Władysław I became the King of United Poland. His son Casimir III reformed the Polish economy, built new castles, and won the war against the Ruthenian Dukedom. Many people emigrated to Poland, which became a haven. Many Jewish people also moved into Poland during that time. The Black Death, which affected many parts of Europe from 1347 to 1351, did not come to Poland.

After the death of Casimir the Great, the last Piast on the Polish throne, Louis I of Hungary and his daughter Jadwiga of Poland began their rule. She married the Lithuanian prince Jogaila. Their marriage started a new dynasty in Poland: the Jagiellon dynasty. Under the Jagiellon dynasty, Poland made an alliance with its neighbor Lithuania.

In the 17th century Sweden attacked almost all of Poland (this was called “the Deluge”). Many wars against the Ottoman Empire, Russia, the Cossacks, Transylvania and Brandenburg-Prussia ended in 1699. For the next 80 years, the government and the nation were weak, which made Poland dependent on Russia, whose tsars took advantage of this by offering money to dishonest members of the Polish government to block new ideas and solutions. Russia, Prussia, and Austria conquered all of Poland into three pieces in 1772, 1793 and 1795, which dissolved the country. A constitution called the Constitution of 3 May, was made in 1791.

Napoleon made another Polish state, the Duchy of Warsaw, but after the Napoleonic wars, Poland was divided again by the countries at the Congress of Vienna. The eastern part was ruled by the Russian tsar. The Polish people did not like that and often rebelled (two large rebellions in 1830 and 1863). During World War I, the Allies agreed to restore the independence of Poland. Soon after the surrender of Germany in November 1918, Poland became the Second Polish Republic (II Rzeczpospolita Polska). It got its freedom after several military conflicts; the largest was the 1919-1921 Polish-Soviet War. The most famous event from that time was the Battle of Warsaw, in which the leader of Poland, Piłsudski, defended Europe from ther Soviet invasion.

During the Second Polish Republic Poland made quick advancements in science, mathematics and many other fields. Polish mathematicians would break the German enigma code and the Soviet cypher.

On September 1, 1939, World War II started when Germany attacked Poland. The Soviet Union attacked Poland on September 17 .Warsaw was defeated on September 28. The last unit was destroyed in April 1940, under Mjr. Hubal. Poland divided into one part ruled by Nazi Germany and the other by the Soviet Union. More than 6 million Polish people died, and half of then were Jewish. Most of the deaths were part of the Holocaust in which 6 million Jews and 1.5 million Poles were killed. At the war's end, Poland's borders were moved west to push the eastern border to the Curzon line. The western border was moved to the Oder-Neisse line. The new Poland became 20% smaller by 77,500 square kilometres (29,900 sq mi). The shift forced millions of Poles, Germans, Ukrainians, and Jews to move.

After these events, Poland gradually became a communist country. It was supposedly an independent country, but in reality, the new government was appointed by the Soviet leader, Joseph Stalin, and was under the control of the Soviet Union. The country was then renamed the People's Republic of Poland. There are many Poles in the neighboring countries Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania (the three countries were part of the Soviet Union until 1991), as well as in other countries. Most Poles outside of Poland are in the United States, especially in Chicago. Germany and the United Kingdom are also home to a large Polish diaspora. The most recent mass emigration of Poles to western countries began after 1989.

In 1989, Solidarity, a trade union led by Lech Wałęsa, helped to defeat the communist government in Poland. Even before that event, Lech Wałęsa was given a Nobel Prize for leading the first non-communist trade union fighting for democracy in the Eastern Bloc. When communism ended in Poland there were many improvements in human rights, such as freedom of speech, democracy, etc. In 1991 Poland became a member of the Visegrád Group and joined NATO in 1999 along with the Czech Republic and Hungary. Polish voters then voted to join the European Union in a vote in June 2003. The country joined the EU on May 1, 2004.

Currently, the Prime Minister is Donald Tusk. On 10 April 2010 the President Lech Kaczyński died in a government plane crash in Smolensk in Russia. The president is elected directly by the citizens for a five-year term. The Prime Minister is appointed by the President and confirmed by the Sejm, the lower chamber of Parliament legislature for the country. It has 460 deputies elected every four years.

Poland's territory is a plain reaching from the Baltic Sea in the north to the Carpathian Mountains in the south. Within that plain, the land varies from east to west.

The Polish Baltic coast is mostly smooth but has natural harbors in the Gdańsk-Gdynia region and Szczecin in the far northwest. This coast has several spits, dunes, and coastal lakes. Coast lakes are former bays that have been cut off from the sea. These areas are sometimes called lagoons. Szczecin Lagoon is on the western border with Germany. The Vistula Lagoon is on the eastern border with Kaliningrad, province of Russia. The longest river in Poland, the Vistula river, empties into the Vistula Lagoon and also directly into the Baltic Sea.

The northeastern region is densely wooded, sparsely populated, and lacks agricultural and industrial resources. The geographical region has four hilly districts of moraines and lakes created by moraines. These formed during and after the Pleistocene ice age. The Masurian Lake District is the largest of the four districts and covers much of northeastern Poland.

Poland has many lakes. In Europe, only Finland has more lakes. The largest lakes are Śniardwy and Mamry. In addition to the lake districts in the north, there are also many mountain lakes in the Tatras mountains.

South of the northeastern region is the regions of Silesia and Masovia, which are marked by the broad ice-age river valleys. The Silesia region has many resources and people. Coal is abundant. Lower Silesia has large copper mining. Masovian Plain is in central Poland. It is in the valleys of three large rivers: Vistula, Bug and Narew.

Further south is the Polish mountain region. These mountains include the Sudetes and the Carpathian Mountains. The highest part of the Carpathians is the Tatra mountains which is along Poland’s southern border. The tallest mountain in Poland, Rysy at 2,503 m (8,210 ft), is in the High Tatras.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Poland was  on 29 July 1921 in Prószków. The lowest temperature ever recorded in Poland was  on 11 January 1940 in Siedlce.

Poland is made of sixteen regions known as voivodeships (województwa, singular - województwo). They are basically created from the country's historical regions, whereas those of the past two decades (till 1998) had been focused on and named for separate cities. The new units range in areas from under 10,000 km2 (Opole Voivodeship) to over 35,000 km2 (Masovian Voivodeship). Voivodeships are controlled by voivod governments, and their legislatures are called voivodeship sejmiks.

The sixteen voivodeships that make up Poland are further divided into powiaty (singular powiat), second-level units of administration, which are about the same as to a county, district or prefecture in other countries.

Almost no Polish literature remains before Christianisation in the 10th century. Polish literature was written in the Latin language during the Middle Ages. The Polish language was accepted as equal to Latin after the Renaissance for literature.

Jan Kochanowski was a leading poet of European Renaissance literature in the 16th century. Other great Polish poets include Adam Mickiewicz who wrote Pan Tadeusz epic in 1834.

Several Polish novelists have won the Nobel prize. Henryk Sienkiewicz won in 1905 dramatized versions of beginnings of Christianity (Quo Vadis). Władysław Reymont won a Nobel prize in 1924. He wrote the novel Chłopi, recently filmed. Olga Tokarczuk 2018. Two Polish poets won Nobel prizes as well. One is Czesław Miłosz (1980) and the second Wisława Szymborska (1996).

Stanisław Lem is a famous science fiction author in the modern era. His Solaris novel was made twice into a feature film.

In the past, Poland was inhabited by people from different nations and of different religions (mainly Catholics, Orthodox and Judaism). This changed after 1939, because of the Nazi Holocaust which killed many Polish Jews. After World War II, the country was changed into a communist country, by the Warsaw Pact which included most central European countries and Russia Russia.

Today 38,038,000 people live in Poland (2011). In 2002 96.74% of the population call themselves Polish, while 471,500 people (1.23%) claimed another nationality. 774,900 people (2.03%) did not declare any nationality. Nationalities, or ethnic groups in Poland are Silesians, Germans (most in the former Opole Voivodeship), Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Russians, Jews, Roma and Belarusians. The Polish language is part of the West Slavic section of the Slavic languages. It is also the official language of Poland. English and German are the most common second languages studied and spoken.

In the past few years, Poland's population has gone down because of an increase in emigration and a sharp drop in the birth rate. In 2006, the census office estimated the total population of Poland at 38,536,869, a very small rise from the 2002 figure of 38,230,080. Since Poland's accession to the European Union, many Polish people have moved to work in Western European countries like the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland. Some organizations state people have left because of high unemployment (10.5%) and better opportunities for work somewhere else. In April 2007, the Polish population of the United Kingdom had risen to about 300,000 people and estimates predict about 65,000 Polish people living in the Republic of Ireland. However, in recent years strong growth of the Polish economy and the increasing value of Polish currency (PLN) makes many Polish immigrants go back home. In 2007, the number of people leaving the country was lower than people who are coming back. Poland became an attractive place to work for people from other countries (mainly Ukraine).

A Polish minority is still present in neighboring countries of Ukraine, Belarus, and Lithuania, as well as in other countries. The largest number of ethnic Poles outside of the country can be found in the United States.

The lists below show the population count of Poland's largest cities based on 2005 estimates.

Portugal () is a country in Southern Europe on the Iberian Peninsula. It is bordered by the North Atlantic Ocean to the west and south and by Spain to the north and east. Its capital city is Lisbon. It has been a member of the European Union since 1986.

Portugal was under a dictatorship between 1926 and 1974 called Estado Novo. This dictatorship was ended by a peaceful revolution called the Carnation Revolution. The Portuguese economy has been very good since then although it was hit hard by the recession of 2007-2008.

It once had an empire called the Portuguese Empire, and was a powerful maritime nation from the 1500s to the 1800s, being the tenth-largest empire, with a maximum land area of 10.4 million km² which included Brazil, Angola, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau, East Timore, São Tomé and Príncipe, and Portuguese Ceylon (Sri Lanka), as well as Macau in China (until 2002).

Portugal is a popular holiday destination but is sometimes overlooked in favor of larger countries like France, Spain and Italy. The Algarve region in the south and the capital Lisbon are the most popular destinations.

The country has a national football team. Portugal won the Eurovision Song Contest in 2017, and hosted the contest the following year.

Three groups of islands in the Atlantic Ocean are also part of Portugal: the Azores (Açores), Madeira and the Savage Isles (Ilhas Selvagens). The Savage Isles are a small group of uninhabited islands, administered by Madeira. Portugal claims that Olivença is also part of its territory, but it is controlled by Spain.

Portugal became a kingdom in 1139 but was not officially recognized until 1143. It has had links with England since the 1100s by a treaty. The border with Spain has been almost the same since the 13th century. Fishing and trading with other countries were important here.

Portugal was important in world exploration for two reasons. Firstly, Prince Henry the Navigator of Portugal was very interested in exploration. Secondly, inventions in navigation led to a greater knowledge of geography.

This exploration of the world began the Portuguese Empire. The country was a world power during the 15th and 16th centuries. It tried to colonize Canada in the 16th century. However, it lost a lot of money soon after this. Portugal and Spain were in the Iberian Union from 1580 to 1640. The 1755 Lisbon earthquake devastated the capital and weakened the aristocracy. The country was occupied during the Peninsular War during the early 1800s. It lost its largest colony, Brazil, in 1822.

In 1910, the Kingdom of Portugal ended and the nation became a republic. Eight years after Portugal's involvement in World War I, a military group took control of the country from the Portuguese First Republic in the 28 May coup d’état. This began a time of rule by authoritarian governments called Ditadura Nacíonal that later became known as Estado Novo. During World War II Portugal remained neutral but friendly to Britain and Spain.

In 1974, a peaceful left-wing army coup, called the Carnation Revolution took place that overthrew the military dictatorship and ended the Portuguese Colonial War. Political prisoners and opponents of António de Oliveira Salazar were freed. The coup was an important part of Portugal’s transition to democracy and changed the way the country was run.

In 1975, Portugal allowed its colonies in Africa to become independent: Mozambique, Angola, Guinea-Bissau, Cape Verde and São Tomé and Príncipe.

East Timor in Asia declared itself independent from Portugal on 28 November 1975, and was invaded and occupied by Indonesian forces nine days later. Another Asian colony, Macau, became part of China.

Portugal joined the European Union in 1986. The main language of Portugal is Portuguese.

Some famous Portuguese people are D. Afonso Henriques, Henry the Navigator, Bartolomeu Dias, Vasco da Gama, Pedro Álvares Cabral, Ferdinand Magellan, Luís de Camões, Fernando Pessoa, Amália Rodrigues, Álvaro Siza Vieira, and Eduardo Souto de Moura.

Luís de Camões wrote the national poem of Portugal. It is called Os Lusíadas and was written in 1572.

The 2010–2014 Portuguese financial crisis resulted in an international bailout and intense austerity policies, causing lasting social impacts.

Photosynthesis is a process in which green plants make their own food from sunlight, using the help of leaves to produce sugar. It is the process by which these organisms convert light energy into chemical energy, which is used to produce food. Photosynthesis is the process by which plant cells containing chlorophyll produce food substances (glucose and starch) from carbon dioxide and water, and oxygen is released.

Photosynthesis is not an accident. It happens because its building blocks occur in space, and get included when planets form. We have no idea as to how common or rare this process is. We do know that higher elements are formed in supernovae, and that is the origin of all elements higher than helium. The higher elements found in Halley's Comet have been analysed.

Before photosynthesis, the Earth's atmosphere had almost no oxygen. Even without oxygen, some simple life-forms could have existed. But the key event for life as we know it was the Great Oxygenation Event.

Photosynthesis can happen in different ways, but there are some parts that are common.

Photosynthesis occurs in the chloroplasts in leaves (or other green tissues). They contain chlorophyll, the green pigment that absorbs light energy. In leaves, palisade cells have chloroplasts to capture light.

Oxygen is produced as a result of photosynthesis and released into the atmosphere through respiration. All the oxygen in the atmosphere has its origin in plants (including those microorganisms which do photosynthesis).

Glucose is used in respiration (to release energy in cells). It is stored in the form of starch (which is converted back to glucose for respiration in the dark). Glucose can also be converted into other compounds for growth and reproduction e.g. cellulose, nectar, fructose, amino acids and fats.

Photosynthesis has two main sets of reactions, known as phases. Light-dependent reactions which need light to do work; and light-independent reactions which do not need light to do work.

Light energy from the sun is used to split water molecules (photolysis). The sunlight hits chloroplasts in the plant. This causes an enzyme to split the water. Water, when split, gives oxygen, hydrogen, and electrons.

Hydrogen, along with electrons energized by light, converts NADP into NADPH which is then used in the light-independent reactions. Oxygen gas diffuses out of the plant as a waste product of photosynthesis, and ATP is synthesized from ADP and inorganic phosphate. This all happens in the grana of chloroplasts.

During this reaction, sugars are built up using carbon dioxide and the products of the light-dependent reactions (ATP and NADPH) and various other chemicals found in the plant in the Calvin Cycle. Therefore, the light-independent reaction cannot happen without the light-dependent reaction. Carbon dioxide diffuses into the plant and along with chemicals in the chloroplast, ATP, and NADPH, glucose is made and finally, transported around the plant by translocation.

If there is little light shining on a plant, the light-dependent reactions will not work efficiently. This means that photolysis (breakdown of water by light) will not happen quickly, and therefore little NADPH and ATP will be made. This shortage of NADPH and ATP will lead to the light-independent reactions not working as NADPH and ATP are needed for the light-independent reactions to work.

The light intensity required is easily investigated in an aquatic plant such as pondweed. The oxygen bubbles given off can be counted or the volume measured. By changing the distance between light and plant, the light intensity is made to vary. Change in light intensity will affect the change in rate of photosynthesis. Artificial lighting can be used in the dark to maximise the photosynthetic rate.

Carbon dioxide is used in the light-independent reactions. It combines with NADPH and ATP and various other chemicals to form glucose. Therefore, if there is not enough carbon dioxide, then there will be a build-up of NADPH and ATP and not enough glucose will be formed.

There are many enzymes working in photosynthetic reactions – such as the enzyme in photolysis. All enzymes work best at their optimum temperature. All light-dependent and light-independent reactions will occur normally at average or optimum temperatures. Tropical plants have a higher temperature optimum than the plants adapted to temperate climates.

When the temperatures are too low, there is little kinetic energy, so the reaction rate decreases. If the temperatures are too high, the enzymes become denatured and the catalysis of photosynthesis reaction stops.

Greenhouses must keep an optimum temperature for normal functioning of plants.

The first photosynthetic organisms probably evolved early in the history of life. They may have used reducing agents such as hydrogen or hydrogen sulfide as sources of electrons, rather than water. Cyanobacteria appeared later, and the excess oxygen they produced caused the oxygen catastrophe. After this, the evolution of complex life was possible.

The photosystems of green sulfur bacteria and those of cyanobacteria, algae, and higher plants are not the same. That shows photosynthesis occurred not once, but several times over.

Today, the average rate of energy capture by photosynthesis globally is about 130 terawatts. This is about six times larger than the current power used by human civilization.

Photosynthetic organisms also convert about  100–115 thousand million metric tonnes of carbon into biomass per year.

Plato ( ) was one of the most important philosophers of all time. Born to wealthy parents in Athens, Greece, Plato was a student of Socrates (who did not write) and, later, became the teacher of Aristotle. Plato started a university in Athens called the Academy where he taught. Plato wrote about many ideas in philosophy that are still talked about today, including political philosophy and the philosophy of language. One modern scholar, Alfred North Whitehead, said that all European philosophy since Plato is a series of footnotes to his works.

Plato wrote his books in the form of conversations called dialogues. In a dialogue, two or more people talk about ideas and sometimes disagree over them. The Laws is Plato's longest dialogue and probably his last.

Socrates is usually the main person in Plato's dialogues. Often, Socrates talks with people and tries to see if they believe anything that is illogical. Because of this, some people became angry with Socrates and tried to kill him. In Plato's Apology, Socrates is put on trial by these people and is eventually sentenced to death by drinking poison.

Plato is famous for developing the theory of forms. This theory says that everything in our world is imperfect but  to a perfect version of itself that exists in another .

For example, there are wooden chairs, metal chairs, square chairs, big chairs, small chairs, etc. All the chairs we can ever sit in, according to Plato, are imperfect versions of the perfect form of “chairness,” the ideal chair. The same is true of every other object our senses can : it is imperfect but corresponds to a perfect version of itself.

One simple way to think about Plato's theory is with numbers. The difference between "chairness" and a regular chair is similar to the difference between the number five and having five apples, oranges, pears, etc.

In other words, Plato thought that the world we live in is just a shadow of the real, "intelligible realm," which only a few people will ever understand. He thought that all perfect forms come from perfection itself, which he called "the good.”

People who study Plato argue about whether Socrates really said the same things that Plato makes him say, or whether Plato just used Socrates as a character to make the ideas he was talking about seem more important.

There are many dialogues that were written by Plato. This list includes those he probably did write:

Psychology is the study of the mind and brain. It studies thoughts, feelings, and behaviors in humans and animals. Psychology aims to explain how the mind works. It also looks at how our actions relate to how we think.

A lot of the research in psychology is done on humans. However, animals are also used in research. Examples of this are classical conditioning and operant conditioning.

Psychology is a vast subject area. It covers many topics. It is divided into branches. Psychology has a lot in common with other fields of research. Ideas in psychology overlap with ideas in the sciences of anatomy, biology, neuroscience and physiology.

A person who works in the field of psychology is called a psychologist. A psychologist tries to understand how the mind works so that they can help people and animals. They must go through higher education for many years in order to become a professional. These  attempt to explain how the mind functions by itself (individual) and with others (social). They also see how the mind affects the body. They work with social, behavioral, and cognitive sciences.

Psychology has been split up into smaller parts called branches. These are subjects in psychology that try to answer a particular group of questions about how people think. The branches of psychology that are often studied are:

Psychology is a type of science, so research psychologists use many of the same types of methods that researchers from other natural and social sciences use.

Psychologists make theories to try to explain a behavior or pattern they see. Based on their theory, they make predictions. Then, they carry out experiments or collect data to see if their prediction is right or wrong.

Some types of experiments cannot be done on people because it would take too long, cost too much money, risk people's health, or would be unethical. There are also other ways psychologists study the mind and behavior scientifically, and test their theories. Psychologists might wait for some events to happen on their own; they might look at patterns among existing groups of people in natural environments; or they might do experiments on animals (which can be simpler and more ethical to study).

Just like in other fields of science, a good psychological theory can be proven wrong as new information about a subject is learned. Just like in any natural science, psychologists can never be completely sure that their theory is correct. If a theory can be proved wrong, but experiments do not prove it wrong, it is more likely that the theory is accurate. This is called falsifiability.

Psychologists use many tools as part of their daily work. Psychologists use surveys to ask people how they feel and what they think. They may use special devices to look at the brain and to see what it is doing. Psychologists use computers to collect data as they measure how people behave in response to pictures, words, symbols, or other stimuli. Psychologists also use statistics to help them analyze the data that they get from their experiments.

Not all psychology is scientific psychology. Psychodynamic psychology and depth psychology try to interpret dreams to understand the unconscious mind. They are older approaches to psychology begun by Carl Jung. He was interested in finding methods to measure personality traits.

Humanistic psychology and existential psychology believe that it is more important to understand personal meaning than to find causes and effects of mental processes and behaviors.

Psychologists are people who work in the field of psychology. A psychologist may work in either basic research or applied research. Basic research is the study of people or animals to learn more about them. Applied research uses what is learned from basic research to solve real-world problems. A qualified clinical psychologist can become a therapist or counselor.

To become a psychologist, a person must first get a basic degree at a university and go to graduate school. A Master's degree, either MSc (Master of Science) or MA (Master of Arts), allows for work such as a school psychologist. A doctorate degree takes a longer time to earn because it includes doing research and writing a detailed report. A doctoral graduate uses the initials PhD or DPhil (Doctor of Philosophy). Some clinical psychologists earn a Doctor of Psychology degree and use the initials PsyD after their name. The American Psychological Association say that people need a PhD (or PsyD) and a current state license in the U.S. to call themselves a psychologist.

The words psychologist and psychiatrist may be confused with each other. A psychiatrist has graduated from medical school and uses the initials MD or its equivalent (MB ChB in London University, for example). A psychiatrist or doctor may work with a psychologist by prescribing and checking the effects of medications.

In mathematics, the  Pythagorean theorem or Pythagoras's theorem is a statement about the sides of a right triangle.

One of the angles of a right triangle is always equal to 90 degrees, one of the angles of a rectangle. This angle is the right angle. The two sides next to the right angle are called the legs and the other side is called the hypotenuse. The hypotenuse is the side opposite to the right angle, and it is always the longest side.

The Pythagorean theorem says that the area of a square on the hypotenuse (longest side) is equal to the sum of the areas of the squares on the legs (short sides). In this picture, the area of the blue square added to the area of the red square makes the area of the purple square. It was named after the Greek mathematician Pythagoras:

If the lengths of the legs are a and b, and the length of the hypotenuse is c, then, .

For example, if the shorter sides measure  3.75 and 5, then the theorem says to multiply both numbers by themselves, then add to get the long side:

There are many different proofs of this theorem. They fall into four categories:

One proof of the Pythagorean theorem was found by a Greek mathematician, Eudoxus of Cnidus.

We can get another proof of the Pythagorean theorem by using similar triangles.

You can take the two smaller squares and cut them into triangles. These triangles can be put together to make a square the same size as the third square.

This proof and other ones based on cutting and rearranging pieces of the shapes rely on the fact that cutting shapes into pieces and moving them around does not change the area as long as no pieces are lost.

These proofs are often used to teach the theorem for the first time. The process of cutting and rearranging pieces of a shape is easy to understand and do yourself.

Pythagorean triples or triplets are three whole numbers which fit the equation .

The triangle with sides of 3, 4, and 5 is a well known example. If a=3 and b=4, then  because . This can also be shown as

The three-four-five triangle works for all multiples of 3, 4, and 5. In other words, numbers such as 6, 8, 10 or 30, 40 and 50 are also Pythagorean triples. Another example of a triple is the 12-5-13 triangle, because .

A Pythagorean triple that is not a multiple of other triples is called a primitive Pythagorean triple. Any primitive Pythagorean triple can be found using the expression , but the following conditions must be satisfied. They place restrictions on the values of  and .

If all four conditions are satisfied, then the values of  and  create a primitive Pythagorean triple.

and  create a primitive Pythagorean triple. The values satisfy all four conditions. ,  and , so the triple  is created.

Quantum mechanics explains how the universe works with things that are even smaller than atoms. It is also called  quantum physics or quantum theory. Mechanics is the part of physics that explains how things move and quantum is the Latin word for 'how much'. A quantum of energy is the least amount possible (or the least extra amount), and quantum mechanics describes how that energy moves.

Atoms were once believed to be the smallest pieces of matter, but modern science has shown that there are even smaller particles called subatomic particles, like protons, neutrons and electrons. Quantum mechanics describes how the particles that make up atoms work.

Quantum physics also tells us how electromagnetic waves (like light) work. Wave–particle duality means that particles behave like waves and waves behave like particles. (They are not two kinds of things, they are something like both: this is called .) Much of modern physics and chemistry can be described and understood using the mathematical rules of quantum mechanics.

The math used to study subatomic particles and electromagnetic waves is very complex because they act in very strange ways.

Photons are particles that are point-sized, tinier than atoms. Photons are like "packets" or packages of energy. Light sources such as candles or lasers produce light in bits called photons.

The more photons a lamp produces, the brighter the light. Light is a form of energy that behaves like the waves in water or radio waves. The distance between the top of one wave and the top of the next wave is called a 'wavelength'. Each photon carries a certain amount, or 'quantum', of energy depending on its wavelength.

A light's color depends on its wavelength. The color violet (the bottom or innermost color of the rainbow) has a wavelength of about 400 nm ("nanometers") which is 0.00004 centimeters or 0.000016 inches. Photons with wavelengths of 10-400 nm are called ultraviolet (or UV) light. Such light cannot be seen by the human eye. On the other end of the visual spectrum, red light is about 700 nm. Infrared light is about 700 nm to 300,000 nm. Human eyes are not sensitive to infrared light either.

Wavelengths are not always so small. Radio waves have longer wavelengths.  The wavelengths for an FM radio can be several meters in length (for example, stations transmitting on 99.5 FM are emitting radio energy with a wavelength of about 3 meters, which is about 10 feet). Each photon has a certain amount of energy related to its wavelength. The shorter the wavelength of a photon, the greater its energy. For example, an ultraviolet photon has more energy than an infrared photon.

Wavelength and frequency (the number of times the wave crests per second) are inversely proportional, which means a longer wavelength will have a lower frequency, and vice versa. If the color of the light is infrared (lower in frequency than red light), each photon can heat up what it hits. So, if a strong infrared lamp (a heat lamp) is pointed at a person, that person will feel warm, or even hot, because of the energy stored in the many photons. The surface of the infrared lamp may even get hot enough to burn someone who may touch it.

Humans cannot see infrared light, but we can feel the radiation in the form of heat.  For example, a person walking by a brick building that has been heated by the sun will feel heat from the building without having to touch it.

The mathematical equations of quantum mechanics are abstract, which means it is impossible to know the exact physical properties of a particle (like its position or momentum) for sure. Instead, a mathematical function called the wavefunction provides information about the probability with which a particle has a given property. For example, the wavefunction can tell you what the probability is that a particle can be found in a certain location, but it can't tell you where it is for sure. Because of this uncertainty and other factors, you cannot use classical mechanics (the physics that describe how large objects move) to predict the motion of quantum particles.

Ultraviolet light is higher in frequency than violet light, such that it is not even in the visible light range. Each photon in the ultraviolet range has a lot of energy, enough to hurt skin cells and cause a sunburn. In fact, most forms of sunburn are not caused by heat; they are caused by the high energy of the sun's UV rays damaging your skin cells. Even higher frequencies of light (or electromagnetic radiation) can penetrate deeper into the body and cause even more damage. X-rays have so much energy that they can go deep into the human body and kill cells. Humans cannot see or feel ultraviolet light or x-rays. They may only know they have been under such high frequency light when they get a radiation burn. Areas where it is important to kill germs often use ultraviolet lamps to destroy bacteria, fungi, etc. X-rays are sometimes used to kill cancer cells.

Quantum mechanics started when it was discovered that if a particle has a certain frequency, it must also have a certain amount of energy. Energy is proportional to frequency (E ∝ f). The higher the frequency, the more energy a photon has, and the more damage it can do. Quantum mechanics later grew to explain the internal structure of atoms. Quantum mechanics also explains the way that a photon can interfere with itself, and many other things never imagined in classical physics.

Max Planck discovered the relationship between frequency and energy. Nobody before had ever guessed that frequency is directly proportional to energy (this means that as one of them doubles, the other does, too). Under what are called natural units, then the number representing the frequency of a photon would also represent its energy. The equation would then be:

But the way physics grew, there was no natural connection between the units that were used to measure energy and the units commonly used to measure time (and therefore frequency). So the formula that Planck worked out to make the numbers all come out right was:

or, energy equals h times frequency. This h is a number called Planck's constant after its discoverer.

Quantum mechanics is based on the knowledge that a photon of a certain frequency means a photon of a certain amount of energy. Besides that relationship, a specific kind of atom can only give off certain frequencies of radiation, so it can also only give off photons that have certain amounts of energy.

Isaac Newton thought that light was made of very small things that we would now call particles (he referred to them as "Corpuscles"). Christiaan Huygens thought that light was made of waves. Scientists thought that a thing cannot be a particle and a wave at the same time.

Scientists did experiments to find out whether light was made of particles or waves. They found out that both ideas were right — light was somehow both waves and particles. The Double-slit experiment performed by Thomas Young showed that light must act like a wave. The Photoelectric effect discovered by Albert Einstein proved that light had to act like particles that carried specific amounts of energy, and that the energies were linked to their frequencies. This experimental result is called the "wave-particle duality" in quantum mechanics. Later, physicists found out that everything behaves both like a wave and like a particle, not just light. However, this effect is much smaller in large objects.

Here are some of the people who discovered the basic parts of quantum mechanics: Max Planck, Albert Einstein, Satyendra Nath Bose, Niels Bohr, Louis de Broglie, Max Born, Paul Dirac, Werner Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, Erwin Schrödinger, John von Neumann, and Richard Feynman. They did their work in the first half of the 20th century.

Quantum mechanics formulae and ideas were made to explain the light that comes from glowing hydrogen. The quantum theory of the atom also had to explain why the electron stays in its orbit, which other ideas were not able to explain. It followed from the older ideas that the electron would have to fall in to the center of the atom because it starts out being kept in orbit by its own energy, but it would quickly lose its energy as it revolves in its orbit. (This is because electrons and other charged particles were known to emit light and lose energy when they changed speed or turned.)

Hydrogen lamps work like neon lamps, but neon lamps have their own unique group of colors (and frequencies) of light. Scientists learned that they could identify all elements by the light colors they produce. They just could not figure out how the frequencies were determined.

Then, a Swiss mathematician named Johann Balmer figured out an equation that told what λ (lambda, for wave length) would be:

where B is a number that Balmer determined to be equal to 364.56 nm.

This equation only worked for the visible light from a hydrogen lamp. But later, the equation was made more general:

where R is the Rydberg constant, equal to 0.0110 nm−1, and n must be greater than m.

Putting in different numbers for m and n, it is easy to predict frequencies for many types of light (ultraviolet, visible, and infared). To see how this works, go to Hyperphysics and go down past the middle of the page. (Use H = 1 for hydrogen.)

In 1908, Walter Ritz made the Ritz combination principle that shows how certain gaps between frequencies keep repeating themselves. This turned out to be important to Werner Heisenberg several years later.

In 1905, Albert Einstein used Planck's idea to show that a beam of light is made up of a stream of particles called photons. The energy of each photon depends on its frequency. Einstein's idea is the beginning of the idea in quantum mechanics that all subatomic particles like electrons, protons, neutrons, and others are both waves and particles at the same time. (See picture of atom with the electron as waves at atom.) This led to a theory about subatomic particles and electromagnetic waves called wave-particle duality. This is where particles and waves were neither one nor the other, but had certain properties of both.

In 1913, Niels Bohr came up with the idea that electrons could only take up certain orbits around the nucleus of an atom. Under Bohr's theory, the numbers called m and n in the equation above could represent orbits. Bohr's theory said electrons could begin in some orbit m and end up in some orbit n, or an electron could begin in some orbit n and end up in some orbit m. If a photon hits an electron, its energy will be absorbed, and the electron will move to a higher orbit because of that extra energy. Under Bohr's theory, if an electron falls from a higher orbit to a lower orbit, then it will have to give up energy in the form of a photon. The energy of the photon will equal the energy difference between the two orbits, and the energy of a photon makes it have a certain frequency and color. Bohr's theory provided a good explanation of many aspects of subatomic phenomena, but failed to answer why each of the colors of light produced by glowing hydrogen (and by glowing neon or any other element) has a brightness of its own, and the brightness differences are always the same for each element.

By the time Niels Bohr came out with his theory, most things about the light produced by a hydrogen lamp were known, but scientists still could not explain the brightness of each of the lines produced by glowing hydrogen.

Werner Heisenberg took on the job of explaining the brightness or "intensity" of each line. He could not use any simple rule like the one Balmer had come up with. He had to use the very difficult math of classical physics that figures everything out in terms of things like the mass (weight) of an electron, the charge (static electric strength) of an electron, and other tiny quantities. Classical physics already had answers for the brightness of the bands of color that a hydrogen lamp produces, but the classical theory said that there should be a continuous rainbow, and not four separate color bands. Heisenberg's explanation is:

There is some law that says what frequencies of light glowing hydrogen will produce. It has to predict spaced-out frequencies when the electrons involved are moving between orbits close to the nucleus (center) of the atom, but it also has to predict that the frequencies will get closer and closer together as we look at what the electron does in moving between orbits farther and farther out. It will also predict that the intensity differences between frequencies get closer and closer together as we go out. Where classical physics already gives the right answers by one set of equations the new physics has to give the same answers but by different equations.

Classical physics uses the mathematical methods of Joseph Fourier to make a math picture of the physical world,  It uses collections of smooth curves that go together to make one smooth curve that gives, in this case, intensities for light of all frequencies from some light. But it is not right because that smooth curve only appears at higher frequencies. At lower frequencies, there are always isolated points and nothing connects the dots. So, to make a map of the real world, Heisenberg had to make a big change. He had to do something to pick out only the numbers that would match what was seen in nature. Sometimes people say he "guessed" these equations, but he was not making blind guesses. He found what he needed. The numbers that he calculated would put dots on a graph, but there would be no line drawn between the dots. And making one "graph" just of dots for every set of calculations would have wasted lots of paper and not have gotten anything done. Heisenberg found a way to efficiently predict the intensities for different frequencies and to organize that information in a helpful way.

Just using the empirical rule given above, the one that Balmer got started and Rydberg improved, we can see how to get one set of numbers that would help Heisenberg get the kind of picture that he wanted:

The rule says that when the electron moves from one orbit to another it either gains or loses energy, depending on whether it is getting farther from the center or nearer to it. So we can put these orbits or energy levels in as headings along the top and the side of a grid. For historical reasons the lowest orbit is called n, and the next orbit out is called n - a, then comes n - b, and so forth. It is confusing that they used negative numbers when the electrons were actually gaining energy, but that is just the way it is.

Since the Rydberg rule gives us frequencies, we can use that rule to put in numbers depending on where the electron goes. If the electron starts at n and ends up at n, then it has not really gone anywhere, so it did not gain energy and it did not lose energy. So the frequency is 0.  If the electron starts at n-a and ends up at n, then it has fallen from a higher orbit to a lower orbit. If it does so then it loses energy, and the energy it loses shows up as a photon. The photon has a certain amount of energy, e, and that is related to a certain frequency f by the equation e = h f. So we know that a certain change of orbit is going to produce a certain frequency of light, f.  If the electron starts at n and ends up at n - a, that means it has gone from a lower orbit to a higher orbit. That only happens when a photon of a certain frequency and energy comes in from the outside, is absorbed by the electron and gives it its energy, and that is what makes the electron go out to a higher orbit. So, to keep everything making sense, we write that frequency as a negative number. There was a photon with a certain frequency and now it has been taken away.

So we can make a grid like this, where f(a←b) means the frequency involved when an electron goes from energy state (orbit) b to energy state a (Again, sequences look backwards, but that is the way they were originally written.):

Heisenberg did not make the grids like this. He just did the math that would let him get the intensities he was looking for. But to do that he had to multiply two amplitudes (how high a wave measures) to work out the intensity. (In classical physics, intensity equals amplitude squared.) He made an odd-looking equation to handle this problem, wrote out the rest of his paper, handed it to his boss, and went on vacation. Dr. Born looked at his funny equation and it seemed a little crazy. He must have wondered, "Why did Heisenberg give me this strange thing? Why does he have to do it this way?" Then he realized that he was looking at a blueprint for something he already knew very well. He was used to calling the grid or table that we could write by doing, for instance, all the math for frequencies, a matrix. And Heisenberg's weird equation was a rule for multiplying two of them together. Max Born was a very, very good mathematician. He knew that since the two matrices (grids) being multiplied represented different things (like position (x,y,z) and momentum (mv), for instance), then when you multiply the first matrix by the second you get one answer and when you multiply the second matrix by the first matrix you get another answer. Even though he did not know about matrix math, Heisenberg already saw this "different answers" problem and it had bothered him. But Dr. Born was such a good mathematician that he saw that the difference between the first matrix multiplication and the second matrix multiplication was always going to involve Planck's constant, h, multiplied by the square root of negative one, i. So within a few days of Heisenberg's discovery they already had the basic math for what Heisenberg liked to call the "indeterminacy principle." By "indeterminate" Heisenberg meant that something like an electron is just not pinned down until it gets pinned down. It is a little like a jellyfish that is always squishing around and cannot be "in one place" unless you kill it. Later, people got in the habit of calling it "Heisenberg's uncertainty principle," which made many people make the mistake of thinking that electrons and things like that are really "somewhere" but we are just uncertain about it in our own minds. That idea is wrong. It is not what Heisenberg was talking about. Having trouble measuring something is a problem, but it is not the problem Heisenberg was talking about.

Heisenberg's idea is very hard to grasp, but we can make it clearer with an example. First, we will start calling these grids "matrices," because we will soon need to talk about matrix multiplication.

Suppose that we start with two kinds of measurements, position (q) and momentum (p). In 1925, Heisenberg wrote an equation like this one:

He did not know it, but this equation gives a blueprint for writing out two matrices (grids) and for multiplying them. The rules for multiplying one matrix by another are a little messy, but here are the two matrices according to the blueprint, and then their product:

The matrix for the product of the above two matrices as specified by the relevant equation in Heisenberg's 1925 paper is:

A=p(n←n-a)*q(n-a←n-b)+p(n←n-b)*q(n-b←n-b)+p(n←n-c)*q(n-c←n-b)+.....

B=p(n-a←n-a)*q(n-a←n-c)+p(n-a←n-b)*q(n-b←n-c)+p(n-a←n-c)*q(n-c←n-c)+.....

C=p(n-b←n-a)*q(n-a←n-d)+p(n-b←n-b)*q(n-b←n-d)+p(n-b←n-c)*q(n-d←n-d)+.....

If the matrices were reversed, the following values would result:

A=q(n←n-a)*p(n-a←n-b)+q(n←n-b)*p(n-b←n-b)+q(n←n-c)*p(n-c←n-b)+.....

B=q(n-a←n-a)*p(n-a←n-c)+q(n-a←n-b)*p(n-b←n-c)+q(n-a←n-c)*p(n-c←n-c)+.....

C=q(n-b←n-a)*p(n-a←n-d)+q(n-b←n-b)*p(n-b←n-d)+q(n-b←n-c)*p(n-d←n-d)+.....

Note how changing the order of multiplication changes the numbers, step by step, that are actually multiplied.

The work of Werner Heisenberg seemed to break a log jam. Very soon, many different other ways of explaining things came from people such as Louis de Broglie, Max Born, Paul Dirac, Wolfgang Pauli, and Erwin Schrödinger.

The math used by Heisenberg and earlier people is not very hard to understand, but the equations quickly grew very complicated as physicists looked more deeply into the atomic world.

In the early days of quantum mechanics, Albert Einstein suggested that if it were right then quantum mechanics would mean that there would be "spooky action at a distance." It turned out that quantum mechanics was right, and that what Einstein had used as a reason to reject quantum mechanics actually happened. This kind of "spooky connection" between certain quantum events is now called "quantum entanglement".

When an experiment brings two things (photons, electrons, etc.) together, they must then share a common description in quantum mechanics. When they are later separated, they keep the same quantum mechanical description or "state." In the diagram, one characteristic (e.g., "up" spin) is drawn in red, and its mate (e.g., "down" spin) is drawn in blue. The purple band means that when, e.g., two electrons are put together the pair shares both characteristics. So both electrons could show either up spin or down spin. When they are later separated, one remaining on Earth and one going to some planet of the star Alpha Centauri, they still each have both spins. In other words, each one of them can "decide" to show itself as a spin-up electron or a spin-down electron. But if later on someone measures the other one, it must "decide" to show itself as having the opposite spin.

Einstein argued that over such a great distance it was crazy to think that forcing one electron to show its spin would then somehow make the other electron show an opposite characteristic. He said that the two electrons must have been spin-up or spin-down all along, but that quantum mechanics could not predict which characteristic each electron had. Being unable to predict, only being able to look at one of them with the right experiment, meant that quantum mechanics could not account for something important. Therefore, Einstein said, quantum mechanics had a big hole in it. Quantum mechanics was incomplete.

Later, it turned out that experiments showed that it was Einstein who was wrong.

In 1925, Werner Heisenberg described the Uncertainty principle, which says that the more we know about where a particle is, the less we can know about how fast it is going and in which direction. In other words, the more we know about the speed and direction of something small, the less we can know about its position. Physicists usually talk about the momentum in such discussions instead of talking about speed. Momentum is just the speed of something in a certain direction times its mass.

The reason behind Heisenberg's uncertainty principle says that we can never know both the location and the momentum of a particle. Because light is an abundant particle, it is used for measuring other particles. The only way to measure it is to bounce the light wave off of the particle and record the results. If a high energy, or high frequency, light beam is used, we can tell precisely where it is, but cannot tell how fast it was going. This is because the high energy photon transfers energy to the particle and changes the particle's speed. If we use a low energy photon, we can tell how fast it is going, but not where it is. This is because we are using light with a longer wavelength. The longer wavelength means the particle could be anywhere along the stretch of the wave.

The principle also says that there are many pairs of measurements for which we cannot know both of them about any particle (a very small thing), no matter how hard we try. The more we learn about one of such a pair, the less we can know about the other.

Even Albert Einstein had trouble accepting such a bizarre concept, and in a well-known debate said, "God does not play dice".

To this, Danish physicist Niels Bohr famously responded, "Einstein, don't tell God what to do".

Electrons surround every atom's nucleus. Chemical bonds link atoms to form molecules. A chemical bond links two atoms when electrons are shared between those atoms. Thus quantum mechanics is the physics of the chemical bond and of chemistry. Quantum mechanics helps us understand how molecules are made, and what their properties are.

Quantum mechanics can also help us understand big things, such as stars and even the whole universe. Quantum mechanics is a very important part of the theory of how the universe began called the Big Bang.

Everything made of matter is attracted to other matter because of a fundamental force called gravity. Einstein's theory that explains gravity is called the theory of general relativity. A problem in modern physics is that some conclusions of quantum mechanics do not seem to agree with the theory of general relativity.

Quantum mechanics is the part of physics that can explain why all electronic technology works as it does. Thus quantum mechanics explains how computers work, because computers are electronic machines. But the designers of the early computer hardware of around 1950 or 1960 did not need to think about quantum mechanics. The designers of radios and televisions at that time did not think about quantum mechanics either. However, the design of the more powerful integrated circuits and computer memory technologies of recent years does require quantum mechanics.

Quantum mechanics has also made possible technologies such as:

Quantum mechanics describes nature in a way that is different from how we usually think about science. It tells us how likely to happen some things are, rather than telling us that they certainly will happen.

One example is Young's double-slit experiment. If we shoot single photons (single units of light) from a laser at a sheet of , we will see a single spot of light on the developed film. If we put a sheet of metal in between, and make two very narrow slits in the sheet, when we fire many photons at the metal sheet, and they have to go through the slits, then we will see something remarkable. All the way across the sheet of developed film we will see a series of bright and dark bands. We can use mathematics to tell exactly where the bright bands will be and how bright the light was that made them, that is, we can tell ahead of time how many photons will fall on each band. But if we slow the process down and see where each photon lands on the screen we can never tell ahead of time where the next one will show up. We can know for sure that it is most likely that a photon will hit the center bright band, and that it gets less and less likely that a photon will show up at bands farther and farther from the center. So we know for sure that the bands will be brightest at the center and get dimmer and dimmer farther away. But we never know for sure which photon will go into which band.

One of the strange conclusions of quantum mechanics theory is the "Schrödinger's cat" effect. Certain properties of a particle, such as their position, speed of motion, direction of motion, and "spin", cannot be talked about until something measures them (a photon bouncing off of an electron would count as a measurement of its position, for example). Before the measurement, the particle is in a "superposition of states," in which its properties have many values at the same time. Schrödinger said that quantum mechanics seemed to say that if something (such as the life or death of a cat) was determined by a quantum event, then its state would be determined by the state that resulted from the quantum event, but only at the time that somebody looked at the state of the quantum event. In the time before the state of the quantum event is looked at, perhaps "the living and dead cat (pardon

People often use the symbol , which is called "h-bar."  . H-bar is a unit of angular momentum. When this new unit is used to describe the orbits of electrons in atoms, the angular momentum of any electron in orbit is always a whole number.

The particle in a 1-dimensional well is the most simple example showing that the energy of a particle can only have specific values. The energy is said to be "quantized."

The well has zero potential energy inside a range and has infinite potential energy everywhere outside that range. For the 1-dimensional case in the  direction, the time-independent Schrödinger equation can be written as:

Using differential equations, we can figure out that  can be written as

The walls of the box mean that the wavefunction must have a special form. The wavefunction of the particle must be zero anytime the walls are infinitely tall.  At each wall:

We can see that  must be an integer.  This means that the particle can only have special energy values and cannot have the energy values in between.  This is an example of energy "quantization."

Reality means anything that exists. An event that has actually happened, or a thing which really exists is said to have "reality." Something close to reality is realistic.

Reality is the state of things as they are, rather than as they may appear or might be imagined. In a wider definition, reality includes everything that is and has been, whether or not we can see it and understand it. An even wider definition includes everything that has existed, exists, or will exist.

Reality is often contrasted with what is imaginary, delusional, in the mind, dreams, what is false, what is fictional, or what is abstract.

All the same, what is abstract plays a role in everyday life and in academic research. For instance, causality, virtue, life and justice are abstract concepts. They are difficult to define, but they are not pure delusions.

Television programs that are not scripted are called Reality TV.

A pyramid is a structure, usually made of stone, built in the shape of a pyramid. From ancient to modern times people in many different parts of the world have built such structures.

The word "pyramid" comes from the Greek word pyramis which meant "wheat cake." The ancient Egyptian word for them was something like "Mer". The Great Pyramid of Giza was one of the Seven Wonders of the ancient world.

The first pyramids were built in 2630 B.C. The oldest known pyramid was made for king Djoser of the third Dynasty.

In Egypt, kings and queens, called Pharaohs, were buried in the tombs of huge square-bottomed pyramids built of stone. They were usually built to be used as tombs for Pharaohs. The ancient Egyptian pyramids are very well built. Some of the pyramids still stand today.

The oldest man-made pyramid found is called the Step pyramid. It is in the Giza Necropolis in Saqqara, near Cairo, Egypt. It was built for King Djoser thousands of years ago. Later pyramids were built much larger. The largest one was the Great Pyramid of Giza. It is near Cairo. It was the tallest building in the world until the Eiffel Tower was built in Paris, in 1889. The Great Pyramid was built by the pharaoh Khufu (= Cheops) from the Ancient Egyptian Old Kingdom. Herodotus was told by his Egyptian guides that it took twenty years for a force of 100,000 slaves to build the pyramid (with another ten years to build a stone causeway that connected to a temple in the valley below).

People once thought pyramids were built by slaves. More recent evidence suggests that the workers who built the pyramids were paid and well-cared for. They were loyal to the Pharaoh. Inside the Great Pyramid, famous man-made objects have been found from ancient times. Many valuable items were buried with the dead Pharaohs, in the hope that they would take them to the afterlife. Pyramids usually had traps to stop thieves from escaping easily. Tomb thieves were punished by death if they were caught. However, by 1000 BC, many of the pyramids had been robbed of their precious treasures.

A large statue of a Sphinx stands near the pyramids at Giza. It has the body of a Lion and the head of a Pharaoh.

The ancient Greeks called the Great Pyramid one of the seven wonders of the world. There are over 100 pyramids in Egypt. Most of them are on the western side of the River Nile. Some Egyptologists have different opinions on why the ancient Egyptian Kings built pyramids as their tombs. Pyramids have been excavated for about the last 200 years.

The ancient Egyptians believed that the Egyptian pharaohs went to the stars to join their gods in the afterlife.

The Aztecs and Mayans also built many massive pyramids. None are as old or big as the oldest or biggest Egyptian pyramids. Most of them are step pyramids.

Unlike Egyptian pyramids, which were used as tombs for rulers and wealthy people, Aztec and Mayan pyramids are believed to have been used for public displays of human sacrifice.

There are also ancient pyramids in other parts of Africa, Central America, Europe, North America, and Asia. There is a famous modern glass pyramid in front of the Louvre Museum in Paris. The Luxor Hotel, in Las Vegas, Nevada is also a glass pyramid.

Pottery is the ceramic material which makes up potteryware. Major types include earthenware, stoneware and porcelain. The place where such wares are made is also called a pottery (plural "potteries"). Pottery also refers to the art or craft of a potter or the making of pottery. A dictionary definition is simply clay fired in a kiln.

Pottery objects are made from damp clay mixed with other materials. They are then fired in a special oven called a kiln at high temperatures. Firing makes the clay hard. The potter may then apply a glaze to the surface before firing the object again. The fired glaze makes the surface of the pottery shiny, decorative and water-tight.

Some potters make objects which are not useful and are really artistic objects or sculpture. Bare pottery objects without a glaze are called bisque or just earthenware. The finest pottery objects, made of porcelain or bone china are quite strong, yet are translucent.

Pottery originated before the Neolithic period. The earliest example we have is from eastern Europe, dating to 25,000 years ago or earlier. It is a female figurine known as the Venus of Dolní Věstonice, from a palaeolithic site in Moravia, Czech Republic. It may have been made as part of a fertility ritual. There are some similar figures from other nearby sites.

Since the invention of agriculture, and the building of cities, containers for food and drink have been found at almost all archaeological sites.

This means the area of Stoke-on-Trent in England, sometimes called the Staffordshire potteries. There were six towns, Tunstall, Burslem, Hanley, Stoke-upon-Trent, Fenton and Longton, which now make up Stoke-on-Trent.

The area was the centre of the English pottery industry. The area had local supplies of clay, salt, lead and coal. Canals were used to transport the product inland. It was a large exporter of pottery for about 200 years: roughly from 1760 to about 1960. Plastic crockery after World War II and cheap ceramic production in China largely destroyed the Stoke pottery industry.

The common names pigeon and dove are often used interchangeably.  In ornithology, "dove" tends to be used for smaller species and "pigeon" for larger ones. The wild ancestor of the domestic pigeon is the "rock dove". The feral pigeon is common in many cities.

There are more than 300 species in the family. They usually make nests of sticks, and their two white eggs are incubated by both the male and the female parent. Doves feed on seeds, fruit and plants.

Unlike most other birds, the doves and pigeons produce a type of milk. It is produced in their crop, and called crop milk. Both sexes have this highly nutritious milk to feed their young.

Pigeons and doves are distributed everywhere on Earth, except for the driest areas of the Sahara Desert, Antarctica and its surrounding islands and the high Arctic. They have colonised most of the world's oceanic islands. They are in eastern Polynesia and the Chatham Islands in the Pacific, Mauritius, the Seychelles and Réunion in the Indian Ocean, and the Azores in the Atlantic Ocean.

The family has adapted to most of the habitats available on the planet.  Doves may be arboreal or terrestrial  or partly terrestrial.  Species live in savannas, grasslands, deserts, temperate woodlands and forests, mangrove forests, and even the barren sands and gravels of atolls. Some species have large natural ranges.

The largest range of any species is that of the rock dove. This species lives in Britain and Ireland, northern Africa, across Europe, Arabia, Central Asia, India, the Himalayas and up into China and Mongolia. The range of the species increased dramatically after it was domesticated, because the species went feral in cities around the world. It lives in cities across most of North America, South America, sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia, Japan, Australia and New Zealand.

The species is not the only pigeon to have increased its range due to the actions of man; several other species have become established outside of their natural range after escaping captivity. Other species have also increased their natural ranges due to habitat changes by humans.

The dodo and the Rodrigues solitaire are two famous flightless birds on the Mascarene Islands in the Indian Ocean, east of Madagascar. They are extinct, but were alive before sailors found the islands. They had no fear of humans, whom they had never seen. The sailors hunted them, and killed them for food. Both species are now extinct. Animals introduced by man may also have hunted them. Their anatomy (osteology) and DNA sequence analyses show that they belong to the Columbidae family.

In the Ancient Near East and Mediterranean, doves were used as symbols for the Canaanite mother goddess Asherah, the Phoenician goddess Tanit, and the Roman goddesses Venus and Fortunata.

The Christian symbol of a dove with an olive branch in its beak represents peace and comes from Genesis 8:6 - 12, also John 1:32–34.  The Christian stories came after very similar myths from earlier cultures.The Chaldean myth the Epic of Gilgamesh, Utnapishtim releases a dove and raven to find land; however, the dove merely circles and returns. Only then does Utnapishtim send forth the raven, which does not return, and Utnapishtim concludes the raven has found land.

Several species of pigeons and doves are used as food, and probably any might be. The powerful breast muscles of the family make excellent meat. Domesticated or hunted pigeon were used as food in Mesopotamia, Ancient Rome and medieval Europe. It is familiar meat within Jewish, Arab, Assamese and French cuisines. According to the Tanakh, doves are kosher, and they are the only birds that may be used for a korban (offering). Other kosher birds may be eaten, but not brought as a korban. It is also eaten in Asian cuisines, such as Chinese and Indonesian cuisine. Young pigeons in cuisine are known as "squabs".

In Europe, the wood pigeon is commonly shot as a game bird. Rock pigeons were originally domesticated as a food species, and many breeds were developed for their meat-bearing qualities. The extinction of the passenger pigeon in North America was partly due to shooting for food. Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management has recipes for roast pigeon and pigeon pie, a popular, inexpensive food in Victorian industrial Britain.

A type of pigeon commonly found on the streets of large cities. Feral pigeons come in all shades, some bluer, others blacker. Some are pale grey with darker chequered markings, others an unusual shade of dull brick-red or cinnamon-brown. Others can be or less white while others look exactly like wild rock doves.

Polytheism means believing in many gods. A person that believes in polytheism is called a polytheist. A religion with polytheism can be called a polytheistic religion.

Polytheism is well documented in historical religions of classical antiquity, especially those of Ancient Greeks and Ancient Rome. Other ancient peoples who were polytheists were Germanics, Turkic peoples, Ancient Egyptians, Celts, and the Norse.

There are various polytheistic religions that are practiced today such as Sanamahism (Meitei paganism), Tengrism, Shinto, Chinese folk religion, Wicca, Druidism, Taoism, Asatru and Candomblé.

Polytheistic religions usually include a set of stories about the gods, which is called mythology.

The opposite of polytheism is monotheism, which is the belief in only one god and is practiced by Judaism, Christianity, Islam, Sikhism, etc.

Pregnancy is when an individual with a uterus has an unborn baby (a prenatal foetus) inside of them. Humans give birth to live young. Almost all mammals give birth to live offspring (their young) to end pregnancy. If the birth goes well and there are no serious complications during pregnancy, then a healthy human is born. In other animals which lay eggs, such as birds, they do not give birth to a bird, but lay an egg which needs to develop further to hatch.

It is called being "pregnant" to be carrying an unborn foetus. Before 9 weeks, the foetus is developing as an embryo. A human pregnancy is about 38 weeks long, from conception to childbirth. Usually the mother has one baby at a time. Sometimes the mother has two babies at one time, and when this happens, the babies are called twins. Siblings who are twins might not look like each other, but if they do, they are called identical twins. The mother can have three or more babies at one time. Three siblings born at the same time are triplets, and four are quadruplets, and so on. Multiple birth does not happen very often in humans. About one in 85 pregnancies are of twins, and about one in 7,000 are of triplets. Some animals birth multiple young at a time after every pregnancy.

Some people have trouble becoming pregnant. This is called infertility. Women and men with infertility may take drugs or have surgery to help a pregnancy start. Some people use treatments that are not natural, like in vitro fertilization, to become pregnant with the help of a doctor.

Pregnancy usually starts after two people have sexual intercourse. The ovum (or egg) and the sperm (seed) come together and form a zygote (fertilized egg) inside of the childbearer.

When the egg and the seed come together, it makes one cell called a zygote. The zygote grows into an embryo, which grows into a fetus. When the fetus is ready, the baby is born.

Human pregnancy is divided into three parts called trimesters. A trimester is about three months long. During the first trimester, the childbearer might feel ill in their stomach and need to urinate often. During the second trimester, their abdomen starts to stick out. During the third trimester, their abdomen sticks out even more, and they become even heavier.

At the end of a full pregnancy, the childbearer pushes the baby out through the vagina. This is called delivering a baby or giving birth. Parents can get help for birth from a midwife, nurse, or doctor. In some places, parents give birth at home. In other places, parents give birth in a hospital. Parents who are ill or hurt may need to go to a hospital.

Giving birth may be extremely painful, and hospitals may administer an epidural to ease the pain and make the birthing process smoother.

If the baby cannot be pushed out, then a doctor can cut the uterus open to take the baby out. This operation is called a Caesarean section.

Article 11 of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women declares that pregnant individuals must be given time away from work or equal welfare for their baby without losing their job.

Sometimes, people who are teenagers become pregnant. Teenage pregnancies have a set of problems, which need to be carefully considered.

Sometimes there are problems with pregnancies. A miscarriage (spontaneous abortion) is when the baby dies before it is born. A stillbirth is when the baby is dead when it is born. There are also diseases caused by pregnancy.

Pregnancy is not risk free. Sometimes, individuals die from giving birth. In developed countries, this is much less common than it used to be. Every year, about 500,000 people die from giving birth, while about 7,000,000 people have major complications from giving birth.

For example, giving birth can tear the childbearer's body and cause an obstetric fistula.  during childbirth like these, and others, is why sometimes, abortions are carried in places where they are usually not. If there is risk to the parent during pregnancy or giving birth then it is said that it needs to happen. In these cases (called ) it is for the safety of the person giving birth. Some states in the U.S. that have otherwise banned abortion have to make an exception to protect the woman. The other way of doing it is for those places to let the dangerous pregnancies be carried out.

During pregnancy, the childbearer is less mobile because of the extra weight. Pregnancy may cause the ankles to become swollen, and someone who is pregnancy may need to sit down more. Talking to friends and family, and loved ones, is important during pregnancy, if it is preventing mobility. Light exercise is useful and so are other ways of keeping the mind busy, such as reading or listening to music, which can help pass the time.

A pregnancy can also stop without the baby being born. This is called abortion. Doctors can do things that will stop a pregnancy. Such an abortion is called induced abortion. Countries have different laws about induced abortions. Some countries allow it, and others do not. In some countries, it is allowed, but only for certain reasons, such as the pregnancy resulting from rape, or a doctor saying that the pregnant woman might die if the pregnancy is not stopped. People also have different opinions about abortion. Often, these are influenced by religious beliefs.

There are a few diseases that can kill a woman or make her very ill if she has a baby. Having abortions could save the lives or health of these mothers.

A pregnancy test is something that women use to tell whether they are pregnant. The woman urinates on the stick. If the woman is pregnant, a plus sign or two lines will appear on the stick. If the woman is not pregnant, then a minus sign or one line will appear on the stick.

Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky ( , pronounced chai-KOV-skee; 7 May 1840 – 6 November 1893) was a Russian composer who lived in the Romantic period. He is one of the most popular of all Russian composers. He wrote melodies which were usually dramatic and emotional. He learned a lot from studying the music of Western Europe, but his music also sounds very Russian. His compositions include 11 operas, 3 ballets, orchestral music, chamber music and over 100 songs. His famous ballets (Swan Lake, The Nutcracker  and Sleeping Beauty) have some of the best known tunes in all of romantic music. He is widely regarded as the greatest composer of ballets.

Tchaikovsky’s father worked as a mining engineer. His mother’s grandfather was a Frenchman who had moved to Russia. She was a nervous woman and Tchaikovsky may have got his nervous character from her. Tchaikovsky was only five when he started taking piano lessons.  He was soon better than his teacher. The family had an orchestrion (a kind of musical box) which played some tunes from classical music by Mozart, Bellini, Donizetti and Rossini.

In 1848 the family moved to St. Petersburg. Tchaikovsky was unhappy and unsettled as he was often separated from his family who moved several times. In 1854 his mother died. He tried to comfort himself by playing music. He spent nine years at the School of Jurisprudence. When he left school, he had to get a job. For four years he worked as a clerk in the Ministry of Justice. Then the composer and pianist Anton Rubinstein helped him to become a music student at the newly opened conservatory in St. Petersburg. He learned to play the flute and the organ as well as the piano and learning all about composition. In 1866 he moved to Moscow where Nikolai Rubinstein, the brother of Anton, encouraged him to write music with a Russian character. He worked very hard, and was often exhausted, but he managed to finish his First Symphony, which was performed in 1868.

Tchaikovsky met some famous musicians including the French composer Berlioz who was visiting Moscow. He also became friendly with the Russian composer Mily Balakirev who was very helpful and persuaded him to rewrite one of his works several times until it was very good. The result was a piece for orchestra called Romeo and Juliet which soon became internationally known. Balakirev had four friends who were composers. This circle of friends is often called “The Five” or “The Mighty Handful”. They were interested in using Russian folk tunes in their music. Tchaikovsky was never a member of the group, although he liked their ideas. Tchaikovsky was different from them: he had learned music at the Conservatoire where he had studied Western music. The harmonies that he used in his works were often not suitable for Russian folk tunes. He wrote many songs which are romantic in character. One of them, None But the Lonely Heart, is especially well-known in English.

By now, Tchaikovsky was writing works which were to make him very famous. He wrote two more symphonies, and his First Piano Concerto, one of the most popular of all piano concertos, was given its first performance in Boston. He was also writing operas and chamber music.

In 1875, Tchaikovsky began making a long tour of Europe. He liked Bizet’s opera Carmen, but Wagner’s operas from the Ring cycle bored him. In 1877 he finished Swan Lake, the first of his three ballets. The audience did not like it at first because the dancers were not very good.

In the summer of 1877 Tchaikovsky decided to marry. His wife was called Antonina Milyukova. The marriage was a disaster. A few weeks after the marriage, he ran away and never lived with her again. Keeping his private life intensly guarded, through letters discovered after his death suggest his deepest attachments were to men.

Another woman was to become important in his life, but in a very different way. It was to be a very unusual relationship. Her name was Nadezhda von Meck. She was the wife of a rich man. She loved Tchaikovsky’s music and promised him that she would pay him a lot of money every month so long as he promised her that he would never try to meet her.  Tchaikovsky no longer needed to work. He was able to give up his teaching job at the Conservatory. For several years he spent the winters in Europe and the summers in Russia.  Nadezhda and Tchaikovsky wrote long letters to one another, often quite passionate and dreamy they talked about love, life and how they wanted it to change, but they never saw one another. He had plenty of time to write music: he wrote several operas including Eugene Onegin and his Fourth and Fifth Symphonies, the Violin Concerto, the Serenade for Strings, Capriccio Italienne and the 1812 Overture. Tchaikovsky loved Nadezhda very much but never actually told her his true feelings.

By 1885, Tchaikovsky had tired of travelling around. He rented a country house in Klin, just outside Moscow. He lived a regular life, reading, walking in the forest, composing during the day and playing music with his friends in the evenings. He started to have more confidence as a conductor and toured Europe twice, conducting in Leipzig, Berlin, Prague, Hamburg, Paris and London. In 1889 he finished his second ballet, The Sleeping Beauty and the next year, while staying in Florence, he wrote his famous opera The Queen of Spades based on a story by Pushkin. Later that year Nadezhda von Meck wrote to him that she had lost nearly all her money and could not continue to support him.

In the spring of 1891 he was invited to conduct in New York where the Carnegie Hall was being opened. He also conducted concerts in Baltimore and Philadelphia. When he returned to Russia he wrote his last ballet The Nutcracker and his Sixth Symphony, known as the “Pathétique” which was dedicated to his nephew with whom he was passionately in love. This work is often considered his best. It was performed in St Petersburg on October 16 1893.  Five days later he suddenly became ill with cholera, a disease many people were catching in the city. Tchaikovsky died four days later. Many people think that he committed suicide by deliberately drinking contaminated water. He may have wanted to (or even been forced to) commit suicide in order to avoid a scandal because he was having a relationship with a nephew of an important aristocratic man. Exactly what happened is still a mystery.

Rembrandt Harmenszoon van Rijn (Leiden, 15 July 1606 – Amsterdam, 4 October 1669) was a famous Dutch painter and artist.

He is generally considered one of the greatest painters and printmakers in European art history, and the most important in Dutch history.p420 His contributions to art came in a period that historians call the Dutch Golden Age.

After his success as a young portrait painter, he had personal tragedy and financial hardships in his later years. Yet his etchings and paintings were popular throughout his lifetime, and his reputation as an artist remained high.p427 For twenty years he taught nearly every important Dutch painter.p203

Rembrandt's greatest creative work is seen in his portraits of his contemporaries, self-portraits and illustrations of scenes from the Bible. His self-portraits are a unique biography, in which the artist surveyed himself without  and with the utmost .p420

He went to the University Leiden but he liked painting better so he became a painter. In 1631 he went to live in Amsterdam, because people there had heard of him and wanted him to paint their portraits. He married a woman called Saskia van Uylenberg in 1634. They had four children, but three of them died very young. Only their fourth child, Titus, who was born in 1641, survived into adulthood. Saskia died in 1642 soon after Titus's birth, probably from tuberculosis.

During Saskia's illness, a nurse was hired, who probably also became Rembrandt's lover. She later charged Rembrandt with breach of promise and was awarded 200 guilders a year.p28 When Rembrandt learned she had pawned Saskia's jewellery, which Rembrandt had given her, he had her committed for twelve years to a poorhouse (a 'bridewell') at Gouda.

Rembrandt then lived with a young woman called Hendrickje Stoffels from Bredevoort who had been his maid. They had a daughter called Cornelia. Rembrandt died in Amsterdam on 4 October 1669.

Rembrandt painted many famous pictures. The portraits use light and dark colors; people sitting in the pictures are often shown in a calm or thoughtful appearance. He was such a good painter, that many of his pictures make people feel as if they are taking part in what is happening. Paintings by Rembrandt can be seen in art galleries all over the world.

Throughout his work Rembrandt used colour which darkens as it approaches the edge of the painting, and lighter towards the center. There is always a certain person, or event, or group of people that is near the center, and they are shown to be brighter than the rest of the picture. The dark backgrounds are painted to be very interesting and important. In most of his paintings, there are deep whites and blacks which shows contrast between different parts of the work.

Primates are an order of mammals. It includes all lemurs, tarsiers, lorises, galagos, monkeys and apes (including humans). Most primates (but not humans) are mainly or entirely forest dwellers.

There are about 400 species of primates. All primates are similar to humans in many ways, but language is an important advantage which only humans have. Other primates have a pattern of calls and gestures, but not language as we know it.

Primates have hands with five fingers and flat fingernails (most other animals have claws or hooves). All primates are covered with fur (hair), but in humans the body hair is only noticeable in two places: on the head and around the genitals.

Primates are split into two groups: Strepsirrhini and Haplorhini. Haplorrhini includes larger monkeys such as, tarsiers and apes including humans. Strepsirrhini includes smaller monkeys such as lemurs, lorises, galagos (also called bush babies) and the aye-aye.

Primates are one of the few mammal groups which re-evolved full color vision. Even so, color vision in birds is better. Color vision was lost in mammals during the long period when dinosaurs ruled the Earth, and mammals were mainly small nocturnal animals.

Close contact between humans and non-human primates creates opportunities for zoonotic diseases to get to humans.  Virus diseases transmitted to humans include herpes, measles, ebola, rabies, and hepatitis.

Protists are single-celled eukaryotes (which are organisms with a nucleus). The term Protista was first used by Ernst Haeckel in 1866. The protists are not a natural group, or clade, since they have no common origin. Like algae or invertebrates, they are often grouped together for convenience.

The term "protist" includes microorganisms from several distantly related phyla. Some are autotrophic (which means they make their own food by photosynthesis), and others are heterotrophic (which means they eat organic material).

Most protists are very small. They are made up of one or a few cells at most – they are microscopic and usually invisible to the naked eye. Some algae are protists, if they are single-celled. Many protists are part of the plankton and are very important for the ecosystem. The cells found in protists may be extremely complex, and are often little understood. It is now possible to do DNA sequencing, and a number of protists have been analysed. The results show that the Protista is not a monophyletic group. It is paraphyletic, and not a single clade. The taxonomy of the Protista is therefore rather confused.

Some protists cause diseases. Plasmodium falciparum causes malaria; sleeping sickness is also caused by a protist.

An example of a single celled organism in the protist kingdom is the Paramecium or "slipper animalcule." The Paramecium moves using its small, hair-like fibers called cilia, and eats using the cilia to sweep the food into its food vacuole. Other protists can be amoebas, which move by extending pseudopods and flowing into them, or flowing around food particles and engulfing them.

Protists are not a monophyletic clade. The term is a convenient holdall for about 20 different kinds of single-celled eukaryotes. They differ in their cell organelles, specialised units which carry out well-defined functions, like mitochondria and plastids. This proves they have made the transition from prokaryotes in different ways. It is fairly clear now that all or most of these organelles have their origin in once-independent prokaryotes (bacteria or archaea), and that the eukaryote cell is a 'community of micro-organisms' working together in 'a marriage of convenience'. Admittedly, the Protista is a collection of disparate single-celled forms, but while a more sophisticated taxonomy is in flux (changing), Protista is still a useful term.

Peter the Great (), Peter I () or Pyotr Alekseevich (;  – ) was a czar of Russia. He transformed Russia from an isolated kingdom into a transcontinental great power.

He became czar of Russia in 1682, after his sister Sophia Alekseyevna of Russia lost a war. In 1697 and 1698 he visited Western Europe, seeking allies against Turkey. He hired foreign technical specialists and brought them to Russia, and decided Russia must have access to the sea. He built the city and seaport of St. Petersburg which became the capital of Russia in 1711. He changed Russia's society, by making new laws so it would be modern like the European countries of the new Age of Enlightenment. Prince Alexander Danilovich Menshikov was a close friend of the emperor but was later disgraced due to embezzlement of national funds.

These are the wars that Russia fought in when Peter the Great was in charge:

The Great Turkish War: In this war Russia fought against the Ottoman Empire and won. Russia got some fortresses in the town of Azov from the Ottoman Empire.

Great Northern War: Russia was fighting Sweden during the Great Northern War. In 1700 Saxony, Denmark and Russia attacked Sweden. Sweden invaded Russia in 1709 which was not a good idea.  The Russian Army retreated  so the Swedish Army had to chase them.  When a very cold winter came, half of the Swedish soldiers died in the cold. Eventually the Swedish army caught up to the Russian army and they had a battle, called the battle of Poltava. Russia won the battle but most of the Swedish soldiers, including their king, Charles XII of Sweden escaped and went to the Ottoman Empire. Peter didn't like this so he declared war on the Ottoman Empire but he lost and had to give the town of Azov back to the Ottomans.

After that Russia invaded Sweden and conquered  Estonia, Livonia, and Finland.  By 1719 Russia had conquered all of Sweden. Even though Sweden had clearly lost, they did not give up until 1721. In 1721 Sweden  signed the Treaty of Nystad where they agreed to give Estonia, Livonia and Ingria to Russia.

Because Russia was a major power after the war, Peter the Great changed its name from the Tsardom of Russia to the Russian Empire.

Russo-Persian War:   At the start of the war Persia was already in chaos and was about to collapse. Peter the Great took advantage of this and invaded Persia. The war went from 1722 to 1723. In the end, Russia won and gained lots of land from Persia but had lost a lot of men from fighting. After Peter died, his heirs struggled for power and all the lands that Russia had conquered were given back to Persia.

The Renaissance is a period in European history that followed the Middle Ages and ended in the 17th century. Renaissance is a French word for “cultural rebirth.” During this period, there was a “rebirth” of classical learning. People started relearning the teachings of scholars from Ancient Greece, Rome, and other ancient societies. The Renaissance is often said to be the start of the modern age.

During the Renaissance, there were many advances in art, literature, the sciences, mathematics, and culture. Many famous artists, writers, philosophers, and scientists lived during this period. A person who is clever at a great number of things is sometimes called a "Renaissance man." The most famous Renaissance man was Leonardo da Vinci, a painter, scientist, musician, and philosopher.

The Renaissance started in Italy but soon spread throughout Europe. In Italy, the period is divided into three parts:

Following the Mannerist period was the Baroque period, which also spread across Europe starting around 1600. Outside Italy, it can be hard to tell when the Renaissance period ended and the Baroque began.

In the Middle Ages, most artistic, legal, and historical production took place in and around books. Monasteries, churches, universities, and rich people them produced and owned books. They were produced entirely by hand and so were called manuscripts; illuminated manuscripts include handcolored, drawn, and gilded pictures.

Most books were written in Greek or Latin, which was used in the Catholic Church. Only priests and well-educated people could read Latin. People were forbidden by church law from translating the Bible into Italian, English, German, French, or other local languages.

Around 1440, the first printed books were made in Europe. The printing press made it possible to print copies of large books like the Bible and to sell them cheaply. It took 300 calf skins or 100 pig skins to print the Bible. Printers soon began to print everything that they thought was interesting: Ancient Greek and Roman writings, poetry, and plays; stories about the lives of the saints; mathematics textbooks; medical textbooks; Christian stories; erotic stories; books about animals and monsters; maps of the world; and advice to princes about on to rule.

Before the invention of the printing press, knowledge had belonged to priests, monasteries, and universities. Suddenly many thousands of people, even merchants, could learn far more than they ever could before.

From about 400 BC to 400 AD, Europe experienced a Golden Age. In Ancient Greece and Rome, there were many philosophers, writers, painters, sculptors, architects and mathematicians. Things were beautiful, well-organized, and well run.

However, by the year 1400, the city of Rome was in ruins. Inside the broken walls, which had been smashed in 410 AD, were the remains of huge temples, sports arenas, public baths, apartment blocks and palaces. Nearly all of them were half-buried and ruined and so they could not be used. Many were pulled down to use as building stone.

Among the ruins of the once-great city, the people of Rome lived in cottages. They still went to church in the huge churches (basilicas) that had been built by the first Christian emperor, Constantine the Great, in the 4th century. They still held market day in the ancient Roman market place of Campo dei Fiori ("Field of Flowers").

In 1402, Filippo Brunelleschi and the teenager Donatello came to Rome. They were probably the world's first archaeologists. They were fascinated by everything that they saw. They measured ancient ruined buildings, drew things, and dug around for weeks looking for bits of broken statues and painted pottery that they could put back together. When they went back home to Florence, they knew more about ancient Roman architecture and sculpture than anyone had known for about a thousand years. Brunelleschi became a very famous architect, and Donatello became a very famous sculptor.

The Renaissance really began in the city of Florence. In those days, Italy was not one single country but was made of many little states. All of them were governed in different ways and were constantly making alliances and fighting one other.

Rome was politically powerful, because the city had the Pope, the head of the Roman Catholic Church. Because of his very great importance as a spiritual leader, most people and most cities did not want to argue with him. After a pope died, a new pope was elected. Rich and powerful people hoped that a member of their family would be chosen. It was always a good idea to have several young men in the family trained as priests just in case. It also helped to be good friends with other rich families. One way to do so was to have many daughters and to get them to marry rich and powerful men from different cities, which was how politics then worked.

There were other powerful cities in Italy. Venice had a large and powerful navy. Milan controlled trade with Northern Europe and was very rich. Genoa was also very rich because it controlled trade with France and Spain. Florence, where the Renaissance is said to have started, was another important city.

Florence’s strength came from a strong army, strong fortress, or control over trade but came from banking. The ruling Medicis were an important banking family and helped to make Florence a powerful city and the centre of Renaissance learning.

The Protestant Reformation was a series of events that happened in the 16th century in the Catholic Church. Because the Catholic Church had been accused of corruption, some people wanted changes to the way the Church worked.

People like Erasmus, Huldrych Zwingli, Martin Luther and John Calvin protested the corruption and tried to stop it. This led to a split in the church, into Catholics and various Protestant churches. The Protestant reformation triggered the Catholic Counter-Reformation.

In 1517, Martin Luther posted the Ninety-Five Theses at Wittenberg. Historians consider this the start of the Protestant Reformation. John Knox brought Luther's ideas to Scotland and founded the Presbyterian Church.

At this time, the printing press had just recently been invented. This made it possible to spread awareness of the Church's abuses to many people.

Reformers translated the Bible into various local languages. For example, John Wycliffe and William Tyndale worked on an English translation. Much of Tyndale's translation was used in the King James version of the Bible. Luther translated the Bible into German.

As various countries adopted Protestant ideas, wars broke out between Catholic and Protestant factions and countries. Many people died in these wars, which included the Thirty Years' War and the Eighty Years' War. These wars were not just about religion. Since most countries have recognized (state) religion, many of the disputes were political.

In 1648 the Peace of Westphalia recognized Protestants when the signers agreed not to interfere in the internal affairs of other countries. This included their chosen religion.

Many events in the early 16th century helped to cause the Protestant Reformation. Clergy abuse caused people to begin criticizing the Catholic Church. The greed and scandalous lives of the clergy had created a split between them and the peasants. Furthermore, the clergy did not respond to the population's needs, often because they did not speak the local language, or live in their own diocese. The papacy lost prestige.

However, the split was more over doctrine than corruption. The main points of criticism were:

In 1515, the Pope started a new indulgence campaign to raise money for rebuilding St. Peter's Basilica, an important church in Rome. Preachers came to Germany to sell the indulgences, promising that money could release souls from purgatory.

Martin Luther, a German Catholic monk, thought this went too far. On October 31, 1517, he sent his 95 Theses to the local archbishop in protest. It is said he nailed a copy to the door of a church in Wittenberg. These theses, written in Latin, were points that Luther wanted to debate. Most of them related to the problems caused by the sale of indulgences.

Luther said that the idea that money could buy forgiveness prevented people from turning away from sins. He said that it also made people give less money to the poor. Luther did not attack the Pope; he blamed the abuses on others. Nevertheless, his ideas implied that the Pope was corrupt too.

Without Luther's permission, the 95 Theses were translated into German and sent to many places. Many people agreed with Luther. The Catholic Church tried to stop these new ideas, but without much result. Luther was considered an enemy of the Pope, and when he refused to change his ideas he was excommunicated (put out of the church). In the beginning, Luther had not planned to separate from the Catholic Church or to create a new religion; he wanted to reform the Catholic Church.

In many countries, Christians put Luther's reforms into practice. People began to read the Bible in their own language, and many could see for themselves how the Catholic Church had let the Christian faith become corrupted. Many who stayed in the Catholic Church adopted some of Luther's ideas.

The Pope reestablished the Inquisition to combat heresy. The Catholic Church responded to the Protestant reformation with the Counter-Reformation.

Between 1545 and 1563 the Council of Trent met to decide what to do. Some of the worst abuses were eliminated, but many of the old teachings were kept. The Inquisition tried to force people to keep those ideas.

Finding force not very successful, the church utilized religious orders like the Jesuits, Theatines, Capuchins, and the Ursulines.  These new religious orders were told to combat Protestantism by educating the population about Catholicism.

The Pope made the Index Librorum Prohibitorum, a list of banned books. It had a big influence in its first centuries and was not ended until the 1960s. The Catholic Church also used baroque art to touch the religious feeling of the faithful and bring them to the Catholic religion.

In addition to the conflict in the churches, there were political consequences. Common people became more willing to question their leaders. In 1524-1525, millions of peasants rebelled against the nobles in the name of equality of humanity in front of God.

Many countries in Europe chose Protestantism as their state religion. This divided Europe by religion. Religious wars such as the French Wars of Religion resulted.

For a short time, Protestant and Catholic had managed to live with one another and with the Peace of Augsburg in 1555. This Peace recognized the confessional division of the German states and gave the right to Protestants to practice their religion.

For a long time, Catholic countries like Spain and Italy didn't allow Protestants to live there, while Protestant countries kept out Catholics. With the American Revolution, the idea of freedom of religion began to expand. Protestants became influential in the United States and the English Canada.

Quebec was a (formerly French) Catholic province of Canada. After the Seven Years War the British imposed the Quebec Act  granting freedom of religion in Quebec. This law also said that some of the present-day United States (like Ohio and Michigan) were part of Quebec.  Catholics were granted religious freedom in those areas. Protestant colonists saw this as one of the Intolerable Acts. In later centuries, many Protestant churches were established in the province of Quebec. Many Catholic churches also began in Ohio and Michigan. Eventually most Christian countries allowed some religious freedom.

Churches based on Reformation ideas have multiplied into different forms, especially in historically Protestant countries. Even in much of Latin America, which is historically Catholic, Evangelical churches (which follow many of the Protestant ideas) have greatly expanded.

In the 20th century, some countries still had state churches, but also allowed full freedom of religion. In these countries, conflict between Protestant and Catholic Christians became less important. They have to work together to confront a more secular society.

In 2016 Pope Francis praised Martin Luther in a prayer service that commemorated the 500th anniversary of the Reformation. In turn, some Protestant churches have embraced some Catholic worship traditions, and others have praised them for their stand on social issues.

Prehistory (or better known as Pre-history) is the time before people began to write. It lasted from around 4.5 billion BC  3000 BC, during the Stone Age.

The word comes from the Ancient Greek words προ (pre = "before") and ιστορία (historia = "history").

Paul Tournal first used the French word Préhistorique. He found things made by humans more than ten thousand years ago in some caves in France. The word was first used in France around 1830 to talk about the time before writing. Daniel Wilson used it in English in 1851.

The term "pre-history" is mostly used for the period from 4.5 billion BC  3000 BC, roughly speaking, the Neolithic. Sometimes the term "prehistoric" is used for much older periods, but scientists have more accurate terms for those more ancient times.

Pre-history ends when people began to write. This happened at different times in different places, depending on when people began to write and whether their records were kept safe so they could be found later on. In places like Mesopotamia, China, and Ancient Egypt, people recorded things from very early times (around 3200 BC in Ancient Egypt), and these records can be looked at and studied. In New Guinea, the end of prehistory came much later, around 1900 BC.

Less is known about prehistoric people because there are no written records for us to study.  Archaeologists study things like tools, bones, buildings and cave drawings to learn about pre-history. Palaeontology, astronomy, biology, geology, anthropology, and geochronology also provide information about pre-history. For example, anthropologists study the traces of human behavior to learn what people were doing and why.

After people started to record events, first by drawing symbols (called pictographs) and then by writing, it became much easier to tell what happened, and history started. These records can tell us the names of leaders (such as Kings and Queens), important events like floods and wars, and the things people did in their daily lives.

In the more ancient Stone Age pre-history, people gathered in tribes and lived in caves or tents made from animal skin.  They had simple tools made from wood and bones, and cutting tools from stone such as flint, which they used to hunt and to make simple things.  They made fire and used it for cooking and to stay warm.  They made clothing out of animal skins, and later by weaving.

Society started when people began doing specialized jobs. This is called the division of labour. The division of labor made people depend on one another and led to more complex civilizations.

it is more challenging to study than periods with written records because knowledge of prehistory is almost entirely dependent on archaeological evidence.

Raffaello Sanzio, usually known as Raphael (April 6, 1483 - April 6, 1520) was a Renaissance painter and architect. With Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, he is one of the three greatest painters of the High Renaissance.

He is best known for his paintings of the Madonna and Christ Child and for his paintings in the Vatican in Rome, Italy.

Raphael was born in Urbino, in the region of Umbria, Italy. He was the son of Giovanni Santi (d. 1494), who was also a painter, and Magia di Battista Ciarla (d. 1491). Giovanni Santi was Raphael's first teacher, but he died when Raphael was only eleven.

At the age of 15, Raphael became an apprentice at the workshop of the painter Pietro Perugino, called by that name because he was the most famous painter in the town of Perugia. Perugino was famous, not only in Umbria, but also in Rome and in Florence, the home of Leonardo and Michelangelo. He had been one of the artists given the important job of painting the Pope's large chapel in the Vatican, the Sistine Chapel.

Perugino was known to have expert ways of painting (technique), and was good at getting paintings finished on time which made him popular with his patrons. He painted some portraits of people alive in his day, but most of his pictures are of religious figures of the past. Some of his paintings are small pictures of the Madonna and Child that could be used in a family chapel for private worship. Because he was famous, Perugino also got lots of work from wealthy patrons and from churches, so he painted many very large pieces to go above the altars in churches. To do this, he needed the help of his apprentices.

Raphael was able to learn a great deal from Perugino - drawing, the anatomy of the human figure, paint chemistry, and the technique of putting the paint onto the picture in smooth layers. The figures in Perugino's paintings often have very sweet gentle faces. Many of Raphael's paintings are also sweet and gentle. Some painters, such as Leonardo, were quick to change their style and make their paintings show their own touch. But Raphael continued to paint in the style that Perugino taught him. He added new ideas that he learned by looking at the work of other artists. Unlike Leonardo and Michelangelo, Raphael did not give the world anything new in the Art of Painting. He is famous simply because he was so expert at what he did, and because people loved his paintings so much.

The painting that is thought to be his earliest known work is a small picture called The Vision of a Knight. In this painting a knight lies asleep. In his dream there are two beautiful women. One woman, dressed in soft flowing clothes, offers him flowers. The other woman, dressed in dark clothing, offers the knight a sword and a book. The path behind the pretty woman runs beside a river. The other path leads up a steep mountain. Raphael was thinking about choices. Should the knight take the easy road, or should he try to change things?

Other early pictures by Raphael are Three Graces, and Saint Michael.

Raphael's first major work was The Marriage of the Virgin which was painted in 1504. It was influenced by Perugino's painting for the Sistine Chapel of Jesus giving the Keys to Saint Peter. It is now in the Brera Gallery in Milan, Italy.

In about 1504 Raphael went with another painter, Pinturicchio, to Florence, Italy. Florence was famous for its artworks, its artist's workshops, its new Renaissance buildings and its huge cathedral. Raphael wanted to see the work of Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and other important painters and sculptors.

Florence had a very strong tradition of making images of the Madonna and Child because the city was dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary. On almost every street corner there was a painting or a brightly coloured statue of the Madonna and Child.

While he was in Florence, Raphael painted many of his famous Madonna paintings. The most famous of these paintings are:

In 1508 Raphael was called to Rome by Pope Julius II. He became so popular whilst he was in Rome that he was known as the "Prince of Painters". He spent the last 12 years of his life in Rome and created many of his most famous paintings.

While he was in Rome he was commissioned (given a job), to paint a fresco of the Prophet Isaiah in the Church of Sant'Agostino. While he was working on the painting, he went to visit his friend, the architect, Donato Bramante. Bramante was at the Vatican while Michelangelo was painting the Sistine Chapel ceiling. Of course Raphael wanted to see what the famous master was doing. While Michelangelo was away, Bramante took Raphael into the chapel. When Raphael saw the way that Michelangelo had painted the prophets, he was so excited that he went back to Sant'Agostino's Church, scraped his painting off the wall and started all over again. It is easy to see that Raphael's painting is in the style of Michelangelo. Raphael was not ashamed of this. He did it to give honour to the great master.

Among Raphael's most famous paintings are the frescos that are painted on the walls of Julius II's own rooms in the Vatican Palace, known as the Stanze. The paintings in the Stanza della Segnatura and the Stanza d'Eliodoro were created by Raphael himself, whilst the Stanza dell'Incendio was designed by Raphael and painted by his assistants.

One of the frescoes in the Stanza della Segnatura is of the greatest importance. This painting is called The School of Athens. It shows a group of learned people from Ancient Greece, philosophers, poets, dramatists, mathematicians and others. They are listening to the central figure, who is the philosopher, Plato. The painting is meant to show that at that time, the early 1500s, there was a new birth of ideas and learning among the people of Rome that was equal to the learning of Ancient Athens.

To make this message clear, Raphael used the faces of the people that he knew. Michelangelo, with his broken nose, is sitting with his chin on his hand. The tall figure of Plato with long hair and flowing beard is a portrait of Leonardo da Vinci.

One of the excellent things about this painting is the way that Raphael has painted the building in which the figures are standing. The architecture looks as if it is opening up from the real room.

In the 1500s, painters were often asked to design architecture. Raphael's first work as an architect was the funeral chapel in the church of Santa Maria del Popolo. Pope Leo X also chose Raphael to help design Saint Peter's Basilica alongside Donato Bramante. After Bramante died, Raphael took over the designing of the basilica and changed its groundplan from a Greek Cross to a Latin Cross. Michelangelo went back to Bramante's plan but made it simpler. Then another architect, Maderna, made the building longer, as Raphael had planned.

Raphael's last work of art was a painting of the Transfiguration. This was an altarpiece, but Raphael died before he could complete it. It was instead finished by Giulio Romano, who was one of Raphael's assistants.

Raphael died on his 37th birthday. He was buried in the Pantheon in Rome. His funeral was at the Vatican. His Transfiguration altarpiece was put at the head of Raphael's funeral carriage.

Radioactive decay happens to some chemical elements. Most chemical elements are stable. Stable elements are made up of atoms that stay the same. Even in a chemical reaction, the atoms themselves do not ever change.

In the 19th century, Henri Becquerel discovered that some chemical elements have atoms that change over time. In 1898, Marie and Pierre Curie called this phenomenon radioactive decay. Becquerel and the Curies were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery, in 1903.

Most carbon atoms have six protons and six neutrons in their nucleus.  This carbon is called carbon-12 (six protons + six neutrons = 12).  Its atomic weight is 12.  If a carbon atom has two more neutrons it is carbon-14. Carbon-14 acts chemically like other carbon, because the six protons and six electrons are what govern its chemical properties.

In fact, carbon-14 exists in all living things; all plants and animals contain carbon-14.  However, carbon-14 is radioactive. It's carrying too many particles to hold, so it lets go of some and decays through beta decay to become nitrogen-14. Carbon-14, in the small amounts found around us in nature, is harmless.  In archaeology, this kind of carbon is used to determine the age of fossils and other things that lived a long time ago. The method is called radiocarbon dating.

Ernest Rutherford found that there are different ways in which these particles penetrate matter. He found two different kinds, which he called alpha decay and beta decay. Paul Villard discovered a third kind in 1900. Rutherford called it gamma decay, in 1903. The change from radioactive carbon-14 to stable nitrogen-14 is a beta decay. It happens when the atom emits a beta particle. A beta particle is a high energy electron or positron leaving the nucleus.

Other kinds of decay were discovered later. The types of decay are different from each other because different types of decay produce different kinds of particles. The starting radioactive nucleus is called the parent nucleus and the nucleus that it changes into is called the daughter nucleus. The high-energy particles produced by radioactive materials are called radiation. These various kinds of decay can happen sequentially in a "decay chain". One kind of nucleus decays to another kind, which decays again to another and so on until it becomes a stable isotope and the chain comes to an end.

The speed at which this change happens, is different for each element. Radioactive decay is governed by chance: The time it takes, on average for half the atoms of a substance to change is named the half-life. The rate is given by an exponential function. As an example, iodine (131I) has a half-life of about 8 days. That of  plutonium ranges between 4 hours (243Pu) and 80 million years (244Pu).

Radioactive decay changes an atom from one that has higher energy inside its nucleus into one with lower energy. The change of energy of the nucleus is given to the particles that are created. The energy released by radioactive decay may either be carried away by a gamma ray electromagnetic radiation (a type of light), a beta particle or an alpha particle. In all of those cases, the change of energy of the nucleus is carried away. And in all those cases, the total number of positive and negative charges of the atom's protons and electrons sum to zero before and after the change.

During alpha decay, the atomic nucleus releases an alpha particle. Alpha decay causes the nucleus to lose two protons and neutrons respectively. Alpha decay causes the atom to change into another element as the atom loses two protons and neutrons respectively.

For instance, if Americium were to go through alpha decay it would change into Neptunium because Neptunium is defined by having two protons fewer than Americium. Alpha decay usually happens in the most heavy elements, such as uranium, thorium, plutonium and radium. Alpha particles cannot even go through a few centimeters of air. Alpha radiation cannot hurt humans when the alpha radiation source is outside the human body, because human skin does not let the alpha particles go through. Alpha radiation can be very harmful if the source is inside the body, such as when people breathe dust or gas consisting of materials which decay by emitting alpha particles (radiation).

There are two kinds of beta decay, beta-plus and beta-minus. In beta-minus decay, the nucleus gives out a negatively charged electron and a neutron changes into a proton:

In beta-plus decay, the nucleus releases a positron, which is like an electron but it is positively charged, and a proton changes into a neutron:

Beta-plus decay happens inside the sun and in some types of particle accelerators.

Gamma decay happens when a nucleus produces a high-energy packet of energy called a gamma ray. Gamma rays do not have electrical charge, but they do have angular momentum. Gamma rays are usually emitted from nuclei just after other types of decay.

Gamma rays can be used to see through material, to kill bacteria in food, to find some types of disease, and to treat some kinds of cancer. Gamma rays have the highest energy of any electromagnetic wave, and gamma ray bursts from space are the most energetic releases of energy known.

Medication (also called medicine or pharmaceutical drugs) is the use of legal drugs to treat or cure an illness.

Drugs which are sold freely or do not require a prescription are called over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. It is easy to buy OTC drugs. A doctor must give a prescription for powerful or dangerous drugs. The note from the doctor is called a prescription. These drugs are called prescription drugs, prescription medicines, or prescription only medicines (POM).

There are many different words used to describe things about medications.

Action is what the medication is supposed to do. It is the helpful effects that the medicine is supposed to have on the body.

Many drugs have more than one action. For example, acetaminophen is an analgesic (it kills pain) and an antipyretic (it makes fevers go away).

Many drugs have more than one indication. For example, acetaminophen's indications include pain and fever.

A contraindication is a reason why a medication should not be given.

Almost all medicines, even over-the-counter medications, have some contraindications. For example, acetaminophen should not be given to people who are allergic to acetaminophen. For these people, acetaminophen is "contraindicated," and another medicine should be used instead. Acetaminophen is also contraindicated in people who have liver disease.

Dosage is how much medication needs to be taken to make the medication do what it is supposed to. Dose can be worked out based on body weight (others in BMI) based on amount of drug (for example a mg of the drug) versus weight of the person (like in kg). Working out dosage like this has helped come up with a LD50 (lethal dose in 50% of the population) for drugs and other chemicals people might eat, and it uses the dose of drug for every kilogram of weight on a person to estimate how much it would take to be toxic to the body as a guess.

Some dosages are based on age. For example, children often need less medication than adults. The mix of the drug or how it is delivered can change based on age, like how different flavours can be used in child, animal (horse for example) or psychiatric medicine (or the dose route changed, such as putting it in apple pudding). Other chemicals might be used in the adult version of a medicine people use to treat specific issues, such as the use of salicylic acid in oral wart gel for adults, which is contravened in children. In tinctures, or a mix of the medicine or medicines, is allowed to be made up of 0.5% alcohol for children under 6, 5% for ages 6-12, and 10% for people aged 12+, according to the FDA.

Dosage is very important because all medicines can be poisons if they are taken in large amounts. If a person takes too much of a medication, they can get very sick or even die. This is called an overdose. For example, taking too much acetaminophen (also called paracetamol, Tylenol, or Panadol) can badly hurt the liver.

Sometimes, normal dosages have to be changed if a person has certain medical problems like kidney failure for example. If someone has to go through surgery then they might not be allowed to drink liquids to avoid adverse effects or failure. A different gas has to be used during surgery in types of operation, like one on the GI tract for example. In these cases it is useful to have taken nothing by mouth before the operation, not just to avoid affecting medications but so the operation does not end in failure.

A person takes a medication because they want it to do certain things. When the medication also does other things that the person did not want, these are called adverse reactions or "side effects". For example, acetaminophen can cause nausea. This is a side effect of acetaminophen.

Adverse effects are side effects that are dangerous or harm the body. For example, in some people, acetaminophen can hurt the liver. This is an adverse effect of acetaminophen.

Most medicines have many possible side effects. This does not mean that anyone who takes the medicine will have those side effects. For example, not everyone who takes acetaminophen gets nausea. A side effect is just a possible effect that a medicine can have on the body.

When a medication is first discovered, it is given a chemical name. This name describes the atoms or molecules in the medication. Usually, only scientists use this name.

For example, the chemical names for acetaminophen are N-acetyl-para-aminophenol and para-acetyl-amino-phenol.

Every country has one generic (official) name for every medicine.

In the United States, a medicine is given an official generic name after the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) says it is safe to be sold. For example, acetaminophen is the official generic name used in the United States. (Paracetamol is the generic name used in the United Kingdom and some other countries.)

Sometimes, generic names come from a medicine's chemical name. For example, acetaminophen is named after N-acetyl-para-amino-phenol, and paracetamol is named after para-acetyl-amino-phenol.

Each company that makes a drug gives that drug a brand name. No other company is allowed to use this name.

For example, in the United States, the most common brand name for acetaminophen is Tylenol. One of the companies that makes acetaminophen (Johnson & Johnson) chose the name "Tylenol" for its acetaminophen. Another company that makes acetaminophen (GlaxoSmithKline) chose "Panadol" as its brand name. Like with most medicines, there are many other brand names for acetaminophen.

Some medicines have unofficial abbreviations. For example, acetaminophen is sometimes abbreviated APAP. This comes from the drug's chemical name: N-Acetyl-Para-Amino-Phenol.

No matter which of these names is used, they all describe the same medicine. For example, there is no difference between N-acetyl-para-aminophenol, acetaminophen, paracetamol, Tylenol, Panadol, and APAP.

There are many ways that medications can be given. These are called "routes of administration."

For most medications to work, they need to get into the bloodstream. The blood carries the medicine around the body and takes it where it is needed. The way a medication is given affects:

The most common way of giving medicine is by mouth (per os). The medicine comes in a pill or liquid that a person swallows.

When taken by mouth, medication gets into the bloodstream through the digestive system. It takes a while, usually 15–20 minutes, for the medicine to get through parts of the digestive system and get taken up into the bloodstream. Also, a very small amount of the medicine actually gets into the bloodstream. This is because acid in the stomach kills most of the medicine before it can be taken up into the bloodstream.

Medicines taken by mouth often last longer than medicines taken by other routes of administration.

Not every medication can be given by mouth. With some medicines, like insulin, the acid in the stomach will change the medicine or break it down so much that it will not work.

Some medicines can be given through a needle placed into a vein. This way of giving medicine is called intravenous (IV).

This is one of the fastest ways to get medicine into the bloodstream. Veins carry blood, so when a medication is given intravenously, it goes right into the bloodstream immediately. It takes less than a minute for blood to flow around the entire body. This means that when given intravenously, a medicine will reach the brain within a minute or less. All of the medicine (100%) gets into the bloodstream.

However, IV medications will not last as long as medications given by mouth. This is because the body starts metabolizing medications (breaking them down so the body can get rid of them) as soon as the medicine gets into the bloodstream.

Some medicines can be given through a needle placed into a big muscle, like the muscles in the upper arm, thigh, or buttocks. This way of giving medicine is called intramuscular (IM).

When a medicine is given intramuscularly, the medicine gets into the bloodstream through smaller blood vessels in the muscles. This takes longer than an IV injection, because the medicine is not being injected directly into a blood vessel. However, the medicine still reaches the bloodstream faster than medicines given by mouth.

Also, not all of the medicine gets into the bloodstream because some of it gets caught in the soft tissue in the muscle and never reaches the blood vessels.

Some medicines can be breathed in. This way of giving medicines is called by inhalation (sometimes abbreviated INH). This can be especially helpful for lung problems like asthma. Asthmatics can sometimes carry around inhalers which deliver a nebulized drug to the body quickly. Since the medicine is breathed right into the lungs, it can start working on the lungs right away.

Many medicines can be given more than one way. For example, acetaminophen can be given by mouth, into the rectum, or into a vein.

Reggae is a music genre that is from Jamaica that was developed in the late 1960s. Most music from Jamaica comes from the reggae style.

The music has regular chops on the back beat (off-beat).  These are called “skank”, and are played by a rhythm guitarist.  The bass drum hits on the second and fourth beat of each measure (each bar). These are called the “drop”. Reggae bands also use a bass, a keyboard or organ, and horns.

Reggae music is often used by Rastafarian groups. They are usually songs about religion, love and social problems. Bob Marley (1945-1981) was the most famous reggae artist. Other popular reggae artist are Peter Tosh, Bunny Wailer, Jimmy Cliff, Ziggy Marley, Burna Boy.

Famous instruments in reggae music are drums, guitar, saxophone, trumpet and trombone.

The Qing Dynasty or the Qing Empire () was a dynasty of rulers of China from 1644 to 1912. The dynasty was founded by the Manchus and so its other name is the Manchu dynasty. The surname of the Qing emperors was Aisin Gioro. It became the Republic of China in 1912 after the 1911 Xinhai Revolution.

In 1580, Nurhaci became the Jian Zhou general of the Ming dynasty. He unified the Manchu tribe and organised the Eight Banners. In 1616, Nurhaci declared himself Khan (King) and founded the Jin dynasty in Liao Ling. In 1626, Nurhaci led armies to attack Ning Yuan. Unluckily, Nurhaci was wounded by Yuan Chonghuan's Portuguese cannon and he died 2 days later. Huang Taiji, the son of Nurhaci, then succeeded to the throne and became the Khan of the Manchu tribe. In 1643, Huang Taiji was dead, caused by apoplexy. Shunzhi Emperor inherited Huang Taiji's throne. Prince Dorgon became the regent. In 1644, the Manchu armies conquered the north of China. The capital was changed to Beijing. The Ming dynasty was overthrown, though fighting continued until 1683.

The first Qing emperors were very capable.The Kangxi Emperor ruled for 61 years (1661–1722) — longer than any other Chinese emperor. He put down a big rebellion by powerful warlords. He pushed back Russian soldiers in the north and signed a peace agreement with Russia. He also defeated the Mongols in Central Asia. He was curious about Western science and welcomed many foreign scholars to his court.

The Yongzheng Emperor (1722–1735) was strict but very hard-working. He fought corruption and fixed the tax system.

The Qianlong Emperor (1735–1796) ruled during the best years of the Qing. The empire grew to its biggest size ever — including Tibet, Xinjiang, and Mongolia. He loved art and books, and ordered the collection of thousands of old Chinese texts. But during his reign, corruption also grew worse.

In 1793, Britain sent a team to China to ask for more trade. The Qianlong Emperor said no. He believed China had everything it needed and did not want foreign goods.

Peasant rebellions broke out across the country. The Qing army was slow and weak after years without real fighting. It took many years and a lot of money to put down these uprisings.

Foreign trade was also a growing problem. British merchants started bringing large amounts of opium — a dangerous drug — into China from India. By the 1830s, millions of Chinese people were addicted. Money was leaving the country, and the government was worried.

In 1839, a Qing official named Lin Zexu destroyed more than 20,000 boxes of British opium in the city of Guangzhou.

Britain was angry and sent warships. TheFirst Opium War (1839–1842) was a big defeat for China. British ships were much more powerful. China had to give Hong Kong to Britain and open several ports to foreign trade.

A Second Opium War (1856–1860) with Britain and France was even worse. Foreign soldiers marched to Beijing and burned the Summer Palace. China had to agree to more unfair treaties.

Chinese historians call this period the start of the "Century of Humiliation" — a long time when China was weak and foreign countries took advantage of it.

At the same time, China faced huge rebellions from its own people.

The Taiping Rebellion (1850–1864) was one of the deadliest wars in all of history. A man named Hong Xiuquan believed he was the younger brother of Jesus Christ. He gathered millions of followers and captured much of southern China. Around 20 to 30 million people died before the rebellion was finally stopped.Other large rebellions also broke out in northern and northwestern China, killing millions more.

The self-strengthening movement ( or ; 1861 - 1895) was a reform organised during the late Qing. With the defeat in the Opium Wars and the outbreak of Taiping Rebellion, the emperor and the imperial officials realised that it was necessary to improve the country's state with a series of reforms. Therefore, the Self-Strengthening Movement was started.

The movement could be divided into three phases: the first phase (1861 - 1872), the second phase (1872 - 1885) and the third phase (1885 - 1895). The major leaders are Yixin, Prince Gong (Chinese: 恭親王), Wenxiang (Chinese: 文祥), Zeng Guofan (Chinese: 曾國藩), Li Hongzhang (Chinese: 李鴻章), Zuo Zongtang (Chinese: 左宗棠), Shen Baozhen (Chinese: 沈葆禎) and Zhang Zhidong (Chinese: 張之洞). However, owing to the conservatives opposition and the problems of modernization, it failed finally.

With the failure of the Self-Strengthening Movenment, the defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War and the scramble for concessions, many Chinese leaders realised that reforms were urgently needed. Thus, the Hundred Day's Reform (Chinese: 戊戌變法; 11 June 1898 - 21 September 1898) was started in 1898. The leaders of the reform were Guangxu Emperor, Kang Youwei (Chinese: 康有為) and Liang Qichao (Chinese: 梁啟超). Eventually, it ended in a coup d'état led by Empress Dowager Cixi.

In 1900, a group called the Boxers rose up. They hated foreigners and believed magic made them safe from bullets. They attacked foreign people and Chinese Christians, and surrounded the foreign embassies in Beijing.

Cixi made a terrible decision: she declared war on all foreign countries at once. Eight countries — including Britain, France, Germany, Japan, and the USA — sent armies to China. They quickly defeated the Qing forces and entered Beijing. Cixi ran away in disguise. China was made to pay an enormous amount of money as punishment.

After all these disasters, even Cixi agreed China needed real change. The Qing started building modern schools, a new army, and promised to create a constitution. But for many people, these changes came too late.

A revolutionary movement was growing. Young Chinese wanted to end the monarchy and build a modern republic. The leader of this movement was Sun Yat-sen.

In 1908, both Cixi and the Guangxu Emperor died within one day of each other. The new emperor, Puyi, was only two years old.

On October 10, 1911, soldiers in the city of Wuchang rose up against the Qing. The revolt spread fast.

On February 12, 1912, the six-year-old Emperor Puyi stepped down. The Qing dynasty was over. More than two thousand years of imperial rule in China ended that day. China became a republic.

The Manchus changed their ways to be more like the Chinese in order to rule them better.  The Manchus started wearing Chinese clothes and writing in Chinese.  They began to enjoy Chinese food and art.  One of the Manchu emperors, Qianlong Emperor, began to worry about how much like the Chinese the Manchus were becoming and he tried to get Manchus to be more Manchu.  Qianlong Emperor made Manchus ride horses and shoot bows and arrows so that they would remember where they came from. The Chinese people used different types of clothes like maccukau, konaha, schinin and sakahn.

In the early Qing, Guangdong was a province. There were 79 counties. In 1911, it was checked that there were 5,041,780 households, approximately 28,001,564 people. The famous mountains in Guangdong were Lingchau, Huangling and Luofu. Dongjiang, Beijiang and Xijiang were the most important rivers in Guangdong. Guangzhou, Zhaoqing, Xiamen and Fujian were the major Guangdong cities.

Rabindranath Tagore ( ; 7 May 1861 – 7 August 1941), known in Bengali as Robindronath Ṭhakur ( ) and in Hindi as Rabīndranāth Ṭhākur ( ), was a Indian Bengali poet, philosopher, and artist. He wrote many stories, novels, poems, and dramas. He is also popularly known around the world as Kabiguru. He is also very well known for composing music. He wrote the national anthems of both India and Bangladesh. His writings greatly influenced Bengali culture during the late 19th century and early 20th century. In 1913, he became the first Asian to win the Nobel Prize in Literature.

His major works include Gitanjali (Song Offerings), a world-famous poetry book; Gora (Fair-Faced); Ghare-Baire (The Home and the World); and many other works of literature and art. Tagore was also a cultural reformer and modernized Bengali art. He made it possible to make art using different forms and styles.

Tagore was born on 7 May in 1861, at Jorasanko in Calcutta. He was the youngest son of his parents. His father was Debendranath Tagore. His mother was Sharada Devi.

Rabindranath Tagore was admitted to school. But he did not like the still education. So he was educated at home He wrote his first poem when he was eight years old. In 1877, at the age of 16, Tagore published his first large poetry collection and wrote his first short story and dramas.

In February 1873, at age 11, Tagore went on a tour of India with his father. They visited many places like Amritsar in Punjab, and Dalhousie in the Himalayas. Tagore also visited his father's estate at Shantiniketan. There he read biographies and studied history, astronomy, modern science, and Sanskrit. He also read works of Kalidas.

During this time, Tagore also composed many literary works. Tagore wrote a poem in the style of Vidyapati, a famous poet who wrote in Maithili.

In 1878, Tagore went to London. Because wanted to become a barrister. Later he studied at University College London. But in 1880, after Tagore did not do well in school, his father called him back from London. His father arranged a marriage for him with Mrinalini Devi, a girl of ten years. Child marriage was common during that time. They got married on 9 December 1883. Together they had five children.

Tagore died on 7 August 1941 ("Baishey Shrabon" in Bengali, 22nd Shrabon), at the age of 80, which was well beyond the average life expectancy of a South Asian male at the time.

In 1901, Tagore left Sheildah. He went to Shantiniketan (West Bengal) to build an ashram (which is like a monastery in Indian religions). In English, "Shantiniketan" means "an abode [place] of peace". He built a prayer hall, a school, and a library. He planted many trees and built a garden.

Tagore's wife and two of his children died in Shantiniketan. On January 19, 1905, Tagore's father also died.

By this time, Tagore had started receiving monthly income as part of his inheritance. He also started receiving some royalties for his literary works. He was very popular among readers of the Bengali language, as well as other people who knew his works through translations and reviews. Rabindranath's father bought a large parcel of land in Santiniketan, intending to establish a preparatory school.

On November 13, 1913, Tagore won the Nobel Prize in Literature. The Swedish Academy had selected him based on a small number of his translated works, and his 1912 work of poems named Gitanjali: Song Offerings.

The British Crown gave Tagore a knighthood in 1915. However, he gave back the title in 1919 to protest the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre in Amritsar. During this massacre, troops of the British Raj killed people who had no weapons.

In 1921, Tagore and an agricultural economist named Leonard K. Elmhirst set up the Institute for Rural Reconstruction in a village named Surul, near Tagore's ashram at Shantiniketan. Tagore recruited many scholars and officials from many countries to help the institute. Its goal was to use schooling to "free village[s] from ...  and ".

In the early 1930s, Tagore also grew more concerned about India's "abnormal caste consciousness" and differences based on castes. He lectured on the evils of such practices and also wrote many poems and dramas on these themes. He also became an activist.

He also founded a school named "Sriniketan" for teaching agriculture and crafts at Surul at a distance of about three kilometers from Shantiniketan.

Even during the last decade of his life, Tagore continued his activism. He criticized Mohandas Gandhi, one of India's leaders, for his comments about an earthquake on January 15, 1934 in Bihar. Gandhi had said the earthquake had happened because God wanted to punish people for practicing casteism.

Tagore also wrote a hundred-line poem about the poverty in Kolkata. Later on, Satyajit Ray based one of his movies on this poem.

During this period, Tagore wrote fifteen volumes of prose-poems. They covered many parts of human life. In his last years, Tagore took an interest in science and wrote a collection of essays. These essays explored biology, physics, and astronomy.

Tagore spent the last four years of his life in poor health. In late 1937, he lost consciousness. He was in a coma for a long time. Eventually, he woke up, but three years later, he went back into a coma. During these years, whenever he was conscious and felt well enough, he wrote poems. These poems talk about how he came close to death. Tagore died on August 7, 1941 at the age of 80 in his childhood home in Kolkata.

Between 1878 and 1932, Tagore visited thirty countries on five continents. His goal was to make his literary works known to people who did not speak Bengali. He also spread his thoughts and ideas, including his political ideas.

In 1912, Tagore went to England. The Anglo-Irish poet William Butler Yeats wrote the preface to the English translation of Tagore's famous book Gitanjali (Song Offerings). Tagore also met Ezra Pound, Robert Bridges, Ernest Rhys, Thomas Sturge Moore, and many others.

From May 1916 until April 1917, Tagore gave many lectures in Japan. Shortly after returning to India, the 63-year-old Tagore visited Peru at the invitation of the Peruvian government. At the same time, he also visited Mexico. Both governments pledged donations of $100,000 to Tagore's school at Shantiniketan.

On May 30, 1926, Tagore reached Naples, Italy. The next day, he met fascist dictator Benito Mussolini in Rome. On 20 July 1926, Tagore criticized and spoke out against Mussolini.

In July 1927, Tagore and two friends went on a four-month tour of Southeast Asia. They visited Bali, Java (island), Kuala Lumpur, Malacca, Penang, Siam, and Singapore. Later on, Tagore wrote a book named Jatri (The Traveler) about his experiences during these trips.

In early 1930, Tagore left Bengal for a nearly year-long tour of Europe and the United States. In Paris and London, there were displays of his paintings. During this period, Tagore wrote his Hibbert Lectures for the University of Oxford. He also met Aga Khan III.

From June to mid-September 1930, Tagore toured Denmark, Switzerland, and Germany. Next, he toured the Soviet Union.

Tagore's travels gave him the opportunity to talk with many notable persons of his time. They included Henri Bergson, Albert Einstein, Robert Frost, Mahatma Gandhi, Thomas Mann, George Bernard Shaw, H.G. Wells, Subhas Chandra Bose, and Romain Rolland.

Tagore's last trips abroad were his visits to Iran and Iraq in 1932, and to Ceylon in 1933. He visited Iran as a personal guest of Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi.

Tagore was mainly a poet, but his other writing includes essays, short stories, travelogues, dramas, and thousands of songs. He was also an expert painter.

Many movies also have soundtracks featuring selections from Tagore's songs, the Rabindra Sangeet.

Tagore also wrote many non-fiction books. These covered many subjects, including the history of India, linguistics, essays and lectures, details of his travels, and other autobiographical things.

In 1917, Tagore published a book called My Reminiscences. In this book, Tagore gives credit to his friend and mentor, Akshay Chowdhury, for influencing him in literature since he was a child. Akshay was the youngest son of Mihir Chandra Chowdhury, whose ancestry was linked with the Dutta Chowdhury (Chowdhuries) family of Andul. Rabindranath used to call Akshay Akshay Babu.

Akshay Chowdhury, Romesh Chandra Dutt, and Jyotiridranath Tagore were classmates at Hindu School in Kolkata. Because of this, Akshay developed a strong, friendly relationship with the Tagore family.

Rabindranath wrote that he loved to discuss high-level literature in detail with "Akshay Babu". At times, Akshay and his wife, Sarat Kumari Chaudhurani, used to participate in long talks about literature in a garden at Thakur Bari.

Tagore was also a musician and painter. He wrote around 2,230 songs. People call these songs "Rabindra Sangeet" (which means "Tagore Song" in English). These songs are now a part of modern Bengali culture. Tagore's many poems and songs are parts of his novels and stories.

His songs and music cover many aspects of human emotion, devotional hymns,nature and love songs. In most Bengali-speaking families, people sing Rabindra Sangeet.

Music critic Arther Strangeways of The Observer first introduced Tagore's songs to non-Bengalis through his book The Music of Hindustan. The book describes Tagore Song as a "vehicle of a personality ... [that goes] behind this or that system of music to that beauty of sound which all systems put out their hands to seize." Rabindra Sangeet has two great works, which are now national anthems of two countries: India and Bangladesh. This makes Tagore the only person in the world to have written the national anthems of two nations. They are Bangladesh's Amar Sonaar Baanglaa and India's Jana Gana Mana. Rabindrasangit. They are also influenced by musicians like Vilayat Khan, Buddhadev Dasgupta, and composer Amjad Ali Khan.

At age 60, Tagore took an interest in drawing and painting. He used many styles from different parts of the world. His styles included craftwork by the Malanggan people of northern New Ireland, Haida carvings from the Pacific Northwest region of North America, and woodcuts by Max Pechstein. Sometimes, Tagore used his handwriting in artistic styles on his manuscripts. His drawings and paintings were displayed in France and London. These varied artistic influences were further enriched by his extensive travels. Tagore's travels to Europe, Japan, and the U.S. exposed him to diverse cultures and artistic movements, significantly influencing his work. His visit to the 1913 Armory Show in Chicago, which featured Fauvist painters like Matisse and Derain, notably impacted his art. Tagore's painting of women in a field reflects Fauvist traits such as bold colours and expressive brushwork. This experience exemplifies his openness to experimenting with new styles and techniques, showcasing a blend of global influences in his art.

When he was 16 years old, he performed in a drama organized by his brother, Jyotirindranath Tagore. When Tagore was 20 years old, he wrote a drama named Valmiki Pratibha (The Genius of Valmiki). This described the life of Valmiki, a man who stopped being a robber and became a learned person, his blessing from the goddess Saraswati, and his writing of the Ramayana.

Another notable play by him is Dak Ghar (The Post Office), which describes how a child tries to escape from his confinement and falls asleep. This sleeping is suggestive of death. This play received reviews in many parts of Europe. In 1890, he wrote Visarjan (Sacrifice). Many scholars believe this to be his finest drama. The Bangla-language original versions included intricate sub-plots and extended monologues. He wrote many other dramas on a variety of themes. In Tagore's own words, he wrote them as "the play of feeling and not of action". Furthermore, Tagore’s “The King of the Dark Chamber” presents readers with a fascinating and enigmatic protagonist in the form of the King, an unseen monarch, even to his queen Sudarshana. Tagore portrays him as a powerful yet reclusive ruler, whose secluded existence in a dark chamber symbolizes his internal struggles and dissatisfaction with his appearance. Despite his regal facade and the power he wields, the King exhibits remarkable selflessness and forgiveness, as seen when he responds with understanding to Sudarshana's fear and repulsion upon seeing his true form, and spares the life of the King of Kanchi who caused great mischief. This complex character invites readers to reflect on internal conflicts and selflessness within themselves.  Another important aspect is Tagore's Rabindra Nritya Natya, dance dramas based on Tagore's plays.

Tagore wrote many stories. Galpaguchchha (Bunch of Stories) is a three-volume collection of eighty-four of his stories. Tagore wrote about half of these stories during the period from 1891 to 1895. This collection continues to be very popular work of Bangla literature. These stories have been used for many movies and theatrical plays.

Tagore drew inspiration and ideas for writing his stories from his surroundings, from the village life of India. He saw the poor people very closely during travels to manage his family's large landholdings. Sometimes he used different themes to test the depth of his intellect.

Tagore's poetry is very varied and covers many styles. He drew inspiration from 15th and 16th century poets and from ancient writers like Vasa. Bengal's Baul folk singers were also influenced by his style of poetry. He wrote many poems when he was at Shelidah managing his family's estates. Many of his poems have a lyrical quality. These poems tell about the "man within the heart" and the "living God within". Over the next 70 years, he repeatedly revised his style of writing poetry. In 1930s, he wrote many experimental works of poetry, and also used modernism and realism in his works.

One of his poems reads "all I had achieved was carried off on the golden boat; only I was left behind". Tagore is known around the world for his Gitanjali ("Song Offerings"), his best-known collection, which won him his Nobel Prize. A freeverse translation by Tagore of a verse of Gitanjali reads as follows:

Tagore is the only person to have written anthems for three countries.

Tagore's political views were complicated. He criticized European colonialism and supported Indian nationalists. But he also criticized the Swadeshi movement that many nationalist leaders in India liked. He liked self-help and learning. He asked Indians to accept "there can be no question of blind revolution, but of steady and purposeful education". Many people did not like his thinking. In late 1916, some Indians plotted to kill him when he was staying in a hotel in San Francisco, USA. When they saw him face-to-face, however, they instead started arguing with Tagore and changed their minds about killing him. Tagore also wrote many songs praising the Indian independence movement. He also returned the British honor of Knighthood as a protest against the 1919 Amritsar massacre. In Amritsar, troops of the British Raj had opened fire on unarmed civilians, killing many. Despite his unfriendly relations with Gandhi, Tagore played a key role in resolving a Gandhi-B. R. Ambedkar dispute which was about separate electorates for untouchables. Untouchables were people considered lowest in the social order. Rabindranath Tagore helped the freedom of India. He was first to identify the theme of "Globalization".

Tagore was also critical about the traditional style of education. While on a visit to Santa Barbara, California on October 11, 1917, he thought of a new type of education: a new type of university which he wanted to set up at Shantiniketan. On December 22, 1918, work for building the new university began. It opened on December 22, 1921. He named the university Visva-Bharati University. Tagore worked hard to raise funds for the university, and he toured many parts of Europe and the United States for this purpose. He gave all his Nobel Prize money to this university. The university gave personal guidance to all students. Students lived close to nature, and the teacher-student relationship followed a pattern of the gurukul system of ancient India. In his own words, he wanted this university to become "a world center for the study of humanity ... somewhere beyond the limits of nation and geography".

He also had a dream for the future India. He wanted India's freedom from the British rule. He dreamt of an India "where the mind is without fear it is ".

Even many decades after his death, people hold festivals in his honor in many parts of the world. Examples include the following:

Nobel laureate Amartya Sen, who is also a Bengali, once noted that even for modern Bengalis, Tagore was a "towering figure", being a "deeply relevant and many-sided contemporary thinker".

Tagore's collected 1939 Bangla-language writings (Rabīndra Rachanāvalī) are one of Bengal's greatest cultural treasures, and Tagore himself has been proclaimed "the greatest poet India has produced".

He was also famous in much of Europe, North America, and East Asia. Translations of his works are available in many languages, including Russian, English, Dutch, German, and Spanish. In the United States, Tagore gave many lectures during 1916 and 1917. Many people attended those lectures.

Between 1914 and 1922, the Jiménez-Camprubí spouses translated at least twenty-two of Tagore's books from English into Spanish. These Spanish translations influenced many leading figures of Spanish literature, including Pablo Neruda and Gabriela Mistral of Chile; Octavio Paz of Mexico; and José Ortega y Gasset, Zenobia Camprubí, and Juan Ramón Jiménez of Spain

Various composers, have set Tagore's poetry to music, including Arthur Shephard, Naresh Sohal and the Indonesian Ananda Sukarlan (the latter has set to music from Tagore's poems Passing Breeze, Go Not To The Temple etc.)

Pneumonia is a disease of the lungs and the lower respiratory system. The lung contains many small bulbs, or sacs, called alveoli. These help to take out oxygen from the air. In the case of pneumonia, these bulbs become inflamed. The lungs fill up with a fluid called pus and can no longer absorb as much oxygen as before. These make it hard for the person with pneumonia to breathe. They may feel out of breath, or like they are drowning. They may also feel pain when they breathe. Sometimes people die (30% of patients under 65) of pneumonia, even when they go to a hospital and take medicine (21% in-hospital mortality rate all patients ages).

Most of the time, pneumonia is an infectious disease that can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi or parasites. It may be spread outside of hospitals which is called community-acquired pneumonia. It can also be spread in hospitals and similar health care facilities and this is called nosocomial pneumonia. It can also be caused by chemical or physical damage done to the lungs. Other illnesses, like alcohol abuse or lung cancer, can make it easier for a person to develop pneumonia.

People with pneumonia usually have difficulty problems breathing. They may also cough, or have pain in the chest area. The treatment of pneumonia depends on how the illness was caused. If it was caused by bacteria or fungi, antibiotics can be used to treat it.

People of all ages can have pneumonia. The disease is dangerous. Many people die from pneumonia, especially old people, or people or babies with a weak immune system.

According to some research in 2010, in some parts of the world where people are very poor like India, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Guinea pneumonia was the cause of death for more children under the age of five than any other disease. Statistically, however, for every 2,000 children in the developing world who die of pneumonia, only one child in the developed world dies from the disease. This is because of differences in health care.

Pneumonia can be treated with medications that target the specific source of the infection. This might be an antibiotic, an antiviral, or an antifungal medication taken by mouth as a tablet or intravenously. Other therapies support a patient by providing comfort. These may include oxygen given by nose or mouth, inhalers to breathe in and expand the lungs, or steroids to decrease swelling.

A plow or plough is a tool or machine used for several jobs, like farming and snow removal. It is pushed or pulled across the ground. Human power or other animal power was usual in past centuries; in the 20th century plows are mostly pulled by tractors. The plow lifts and turns dirt and makes two lines of dirt behind it. Turning the soil buries weeds, brings more nutrients to the top, and loosens the soil. Crops grow better in land that has been plowed.

Early in the agricultural revolution, simple hand-held digging sticks or hoes would have been used in areas with good soil, such as the area near the Nile River in Africa. At the Nile, the annual flood makes the soil better by refreshing it, to create places where seeds could be planted. To help crops grow in areas where floods were rare, the soil had to be rejuvenated in a different way. This is when plowing was first used, and hoes were the first plows.

Printing is putting words and images on paper by  means. Books and newspapers are made by printing. Usually, the images are formed by ink. The ink is put on paper in machines called printing presses.

Printing is one of the technologies which has changed the world. It is an efficient way to multiply writing, so that copies may be made available to all people. Printing is therefore the continuation of writing by mechanical means.

Writing originated after people had settled in permanent dwellings. It dates from 3,300 BC, which is over 5000 years ago. A variety of writing systems were invented, long before paper was invented. Clay, papyrus, wood, slate and parchment (prepared animal skins) have all been used. The invention of paper by the Chinese was a step forward.

The earliest printing known was in 8th century China and Korea. Whole pages carved on flat wooden blocks were used. Covered with a carbon-based ink, they were pressed onto sheets of paper.

The second stage was to use separate characters by wood carving or casting. This was done in 11th century China and Korea. It failed to be really successful, because of the structure of the Chinese written language, shared at the time by Korea, which had thousands of characters. So the method was not much better than copying by scribes.

Printing was reinvented in 15th century Europe. Development was slow until Johannes Gutenberg made several improvements. In the next century print became the main means of communication between people who needed to keep precise records. With an alphabetic system of writing, print was much more economical than copying, and permitted many times as many copies to be available. This revolution in information technology helped all aspects of life in Europe, at a time when Europe was becoming the dominant region of the world.

Along with a technology for printing words, there were various means for printing graphics. Carving on blocks of wood and engraving on copper were used up until about 1800. After that, a great many inventions arrived, including lithography and ways to print photographs.

Machines to speed printing, cheaper paper, automatic stitching and binding all arrived in the 19th century during the industrial revolution. What had once been done by a few men by hand was now done by limited companies on huge machines. The result was much lower prices, and a much wider readership.

The consequences of print have been considerable. It led to the spread of knowledge, and had many side-effects. It took control out of a small class of clerks (scribes and monks) and put it in the hands of a newly educated readership. Publishing became a major industry.

Many of the first books were in Latin; some in Greek. Later, almost all books were printed in the : the language ordinary people spoke. The Bible was one of the first books printed, and one of the first to be translated into the vernacular, against strong opposition from the church. Science was given a great boost by printing, and scientific ideas are still usually first published in print. Several scholars have thought that print even changed the way people thought.

Plate tectonics is a theory of geology. It explains movement of the Earth's lithosphere. The lithosphere is the Earth's crust and the upper part of the mantle. The lithosphere is divided into plates, some of which are very large and can be entire continents.

Heat from the mantle is the source of energy driving plate tectonics. Exactly how this works is still a matter of debate. This theory includes the idea of continental drift.

The outermost part of the structure of the Earth is made up of two layers. The lithosphere, above, is solid. It includes the crust and the uppermost part of the mantle.

Below the lithosphere is the asthenosphere. The asthenosphere is like a solid or a hot viscous liquid. It can flow like a liquid on long time scales. Large convection currents in the asthenosphere transfer heat to the surface, where plumes of less dense magma break apart the plates at the spreading centers. The deeper mantle below the asthenosphere is more rigid again. This is caused by extremely high pressure.

There are two types of tectonic plates: oceanic and continental.

An oceanic plate is a tectonic plate at the bottom of the oceans. It is primarily made of mafic rocks, rich in iron and magnesium. It is thinner than the continental crust (generally less than 10 kilometers thick) and denser. It is also younger than continental crust. When they collide, the oceanic plate moves underneath the continental plate because of its density. As a result, it melts in the mantle and reforms. The oldest oceanic rocks are less than 200 million years old.

Continental plate is the thick part of the earth's crust which forms the large land masses. Continental rock has lower density than oceanic rock. They are mostly made of felsic rocks. These have granite, with its abundant silica, aluminum, sodium and potassium. Continental plates are rarely destroyed. Their oldest rocks seem to be 4 billion years old. Oceanic plates cover about 71 percent of Earth’s surface, while continental plates cover 29 percent.

Ocean lithosphere varies in thickness. Because it is formed at mid-ocean ridges and spreads outward, it gets thicker as it moves further away from the mid-ocean ridge. Typically, the thickness varies from about  thick at mid-ocean ridges to greater than  at subduction zones.

Continental lithosphere is about  thick. It varies between basins, mountain ranges, and the stable cratonic interiors of continents. The two types of crust differ in thickness, with continental crust being much thicker than oceanic:  vs. .

The lithosphere consists of tectonic plates. There are seven major and many minor plates. The lithospheric plates ride on the asthenosphere (aesthenosphere). The plate boundary is where two plates meet. When movement occurs, the plates may create mountains, earthquakes, volcanoes, mid-oceanic ridges and oceanic trenches, depending on which way the plates are moving.

Earthquakes, volcanic activity, mountain-building, and oceanic trench formation occur along plate boundaries. The lateral movement of the plates varies from:

Depending on how they are defined, seven or eight major plates are usually listed:

Prose is the ordinary form of the written, or spoken, language. It is not poetry. On the written page it looks like a cluster of paragraphs. It does not need any special format, such as lists and tables. In writing, it is without special rhythm. It is similar to everyday communication. That is what makes it different from poetry and from theatrical works such as plays.

Prose comes from the Latin word prosa, meaning straightforward. Prose writing is usually used to describe facts or to discuss whatever one's thoughts are in free flowing speech. It may be used for newspapers, novels, magazines, encyclopedias, letters, stories, history, philosophy and biography.

Prose generally has no formal structure, like meter or rhyme, that is often found in poetry. Therefore, it is used to describe literature which is non-poetic, and non-theatrical. There is, however, a blend of the two forms of literature known as prose poetry.

Poliomyelitis, or polio, is a virus that causes a serious disease. It is spread from person to person.

Most of the time, polio has no symptoms unless the polio virus gets into the blood. It is uncommon for the virus to enter the brain or spinal cord. If this does happen, it can cause muscles to become paralyzed. Some people get better from the paralysis. Others will be disabled. Depending on which muscles have been affected, these people may need a mobility aid or a wheelchair; they may have difficulty using their hands; or they may even have trouble breathing.

About 15 out of every 10,000 adults who get polio die.  (This means an adult has a 0.015% chance of dying from polio.)

Vaccination with polio vaccines could stop the disease all over the world. Organizations like the World Health Organization have been trying to vaccinate as many people as possible against polio. Vaccinations have eliminated polio from most countries in the world.

Worldwide, polio has become much less common in the past few decades.  In 1988, there were about 350,000 cases of polio in the world.  By 2007, the number of cases of polio in the world had decreased by over 99.9%, to just 1,652 cases.

The disease is preventable with the polio vaccine; however, multiple doses are required for it to be effective. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends polio vaccination boosters for travellers and those who live in countries where the disease is endemic.

The 32nd President of the United States, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, had polio.  He is the only President of the United States to have had this disease.

The child has to have ALL of these to be fully protected. This explains why polio is still around. In endemic areas, wild polioviruses can infect virtually the entire human population. Not all, however, develop paralysis or any other sign of the infection.

Racism is the belief that one race, culture or tribe is better than others. It means judging or treating people badly for belonging to a certain race or ethnic group.

Racism can affect many parts of society, like laws, cultures, and economies. It is a social issue and human rights violation. In extreme cases, it can lead to genocides, such as the Holocaust.

Racism has caused wars, slavery, genocide and the creation of nations. It was used by some powerful groups to justify their actions and biases. For example, during colonial times, European empires used racism to treat indigenous peoples badly and take their lands. In the Americas, white slave owners treated black people as property, using racist ideas to make it seem okay.

There are different forms of racism, some are very obvious, but others are more hidden. Everyday racism is the less obvious kind that happens in society. It's when people make others feel like they don't fully belong because of their race or ethnicity. This can happen through social interactions and behaviors based on racist beliefs.

Some psychologists, especially those influenced by Jungian psychology, explain racism using the idea of the psychological shadow. In Jungian psychology, the shadow is the hidden part of a person or group that contains thoughts, feelings, fears, and weaknesses they do not want to accept about themselves. According to this view, racism can happen when people avoid facing these unwanted parts of themselves and instead blame another group for them. This process is called projection. As a result, the other group may be unfairly seen as dangerous, inferior, or morally wrong. This can create a false feeling that one's own group is better while hiding the real causes of social problems.

Jungian psychologists suggest that reducing racism begins with shadow awareness. This means honestly recognizing one's own fears, unfair ideas about other people, and weaknesses instead of blaming others for them. According to this view, understanding yourself better, caring about other people's feelings, and recognizing that all people share a common humanity can help reduce racism and improve relationships between different groups.

Humans often sort themselves into groups by race or ethnicity (culture/tribe). They do this based on ancestry, as well as visible traits like skin color, facial features and hair texture. However, modern biology knows that humans do not really fit well into these groups.  The DNA of people from different races is very similar.  Evidence from genetics and archaeology suggests that all humans came from the same group of early humans in East Africa.

In the late 18th century, Europeans began using the term Aryan to refer to the original prehistoric Proto-Indo-Europeans and their descendants up to the present day (i.e., the Indo-European peoples). It was also assumed at the time, that, Aryans were a culturally superior people. By the late 19th century, some Europeans began to use the name Aryan for only the Nordic peoples of Europe (one branch of the Indo-European peoples), as a "pure," "noble" and racially "superior" race they claimed were descended from the original Aryan tribes. The theory that the Aryans first came from Europe became especially popular in Germany and to a lesser degree in Austria and Hungary.

When European settlers came to the Americas, they killed thousands of Native Americans and when the European settlers got to Australia, they started killing off large numbers of Indigenous Australians. With the birth of their empires, many other native tribes suffered in Canada, South Africa, New Zealand, Hong Kong, Macau, Pakistan, Bangladesh and India. Japan also held similar beliefs about Chinese, Koreans and Southeast Asians in their colonies.

Racism in the U.K., Ireland and France was usually about limiting the rights of Jews, Roma and minorities like the French Basques. As the colonies became independent after the 1950s, many migrated to the U.K. and France, but were discriminated against. Some British cafes and hotels would not welcome in Caribbean guests and the French made Arabs and Berbers feel unwelcome in some French towns as well. Since the 1960s, Indian, Pakistani, Bangladeshi and Sri Lankan people have moved to the U.K. and been victimised and 'Paki-bashed'. 9/11, 2001, has heightened the French and British fears about Islam and Arabs along with other MENA people in general. Polish and Brazilian migrant labours are also discriminated against in some places. Racist parties like the U.K.'s British National Party and National Front trade on these fears to get votes. As of 2025, racism is growing in the U.K., France, and Europe more generally.

Alleged scientific findings of racial differences were used by Nazi Germany to justify the racialist policy with its concept of "Großdeutschland" (Greater Germany) and the Nordic race idea. The Nazis were anti-Semitic and falsely blamed Jews for Germany's defeat in World War I and the Great Depression. The Nazis and some of their anti-Semitic allies, like Hungary, committed genocide against the Jews during the Holocaust of World War II. Both the Nazis and Romania's Iron Guard also persecuted the Roma people. During World War II, the Nazis embarked on a systematic attempt at genocide of the Roma, known as the Porajmos. The Nazis also knowingly killed of thousands of Slavs.

Fascist Benito Mussolini, in a 1919 speech to denounce Soviet Russia, claimed that Jewish bankers in London and New York City were bound by the chains of race to Moscow, and claimed that 80 percent of the Soviet leaders were Jews.

Many Italian fascists held anti-Slavic views, especially against neighbouring Yugoslav nations, who they saw as being in competition with Italy, which had laid claim to the  Yugoslavia's region of Dalmatia. Mussolini said Italy would get its own way and was willing to use force to settle arguments. An early example was Italy's bombardment of the Greek island of Corfu in 1923. Soon after he succeeded in setting up a puppet regime in Albania and crushed  a rebellion in Libya, which had been an Italian colony since 1912.

Italy, just as Germany, Austria and Hungary, regarded all Slavs and Roma as stupid, racially inferior due to the effects of Social Darwinism and undeserving of their basic rights. Anti-Arab discrimination was also used in parts of Libya.

The Iron Guard was an antisemitic fascist movement and political party in Romania from 1927 to 1941. They hated both Jews and the Romani people.

American racism has been a major issue in the country since before its founding. Historically dominated by European American settler society, race in the United States as a concept became significant in relation to other groups. Generally racist attitudes in the country have been most onerously applied to Native Americans, African Americans and some "foreign-seeming" action against Mexican immigrants among others. The Chinese, Japanese and Irish had trouble in America, during the 19th century, but the Blacks fell foul of the Jim Crow Laws which once racially separated some parts of America between Blacks and Whites. These first emerged in the late 19th Century and lasted to the mid 1960s and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

Millions of West, Central, East and Southern Africans were killed while they were held as prisoners or as slaves by the Europeans, Arabs and Berbers. Some call this the Black Holocaust. The United States' legal system has been accused of racism. 40% of the prison population are black. 12% of the general population is black. The New York Police Department (NYPD) stop-and-frisk program has been accused of racial profiling.

The book To Kill A Mockingbird is a well-known American novel largely focusing on race in the Jim Crow era, described earlier. In the 21st century, certain groups of non-white people hold the idea that all white people have advantages over them based on their skin color, with disregard to family background, personal history, or current situation. The Ku Klux Klan is an example of a racist hate group in the United States.

In the United Kingdom the two most popular nationalist political parties are the British National Party (BNP) and the UK Independence Party (UKIP). There is also a group called the English Defense League (EDL). They are thought to be racist by a lot of people. They are against unlimited immigration (both legal and illegal) by Muslims. Although Muslims can be of any race in the UK, they are usually South Asian. In a 2013 poll, 27% of 1000 British people aged between 18 and 24 said that they did not trust Muslims.

In the United Kingdom, most people are white. 7% are Asian and 3% are black. 4.83% of the British population are Muslims.

South Africa's "Apartheid" was a system of racial segregation which was used to deny many rights of non-white people. The policy started in 1948. Black people had to carry special papers (passes) or have permission to live and work in particular areas. There were areas that Black people were almost never given permission to enter. Whites opposed intermarriage with non-whites. Other non-white people were also discriminated against, but not as badly as Black people.

The Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act of 1949 prohibited marriage between persons of different races and the Immorality Act of 1950 made sexual relations with a person of a different race a criminal offence. Black people suffered greatly and were banned from voting in the Union of South Africa (1910-1961) even before 1948, when apartheid started. Universal sufferage (letting most adults vote, including black ones) was granted in 1994. Nelson Mandela became South Africa's first black head of state in 1994. The International community intensely pressured state president F. W. de Klerk into ending apartheid. Currently, racial quota laws discriminate against Whites in South Africa. Some people in South Africa publicly sung a song called "Shoot the Boer" (Xhosa: Dubul' ibhunu). Boers, also known as Afrikaners, are an ethnicity of White people in South Africa who are of Dutch descent. Former president Jacob Zuma sung the song in 2012. A website called "genocidewatch.org" has reported that White South Africans are facing genocide.

The Imperial Rule Assistance Association (Taisei Yokusankai) was a coalition of fascist (specifically Shōwa Statist) and nationalist political movements of Japan such as the Kōdōha ("Imperial Way Faction") and the Tōhōkai ("Society of the East"). It was formed under the guidance of Japanese Prime Minister Fumimaro Konoe. Prior to creation of the IRAA, Konoe had already effectively nationalized strategic industries, the media, and labour unions, in preparation for total war with China. Japan needed more land, minerals and colonies, so they annexed Korea and parts of China, such as Manchuria. Most imperialists in Japan regarded the Chinese, Koreans, Southeast Asians and Europeans as inferior races, to be crushed and exploited.

With the revelations of the Holocaust, as well as worldwide antiracist efforts, old ideas about race changed and, more slowly, some prejudices about race faded. The civil rights movement tried to liberate Black people from apartheid in South Africa and the Jim Crow laws in the southern United States. Black South Africans were finally granted the right to vote in 1994 by F. W. de Klerk after a 58-year ban. However, those are minor details, racism remains deeply rooted in society and its institutions, as evidenced by reports indicating persistent and in some cases increasing racial discrimination.

Phonemes are the units of sound (speech) that distinguish one word from another in a particular language. Most varieties (accents and dialects) of spoken English have about 23 consonant phonemes and 21 vowel phonemes (altogether 44 phonemes) but only 26 letters in writing. To see all the phonemes in English, the International Phonetic Alphabet has a unique letter for every phoneme, unlike the English alphabet.

A phoneme is the smallest unit of sound in spoken language that can change the meaning of a word. If you swap one sound for another, the entire meaning of the word changes.

The word "cat" has three phonemes (sounds) as part of its word: /k/, /æ/, and /t/.

A good way to learn phonemes in a language is to learn minimal pairs. A minimal pair is a pair of different words that are different by only one sound.

An example of a minimal pair is "bit" and "bat". Even though only the vowel in each word is different, each word has a completely different meaning. Like "bit" and "bat", with the words "rip" and "zip", we have two different meanings even though only the first consonant in each word is different. That different sound (in this case a one-letter sound) is a phoneme.

The /f/ sound in the word phoneme is itself a phoneme. If the "ph" sound was instead a "p" sound followed by an "h" sound, the letters "ph" would consist of two phonemes not one.

In short, letters are not phonemes. In the word "phone", "ph" is a phoneme sounding like "f". If we removed the letter "p" from phone, we would have the word "hone"; if we removed the phoneme "ph" from phone, we would have the word "one". The phoneme "ph" in the word phone is pretty much the same as the phoneme "f" in the word "funny". Phonemes do not need to appear similar to sound similar.

Some other examples of minimal pairs are "bug" and "bag", "dog" and "dig", "hog" and "hug", "cut" and cub", "wag" and "tag", "mop" and "cop", "shop" and "sop", "this" and "thus", "chug" and "pug", and "quick" and "quack". Just changing a single sound in each of these words made a word meaning something totally different.

Physical chemistry uses physics to study chemical systems.  It studies them at macroscopic, atomic, subatomic, and particulate levels.  It looks at concepts like motion, energy, force, time, thermodynamics, quantum chemistry, statistical mechanics and dynamics.

Physical chemistry is not the same as chemical physics. Physical chemistry is mostly a macroscopic or supra-molecular science. The majority of physical chemistry concepts relate to bulk properties rather than to molecular/atomic structure alone. These include chemical equilibrium and colloids.

Some of the relationships that physical chemistry tries to resolve include the effects of:

The term "physical chemistry" was first used by Mikhail Lomonosov in 1752. He presented a lecture course with the title "A Course in True Physical Chemistry"  to the students of Petersburg University.

Modern physical chemistry was developed in the 1860s to 1880s with work on chemical thermodynamics, electrolytes in solutions, chemical kinetics and other subjects. In 1876, Josiah Willard Gibbs wrote an article called, On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances.  This paper introduced many of the main parts of physical chemistry, such as Gibbs energy, chemical potentials, Gibbs phase rule. Other important discoveries include Heike Kamerlingh Onnes' work on enthalpy and macromolecular processes.

The first scientific journal about physical chemistry was the German journal, Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie. It was founded in 1887 by Wilhelm Ostwald and Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff.   The two chemists and Svante August Arrhenius were the leading men in physical chemistry in the late 19th century and early 20th century. All three were awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry.

Important discoveries were made in the 20th century. These include applying statistical mechanics to chemical systems and Irving Langmuir's work on colloids and surface chemistry. In the 1930's, Linus Pauling and others applied quantum mechanics to develop quantum chemistry. Chemical theories have grown with new experimental discoveries. New forms of spectroscopy started in the 20th century including: infrared spectroscopy, microwave spectroscopy, EPR spectroscopy and NMR spectroscopy.

Physical chemistry also improved with discoveries in nuclear chemistry, especially in isotope separation. This happened around the time before and during World War II. Chemists discovered important facts in astrochemistry.

A historical journal that covered both chemistry and physics was Annales de chimie et de physique.  It started in 1789 and was published under the name given here from 1815–1914.

Qin Shi Huang (; 18 February 259 B.C.    10 September 210 B.C.) was the founder of the Qin dynasty and was the first emperor of a unified China.

He was born Ying Zheng () or  Zhao Zheng (), a prince of the state of Qin. He  became the King Zheng of Qin () when he was thirteen, then China's first emperor when he was 38 after the Qin had ruled all of the other Warring States and unified all of China in 221 BC.

The First Emperor's father Yiren was the grandson of Ze, the ruler of Qin. The rulers of Qin and Zhao were from the same family, but the two lands fought against one another frequently. They wanted to make peace. King Ze gave his grandson Yiren to the leaders of Zhao so that, if Qin started to fight Zhao, the ruler of Zhao would kill Yiren and his family. Because King Ze would not want that, the ruler of Zhao was able to have less fear that Qin would fight him. (He also sent people from his family as prisoners to Qin so that things were even.)

While Yiren was a prisoner in Zhao, he met a trader named Lü Buwei. Lü knew that, when King Ze went to death, Yiren's father Lord Anguo would be the ruler of Qin. Lü also knew that Yiren had many brothers but Yiren's father loved a woman who had no son. Lü worked hard to make that woman adopt Yiren (take him up as her son); Yiren even changed his name to Zichu ("son of Chu") because his new "mother" was from a land named Chu. Lü's design turned out well: he and Zichu secretly went out from Zhao and, when King Ze and Lord Anguo died, Zichu got to be the ruler of Qin.

The ruler of Zhao was angry but Zheng's mother hid. He was not able to kill her or her son. Zheng's mother had been the girlfriend of Lü Buwei, but Lü gave her to Yiren when he fell in love with her. Sima Qian was not certain that Zheng was the son of Zichu and not the son of Lü Buwei, but most people thought that he was the son of Zichu, ruler of Qin. When Zichu died, Zheng got to be the new ruler of Qin. Because he was still very young when this took place, his mother and Lü Buwei were the true rulers.

Later, Zheng was older and put Lü Buwei and his mother's new boyfriend to death. He put his mother away as a prisoner as well. Now, Zheng and his helper Li Si ruled Qin. Their ideas are called Legalism. It said that the old ways of doing things were not good: if everyone did as ordered by the ruler and by his laws, things would be much better. The best way to run a country was for the ruler to have all the power. That way, no one would be able to fight or hurt other people. As the ruler of Qin, Zheng liked these ideas; as the ruler of China, he said they would be the only ideas. He made Confucianism and other old ideas against the law. Only the library in his palace (great house) was able to have books with any old ideas or with other people's accounts of history. Everyone else would have to read about Legalism and the accounts of history approved by the Emperor. The First Emperor's men then burned the other books and even killed some of the men who tried to keep them by burying them (putting them under the earth).

As the ruler of China, the First Emperor ordered great undertakings: his men put together earlier bits into a Great Wall of China and made a new river the Lingqu Canal so that boats were able to go from the Yangtze River in the middle of China to the Pearl River in the south. He ordered a large number of new roads and a tomb (last resting place) for himself the size of a city. This resting place was looked after by the thousands of statues of the Terracotta Army. Many people did not like doing as the First Emperor ordered: Sima Qian wrote about three men who made attempts to kill the First Emperor. None of them were successful.

The First Emperor did not want to die. He went to Shandong and Jiangsu to look for people who would be able to make him live forever. No one was able to do that, but some people think that Xu Fu's journeys to look for Mount Penglai were important for Japan. T Jōmon period ended and its Yayoi period started. The Yayoi period was the start of farming and the start of large countries in Japan. The First Emperor died in 210  BC.

The First Emperor had many sons, but his helpers Li Si and Zhao Gao tricked Fusu, his most liked son into killing himself. That way, a younger son became the Second Emperor and Li Si and Zhao Gao was able to be the true rulers for a while. The time when the First Emperor's family ruled China is named the Qin Dynasty, but it was very short. After the Qin Dynasty, there was more fighting before Liu Bei came out on top and got to be the new ruler of China. His family was named the Han Dynasty.

The Roman Empire ruled the Mediterranean and much of Europe, Western Asia and North Africa. The Romans conquered most of this during the Republic, and it was ruled by emperors following Octavian's assumption of effective sole rule in 27 BC. The western empire collapsed in 476 AD, but the eastern empire, the Byzantine Empire, lasted until the fall of Constantinople in 1453.

The Empire started in 27 BC, when Octavian became Emperor Augustus after the death of Julius Caesar. The fall of Western Roman Empire to the Germanic kings in 476 AD, marked the end of classical antiquity and the beginning of the Middle Ages.

The Empire was the third stage of Ancient Rome. Rome was first ruled by Roman kings, later by the Roman Republic and then by an emperor.

Many modern lands were once part of the Roman Empire such as, Britain (not Scotland), Spain, Portugal, France,  Italy, Greece, Turkey, Germany, Egypt, Levant, Crimea, Switzerland and the northern coast of Africa. The main language of the Roman Empire was Latin, with Greek as an important secondary language, especially in the Eastern provinces.

The Western half of the Roman Empire lasted for about 500 years until the barbarian general Odoacer defeated its final emperor, Romulus Augustus. On the other hand, the eastern half, consisting of the Balkans, Anatolia, The Levant and Egypt, continued for about 1000 more years before falling to the Ottomans. The Levant and Egypt were lost to the Arabs in the 8th century. The eastern part was the Eastern Roman Empire, more commonly known as the Byzantine Empire. Its capital was Constantinople, which is now called Istanbul.

In order to control their large empire, the Romans developed ideas about law and government. They developed the best army in the world at the time and ruled by force. They had fine engineering and built roads, cities, and outstanding buildings. The Empire was divided into provinces, each with a governor plus  and military support. Letters, both official and private, went constantly to and from Rome.

Trade was most important for Rome, a city of more than a million people (which was by far the largest city in the world). It needed and got wheat from Egypt, tin from Britannia, grapes from Gaul and so on. In return, the Romans built provincial capitals into fine cities, protected them from raids by barbarians. They gave education and career opportunities for young people in the provinces, such as jobs in the Roman army.

In principle, Emperors had absolute control and could do as they pleased. In practice, they faced some difficult problems. They had a staff of what would today be called "civil servants" and the advice of the Roman Senate. The emperor had to decide the most important issues facing the empire, and what should be done about them. Most tried to do two things. One was doing things to improve the life of Romans in peacetime. The other was fighting and defeating Rome's enemies, which the wealthy empire always had.

For Roman emperors the succession would often be an adopted son. The Emperor would notice an outstanding young man from one of the best families and would adopt him as his son. Before he died, he would make clear who he thought should succeed him. He could make his adopted son a Roman consul, or state in his will that the younger man should succeed him. Sometimes, that worked well. but not always. Every now and then, a civil war would be fought between claimants to the throne.

An adopted son or two gave the Emperor more choices. Some Emperors had no son, and others had sons who did not survive. Later on, Emperors grew so weak that the Roman army would just pick one of their generals to be the next Emperor, which sometimes led to civil war.

The Romans fought many wars against other countries and against barbarians several times. They enjoyed watching violent sports. They watched chariots races and fights between gladiators (men using weapons). Unlike in modern sports, the fighters were often killed in fights. Romans enjoyed those shows in the Colosseum.

The Romans had great civil engineering. They built many large public buildings and villas, aqueducts to carry water, stone bridges and roads. Some of those things can still be seen today. Many famous writers were Romans, including Cicero and Virgil.

Prior to 313 CE, religion in Rome was primarily polytheistic. In 313 CE, Emperor Galerius granted tolerance to all religions, including Christianity.

The city of Rome was taken over several times by barbarians, notably in 410  when a barbarian tribe called the Goths sacked the city (looting). The last Western Roman emperor, Romulus Augustus, abdicated in 476 . The Roman Empire would last another 1000 years as the Byzantine Empire in the East.

The main coin of the Roman Empire was the silver denarius. Later denarii were smaller.

Various reasons have been given for the fall of Rome. Edward Gibbon wrote The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire in which he investigated various ideas. Chief among them was, in his opinion, the effect of Christianity on the ability of the Empire to defend itself militarily.

Other historians blame the unstable system of leadership. In a later 50-year period, only two of 22 emperors died a natural death. Most of the other emperors were assassinated.

Saturn is the sixth planet from the Sun in our solar system. On average, Saturn is about  away from the Sun.

Saturn takes about 29.5 Earth years to complete one orbit around the Sun. A day on Saturn is much shorter than a day on Earth, lasting only about 10.7 hours. This means that Saturn spins much faster than Earth, spinning more than twice in the same time it takes Earth to spin once.

Saturn is one of the four giant planets in our solar system, along with Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune. Saturn is the second largest planet in the Solar System, after Jupiter.

Saturn was named after the Roman god Saturn, which the Greeks called Kronos. Saturn's symbol is ♄, which is the symbol of the Roman god's sickle.

Inside Saturn are many layers: a core of iron, nickel, silicon and oxygen compounds, a deep layer of metallic hydrogen, a layer of liquid hydrogen and liquid helium, and a gaseous layer on the outside.

There are many rings around Saturn, made of ice with some rocks and dust. Some people think that the rings were made by a moon crashing into the planet.

While a final number of Saturnian moons cannot be given, Saturn has the most of any planet in our solar system, 274 having stable and confirmed orbits. The largest of Saturn's moons is Titan, which is larger than the planet Mercury. Titan is the second-largest moon in the Solar System, after Jupiter's moon Ganymede.

Saturn is a squished sphere. This means that it is flattened at the north and south poles and wider around the equator. The planet's equatorial diameter is . Its polar diameter (the distance from the north pole to the south pole through the centre) is . This is a 9% difference. Saturn has a flattened shape because of its very fast rotation. It rotates once every 10.8 Earth hours.

Saturn is the only planet in our solar system that is less dense than water. This means if Saturn could be placed in a large pool of water, it would float. Even though the planet's core is very dense, it has a gaseous atmosphere. Saturn's average density is 0.69 g/cm3.

The outer part of Saturn's atmosphere is about 96% hydrogen, 3% helium, 0.4% methane and 0.01% ammonia. There is also some acetylene, ethane and phosphine.

Saturn's clouds are in a banded pattern, like the cloud bands seen on Jupiter. Saturn's clouds are much  and the bands are wider at the equator. Saturn's lowest cloud layer is made up of water ice and is about  thick. The temperature there is quite low, at 250 K (-10°F, -23°C). However, scientists do not all agree on this. The layer above is made of ammonium hydrosulfide ice. It is about  thick. Above it is a layer of ammonia ice clouds which are  thick. The highest layer of clouds is made up of hydrogen and helium gases and is found between  and  above the lowest layer. Auroras can be seen in the mesosphere. The temperature at Saturn's cloud tops is very low, at 98 K (-283 °F, -175 °C). The temperatures in the inner layers are much higher than the outside layers because of the heat made inside Saturn. Saturn's winds are some of the fastest in our solar system. They can reach 1,800 km/h (1,118 mph), ten times faster than winds on Earth.

Saturn's atmosphere can make oval-shaped clouds. These clouds are like the clearer spots seen on Jupiter. These oval spots are rotating storms, similar to cyclones seen on Earth. In 1990, the Hubble Space Telescope found a very large white cloud near Saturn's equator. Storms like this one in 1990 were known as Great White Spots. These unique storms only exist for a short time and only occur in about every 30 Earth years, in summer solstices in the Northern Hemisphere. Great White Spots were also found in 1876, 1903, 1933, and 1960.

The Voyager 1 spacecraft found a hexagonal cloud pattern near Saturn's north pole at about 78°N. The Cassini−Huygens probe later  it in 2006. Unlike the north pole, the south pole does not show any hexagonal clouds. The Cassini-Huygens probe also found a hurricane-like storm on the south pole that showed an eyewall. Until this finding, eyewalls had only been seen on Earth.

Saturn's inside is similar to Jupiter's inside. At the centre is a small rocky core that is about the size of the Earth. Saturn's core is very hot, with temperatures reaching 15,000 K (). Saturn is so hot that it loses more heat to space than it gets from the Sun. The core is heavy, with about 9 to 22 times more mass than the Earth's core. Above the core is a thicker layer of metallic hydrogen that is about  deep. Above that layer is a region of liquid hydrogen and helium.

Saturn has a natural magnetic field that is weaker than Jupiter's. Like the Earth's magnetic field, Saturn's field is a magnetic dipole (it has north and south poles). The field is perfectly symmetrical, which means it is exactly in line with the planet's axis. It is the only perfectly symmetrical magnetic field of any planet in our solar system. Saturn makes radio waves, but they are too weak to be heard on Earth. Saturn's moon Titan orbits in the outer part of Saturn's magnetic field. The ionised particles in Titan's atmosphere give out plasma to the field.

Saturn's distance from the Sun is over . This is about nine times the distance from the Earth to the Sun. It takes 10,756 days, or about 29.4 years, for Saturn to orbit around the Sun. This length of time is known as Saturn's orbital period.

Voyager 1 measured Saturn's rotation as being 10 hours, 14 minutes at the equator, 10 hours, 40 minutes closer to the poles, and 10 hours, 39 minutes, 24 seconds for the planet's inside. These measurements are known as its rotational periods.

The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft measured the rotation of Saturn as being 10 hours, 45 minutes, 45 seconds ± 36 seconds. That is about six minutes longer than the radio rotational period measured by the Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 spacecrafts, which flew by Saturn in 1980 and 1981.

Saturn's rotational period is the rotation speed of radio waves given off by the planet. The Cassini-Huygens spacecraft found that the radio waves had slowed down since the Voyager spacecrafts flew by the planet. This meant that the rotational period had . Since scientists do not think Saturn's rotation is actually slowing down, they think that the magnetic field may be causing the radio waves.

Saturn is best known for its planetary rings, which are easy to see with a telescope. There are seven named rings: A, B, C, D, E, F, and G. They were named in the order they were found, which is different to their order from the planet. From the planet, the rings are ordered: D, C, B, A, F, G and E.

Some scientists think that the rings are material left after a moon broke apart. A newer idea is that it was a very large moon, most of which crashed into the planet. This would have left a large amount of ice to form the rings and some of the moons, including Enceladus, which is made of ice.

The rings were first found by Galileo Galilei in 1610, using his telescope. They did not look like rings to Galileo. He called them "handles". He thought that Saturn was three different planets that were right next to each other. In 1612, when the rings were facing edge on with the Earth, the rings disappeared, then reappeared again in 1613, further confusing Galileo. In 1655, Christiaan Huygens was the first person to say that Saturn was surrounded by rings. Using a much more powerful telescope than Galileo's, he said that Saturn "is surrounded by a thin, flat, ring, nowhere touching...". In 1675, Giovanni Domenico Cassini found that the planet's rings were in fact made of smaller rings with gaps. The largest ring gap was later named the Cassini Division. In 1859, James Clerk Maxwell showed that the rings are made of small bits or particles, each orbiting Saturn on their own. He found that if the rings were solid, they would become unstable or break apart. James Keeler studied the rings using a spectroscope in 1895, which proved Maxwell right.

The rings are found between  and  above the planet's equator. The circumference of Saturn at its equator is 378,675 km (235,298 miles). As found by Maxwell, even though the rings look solid and unbroken when viewed from above, the rings are made of small particles of rock and ice. The particles are only about  thick; made of silica rock, iron oxide and ice particles. The smallest particles are only specks of dust, while the largest are the size of a house. The C and D rings also seem to have a "wave" in them, like waves in water. These large waves are  high, but they move slowly, at about  each day on Saturn. Some scientists believe that the waves are caused by Saturn's moons. Another idea is the waves were made by a comet hitting Saturn.

The largest gaps in the rings are the Cassini Division and the Encke Division which are both visible from Earth. The Cassini Division is the largest of Saturn's ring gaps at  wide. When the Voyager spacecrafts visited Saturn in 1980, they discovered that the rings are in a complex structure made out of thousands of thin gaps and smaller rings. Scientists believe this is caused by the gravitational force of some of Saturn's moons. The tiny moon Pan orbits inside Saturn's rings, creating a gap within the rings. Other ringlets keep their structure due to the gravity of shepherd satellites, such as Prometheus and Pandora. Other gaps form due to the gravity of a large moon farther away. The moon Mimas is what made the Cassini Division.

Data from the Cassini spacecraft has shown that the rings have their own atmosphere, free from the planet's atmosphere. The rings' atmospheres have oxygen and hydrogen gas. The oxygen gas is made when the Sun's ultraviolet light breaks up the water ice in the rings. Chemical reactions also occur between the ultraviolet light and the water molecules, creating hydrogen gas. The oxygen and hydrogen atmospheres around the rings are very widely spaced. As well as oxygen and hydrogen gas, the rings have a thin atmosphere made of hydroxide (a combination of oxygen and hydrogen), which was discovered by the Hubble Space Telescope.

The Voyager space probe discovered features shaped like rays, called spokes. These were seen later by the Hubble telescope. The Cassini-Huygens probe photographed the spokes in 2005. They appear dark when lit by sunlight, and appear light against the dark side of the planet. At first it was thought the spokes were made of microscopic dust particles, but new evidence shows that they are made of ice.

They rotate at the same rate as the planet's magnetosphere, therefore, it is believed that they have a connection with electromagnetism. However, what causes the spokes to form is still unknown. They appear to be seasonal, disappearing during the solstices and appearing again during equinoxes.

Saturn has a total of 274 known moons; 63 of these are named. Most of the moons are very small: 248 are less than  in diameter. Seven moons are large enough to be a near perfect sphere caused by their own gravity. These moons are Titan, Rhea, Iapetus, Dione, Tethys, Enceladus, and Mimas. Titan is the largest moon of Saturn, larger than the planet Mercury, and it is the only moon in our solar system known to have a thick, dense atmosphere. Hyperion and Phoebe are the largest moons that are not shaped like a sphere; they are each larger than  in diameter.

Between December 2004 and January 2005 a manmade satellite called the Cassini-Huygens probe took lots of close photos of Titan. One part of this satellite, known as the Huygens probe, landed on Titan. Named after the Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens, it was the first spacecraft to land on a planet beyond Mars. The probe was designed to float in case it landed in liquid, but it landed on ground. The probe's batteries lasted about three hours. Enceladus, the sixth largest moon of Saturn, is about  in diameter. It is one of the few solar system objects beyond Mars that shows volcanic activity. In 2011, scientists discovered an electric link between Saturn and Enceladus. This is caused by ionised particles from volcanoes on the moon touching Saturn's magnetic fields. This is like what causes the northern lights on Earth.

Saturn was first explored by the Pioneer 11 spacecraft in September 1979. It flew as close as  above the planet's cloud tops. It took photographs of the planet and a few of its moons, but they were low in . It discovered a new, thin ring called the F ring. It also discovered that the dark ring gaps appear bright when viewed towards the Sun, which shows that the gaps are not empty. The spacecraft measured the temperature of the moon Titan.

In November 1980, Voyager 1 visited Saturn and took higher-resolution photographs of the planet, rings, and moons. These photos showed some of the surface features of the moons. Voyager 1 went close to Titan and gained much information about its atmosphere. In August 1981, Voyager 2 visited the planet. Its photos showed that changes were happening to the rings and atmosphere. The Voyager spacecraft discovered a number of moons orbiting close to Saturn's rings, as well as new ring gaps.

On July 1, 2004, the Cassini−Huygens probe entered into orbit around Saturn. Before then, it flew close to Phoebe, taking very high-resolution photos of its surface and collecting data. On December 25, 2004, the Huygens probe separated from the Cassini probe before landing on Titan on January 14, 2005. It landed on dry ground, but it found that large bodies of liquid exist on the moon. The Cassini probe continued to gather data from Titan and a number of the icy moons. It found evidence that the moon Enceladus had water erupting from its geysers. Cassini also proved, in July 2006, that Titan had hydrocarbon lakes, located near its north pole. In March 2007, it discovered a large hydrocarbon lake the size of the Caspian Sea near its north pole.

Cassini observed lightning occurring in Saturn starting in early 2005. The power of the lightning was measured to be 1,000 times more powerful than lightning on Earth. Astronomers believe that the lightning observed in Saturn is the strongest ever seen.

Rome () is the capital city of Italy. It is also the capital and largest city in the region of Lazio, and the geographical region of Latium. It is on the Tiber River and has 2.8 million people. An estimate by the OECD put the number of people of the city area of Rome at 3.47 million. When the Roman Empire was new, Rome was called the Eternal City because it was already very old.

Rome is well known for being the home of Vatican City, a sovereign state serving as the headquarters of the Holy See having governance over Vatican and the worldwide Roman Catholic Church with the Pope as its head.

Rome is known for sure about the founding of ancient Rome; it is prehistoric. The myth of Romulus and Remus is often told. They were supposedly raised by a she-wolf. Romulus killed Remus, and became the first king of Rome, for some time Romulus ruled alongside a Sabine King a neighboring tribe. There is no historical evidence of this, but the story is popular. Numa Pompilius was the next king.

With the overthrow of the Roman Kingdom began the Republican era. The new Roman Republic fought and conquered the people around it. In 390 BC, the town was invaded by Gauls. Between the third and second century BC, Rome fought against the rival Carthage. The Roman army captured and destroyed Carthage.

Only with Julius Caesar in the first century BC, did the city began to grow significantly, especially toward the Campo Marzio, at the north of Capitoline Hill, and its domain was extended to Britannia. Caesar was never crowned emperor, a title which, however, fell to his adopted son Octavian who took the throne under the name of Augustus.

Augustus "found a city of bricks and left it marble". With him, Rome reached one million inhabitants and this was the first time in history that has happened in the world. Later emperors also added new monuments, temples, and triumphal arches to ancient Rome.

With the decline of the Roman Empire, the city declined in importance and fell into ruin. Pope Gregory I created major reforms for the people. The city was ruled by the pope, and soon also became the capital of a state, the Papal States, which remained active until the 19th century. Popes, like the emperors, became richer over the centuries and the same happened with the counties ruled by them.

Rome experienced a second "rebirth" in importance during the Italian Renaissance. The city of monuments and churches was called the "capital of Christendom", as the home of the Basilica di San Giovanni Laterano, the most important church of the world. The masterpieces of the Renaissance geniuses, like Leonardo da Vinci and Michelangelo, embellished the city.

But with the Italian Risorgimento Rome experienced a third "rebirth". On 20 September 1870, Garibaldi's army, which had the task of uniting all of Italy under the crown of Savoy, entered the city through a breach opened in the walls at Porta Pia and, the same year, Rome became the capital of the new Italian state. In a few decades Rome grew to be one of the most important capitals of Europe and of the world: in 1936 it was the capital of the Italian Empire, even if for a few years because of the second world war.

Today, Rome is a major European political and cultural center, containing the headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. There are also numerous museums, basilicas and palaces, such as the Colosseum, and, in the Vatican City, St. Peter's Basilica, a brilliant example of the architecture of the Renaissance which can be found all over Rome.

Rome stands on seven hills, with an area of . The city is crossed by two rivers: the Tiber, which runs from east to west, and l'Aniene, which runs from north-east to north – within the city, it flows into the Tiber. Rome was built on Sun Hill, later named Palatine. It grew and covered seven principal hills, which are now the inner city of Rome:

Rome has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification: Csa), with cool, humid winters and warm, dry summers. Its average annual temperature is above  during the day and  at night.

The children in Rome have to go to school from the age of six until 16. This takes them to primary school (), then middle school () and finally high school ().  The biggest university in Italy is the University of Rome.  It was created in 1303.  About  students study at this university.

Rome has an airport, which is named Leonardo da Vinci International Airport (IATA: FCO). The  Leonardo Express is a fast train that goes between the airport and the city center.  Many commuter railway lines connect the city to nearby suburbs, and long-distance trains go to other cities in Italy. In the city itself, public transport consists of three metro lines (A, B, and C), six tram lines, and many bus routes.

Rome has many old, famous buildings. In recent centuries, the city has become an important tourist attraction.  Rome has 1,500 fountains, which is more than any other city in the world.

Russia (, ), or the Russian Federation, is a country spanning parts of  Eastern Europe and North Asia. It has land from the Baltic Sea to the Bering Strait. By total area (), it is the largest country in the world, followed by Canada, and the United States or China. Russia's population is about 146.7 million people. It is the most populous country in Europe. Moscow, Russia's capital city, is the largest city entirely in Europe by population; it is also Europe's largest city by area. Other big cities include Saint Petersburg, Novosibirsk, Yekaterinburg, Nizhny Novgorod, and Kazan. Russia's official language is Russian. Russian is the most spoken language in Europe, though only spoken in Russia which is culturally different from most of Europe. It is also the most widely spoken Slavic language. Many regions of Russia have their own official languages alongside Russian.

Russia has land borders with 14 (16, if counting unrecognized) countries, in both Europe and Asia. These countries are Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Belarus, Ukraine, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, China, Mongolia, and North Korea. It borders Lithuania and Poland through Kaliningrad Oblast. It also borders the unrecognized countries of South Ossetia and Abkhazia to the south. It is next to 16 seas, and 3 oceans. It is the country with the most land borders in the world. Russia is made up of 89 federal subjects. This includes Crimea, LPR, DPR, Kherson Oblast and Zaporizhzhia Oblast and Sevastopol, which are claimed by both Russia and Ukraine. There are many different types of federal subjects. There are 48 oblasts, 24 republics, 9 krais, 4 autonomous okrugs, 3 federal cities, and 1 autonomous oblast in Russia.

The economy of Russia is one of the largest in the world. It ranks 11th in the world for highest nominal GDP. This is mainly because of the large amount of natural resources found in Russia. However, much of the land is either infertile or covered by permafrost.

The Eastern Orthodox Church is the largest religion in Russia. Russia has the most followers of Eastern Orthodoxy out of any other country. About 75% of Russians are followers of Eastern Orthodoxy.

Russia is a very large and  country. From 1922 to 1991, it was the largest republic of the Soviet Union. The Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (RSFSR) was based on communism. Today the government of Russia is a mixed republic under an authoritarian dictatorship. The President is chosen by direct election. Challenging candidates do not have  to the mass media. They do have full access to social media, internet news websites, and international media. Election results match , , and exit polling. The current President of Russia is Vladimir Putin. The country has turned towards an authoritarian dictatorship under Putin's rule. The President rules the country, and the Russian Parliament plays a  role. Russia ranks low in measurements of human rights and freedom of the press. Corruption is also seen as a big issue.

The name Russia comes from a Medieval Latin name for the Kievan Rus'. Rus comes from the name of the Rus' people. They were Norse merchants who settled in northern Russia. Another Medieval Latin name for Rus' was Ruthenia. The  Russian name for Russia ( / ) comes from the Byzantine Greek name for Rus' ( / ).

The first humans went to Russia in the Oldowan period of the Lower Paleolithic. Homo erectus migrated to the Taman Peninsula of Southern Russia. Flint tools have been found in Dagestan. Some of them were over 1.5 million years old. Many fossils of ancient humans were found in Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains. Russia had some of the last living Neanderthals around 45,000 years ago. They were found in Mezmaiskaya Cave in Adygea.

The first known Homo sapiens (Ust'-Ishim man) in Russia lived around 45,000 years ago. They lived in Western Siberia. Fossils of humans from around 40,000 years ago were found at the archaeological sites of Kostyonki–Borshchyovo and Sungir. Both of these places are in European Russia. Humans got to Arctic Russia at least 40,000 years ago. Fossils and artifacts were found at Mamontovaya Kurya in the Komi Republic.

The Kurgan hypothesis says that the Volga-Dnieper region of southern Russia and Ukraine is the homeland of the Proto-Indo-Europeans. The Indo-Europeans moved across many parts of Eurasia and spread the Indo-European languages and Yamnaya ancestry. Artifacts from these civilizations were found in Ipatovo, Sintashta, Arkaim, and Pazyryk. The earliest known use of horses in war was found in these places as well. This region is known as the Pontic–Caspian steppe. It was named Scythia in classical antiquity.

In the late 8th century, Greek traders settled Scythia. It became part of the Kingdom of Pontus in 107 BC until Pontus was conquered by the Roman Empire. The Bosporan Kingdom became a client state of the Roman Empire until the Bosporan Kingdom was conquered by the nomadic Huns and Pannonian Avars. The Khazars ruled the lower Volga basin steppes until the 8th century AD. They were important allies of the Eastern Roman Empire.

Russia's history began when the East Slavs settled Western Russia between the 3rd and 8th centuries AD. The Varangians and their descendants made the first East Slavic state of Kievan Rus' in the 9th century. They adopted Christianity from the Byzantine Empire in 988. This form of Christianity influenced Russian culture greatly. Kievan Rus' eventually broke up and the lands were divided into many small feudal states. The most powerful successor state to Kievan Rus' was the Grand Duchy of Moscow. This area served as the main force in later Russian unification and the fight against the Golden Horde from Asia. Moscow slowly gained control of the regions around it and took over the cultural and political life of Kievan Rus'.

Tsardom of Russia existed from 1547 to 1721. Ivan the Terrible was the first ruler of the Tsardom of Russia. He created oprichnina and annexed many lands (Astrakhan, parts of Siberia).

In the 18th century, the nation had expanded through conquest, annexation and exploration. So Russian Empire, the third-largest empire in history, was formed. It stretched from the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth eastward to the Pacific Ocean and Alaska. The empire was ruled by an emperor called the Tsar.

Peter the Great ruled Russia from 1689 until 1725. Peter moved the capital from Moscow to a new city named Saint Petersburg. He made Russian society more modern in many ways. For example, his inspectors shaved off the beards of passers-by. The government began building ships for the Russian navy.

The Russo-Japanese War started in 1904 and ended in 1905 with Japan winning the war. The Russian defeat was one of the reasons for later revolutions.

1917 was a period of revolutions in Russia. The Government was dissolved after October Revolution in 1917. The Bolsheviks (later called "Communists") took over the country. They murdered the Tsar Nicholas II, as well as other people who stood against them. The Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin and Leon Trotsky, created the first Marxist communist state. The Duma declared a Provisional Government. It was better known as the Russian Republic. Vladimir Lenin was the head of government of Soviet Russia from 1917 to 1924. The Russian Republic existed from 1917 to 1918.

From 1924 to 1953, Joseph Stalin ruled as the absolute dictator of Soviet Union. He destroyed anything and anyone that was against his rule. For example, he took the property of farmers and shopkeepers. Many millions of people starved and died in famines because of this. Stalin also removed, or "purged", all military members who were not loyal to him. Many people were killed or sent to prison camps, or gulags, for many years. Many prisoners died in gulags.

Soviet Russia and Nazi Germany agreed not to attack each other in 1939. In June 1941, Germany broke the agreement and attacked in Operation Barbarossa. The attack was part of World War II. The war lasted in Europe until May 1945, and Russia lost more than 20 million people during that time. In spite of this large loss, Russia was one of the winners of the war and became a world superpower.

In 1961, Yuri Gagarin flew into space. He was the first man who was in space. Since this period USSR was considered to be a space power. It was during the space race between USSR and USA.

From 1922 to 1991, Russia was the largest part of the Soviet Union, or the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). People sometimes used the name "Russia" for the whole Soviet Union, or sometimes "Soviet Russia". Russia was only one of 15 Soviet Socialist Republics. The republic was in fact named the "Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic" (RSFSR).

The Soviet Union fell apart in 1991. Russia took over the place of the USSR in the United Nations (UN).

Boris Yeltsin was made the President of Russia in June 1991, in the first direct presidential election in Russian history. Wide-ranging reforms took place, for example privatization and free trade laws. Radical changes (shock therapy) were recommended by the United States and International Monetary Fund. A major economic crisis followed. There was a 50% decline in GDP and industrial output between 1990 and 1995.

The privatization largely shifted control of enterprises from state agencies to individuals with inside connections in the government system. Many of the newly rich business people took billions in cash and assets outside of the country. The depression of state and economy led to the collapse of social services. Millions went into poverty, from 1.5% of people being in poverty in the late Soviet era to 39–49% by mid-1993. The 1990s had extreme corruption and lawlessness, and the rise of criminal gangs and violent crime.

The 1990s had many armed conflicts in the North Caucasus. There were both local ethnic battles and separatist Islamist insurrections. Because the Chechen separatists declared independence in the early 1990s, a Chechen War was fought between the rebel groups and the Russian military. Terrorist attacks against civilians caused hundreds of deaths. The most notable of these were the Moscow theater hostage crisis and Beslan school siege.

Russia took responsibility for settling the USSR's external debts, even though its population made up just half of the population of the USSR at the time of its dissolution. High budget deficits caused the 1998 Russian financial crisis and resulted in more GDP decline.

On 31 December 1999, President Yeltsin resigned (quit being the president). The job of president was given to the recently appointed Prime Minister, Vladimir Putin. Putin then won the 2000 presidential election. Putin stopped the Chechen rebellion quickly, but violence still occurs in the Northern Caucasus at times.

High oil prices and initially weak currency followed by increasing domestic demand, consumption and investments has helped the economy grow for nine straight years. This improved the standard of living and increased Russia's influence on the world stage. While many reforms made during the Putin presidency have been criticized by Western nations as un-democratic, Putin's leadership led to stability and progress. This won him widespread popularity in Russia.

On 2 March 2008, Dmitry Medvedev was elected President of Russia, whilst Putin became Prime Minister. Putin went back to being the president after the 2012 presidential elections, and Medvedev was made the Prime Minister.

On 24 February 2022, the Russian Federation attacked Ukraine, starting the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

On 23 June 2023, the Wagner Group, a Russian paramilitary organization, initiated a rebellion against the government of Russia. The revolt arose amidst escalating tensions between the Russian Ministry of Defense and Yevgeny Prigozhin, the leader of Wagner.

At , Russia is the largest country in the world. It covers more than one-eighth of the Earth's inhabited land area. Russia is also the world's eighth most populous nation with 140 million people as of 2022. Russia produces a lot of energy made from oil and natural gas.

Russia extends from eastern Europe across the whole of northern Asia. Russia spans eleven time zones and has a wide range of environments and landforms. Russia has the world's largest reserves of mineral and energy resources, and is the largest producer of oil and natural gas in the world. Russia has the world's largest forest reserves, and its lakes contain about one-quarter of the world's fresh water.

Russia is a federal semi-presidential republic. It has a president and a parliament. Russia has 85 federal subjects (territorial units). All subjects of the federation shall be equal. All entities are subject to uniform federal law. Subjects of the federation have two representatives in the parliament. Subjects of the Russian Federation do not have the right to secede from it. Important issues are decided by the Federation President. Lesser powers are given to the member republics.

At the end of the twentieth century, Russia experienced many political changes. Some people fought to leave the federation.

Elections are held at all levels. According to Steve White, the present government made it clear that they had no plans of making a "second edition" of the American or British political system. Instead they wanted a system that was closer to Russia's own traditions. Richard Sakwa wrote that the Russian government is considered legitimate by the majority of the Russian people. It seeks to deliver a set of public goods without trying to fit to extra-democratic logic to achieve them. Whether the system is becoming less autocratic (dictatorial) is debatable.

There are four big political parties in Russia. United Russia (Единая Россия) is the biggest party.

The United Russia is the ruling party, which supports the government. The other parties in the Duma (Russian parliament) do not criticize the government strongly, for fear of losing their places in the Duma. Many opposition parties, for the People's Freedom Party and the Other Russia, have been unable to register due to the strict rules. In the 2000s, the government led a war in Chechnya, and in the process, civil liberties and independent media were restricted. Corruption is widespread and human rights, especially in the North Caucasus, are frequently violated. In 2008, Putin's government was in a war with Georgia in a dispute over a region with many ethnic Russians.

The most western point of Russia is near Kaliningrad, formerly named Königsberg. The most eastern point of Russia is Diomid Island,  from mainland Chukotka (Russia) and  from Alaska (USA). The most southern point is in Caucasus, on the border with Azerbaijan. The most northern point is on the Franz Josef Land archipelago in Arctic Ocean,  from the North Pole.

Russia's capital and biggest city is Moscow. The second-biggest city is Saint Petersburg, which was the capital of Russia in the 18th and 19th centuries.

Russia is divided into many different types of administrative divisions. Some of these are called federal subjects. They are the top-level subdivision of Russia. Other types of Russian subdivisions include federal districts and economic regions.

Russia has a population of 142 million people. Most people (73.7%) live in cities. The population decreased by 5 million people after the fall of the Soviet Union. The current population growth is close to zero, and the population went down by 0.085% in 2008.

Russia's area is about 17 million square kilometers (6.5 million square miles). It is the largest country in the world. Its population density is about 8.3 people per square kilometre (21.5 per square mile). This is one of the lowest country densities in the world. The population is most dense in the European part of the country, centering around Moscow and Saint Petersburg. Siberia has a very low density.

The main religion in Russia is the Russian Orthodox Church. It is one of the Eastern Orthodox Churches.

Some very famous composers that were born in Russia during the 20th century were Alexander Scriabin, Igor Stravinsky, Sergei Rachmaninoff, Sergei Prokofiev, and Dmitri Shostakovich. Russia has produced some of the greatest pianists: Anton Rubinstein, Vladimir Horowitz and Vladimir Ashkenazy are among the all-time greats.

Russian composer Tchaikovsky created famous ballets, for example The Nutcracker. The impressario Sergei Diaghilev was responsible for the development of ballet in the early 20th century with the Ballets Russes. Dance companies at the Mariinsky Theatre and the Bolshoi Ballet produced many famous dancers.

Russians have made many famous works of literature. Alexander Pushkin is considered a founder of modern Russian literature. He was a poet from the 19th century.

Other famous poets and writers of the 19th century were Anton Chekhov, Mikhail Lermontov, Leo Tolstoy, Nikolai Gogol (he was born in what is now Ukraine, but during his lifetime Ukraine was a part of Russia), Ivan Turgenev and Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Many people think Tolstoy and Dostoyevsky are two of the greatest novelists ever. Three Russians won the Nobel Prize for Literature in the 20th century: Boris Pasternak (1958), Mikhail Sholokhov (1965) and Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn (1980). Mikhail Bulgakov was one of the most popular writers of the 20th century.

Soccer, ice hockey and basketball are some of the most popular sports in Russia. Boxing, gymnastics, weightlifting, and tennis are also popular sports. Track suits are popular clothing items for many Russians. Some examples of famous Russian sports people are former tennis world number one Maria Sharapova, who has won three Grand Slam titles, and was the world's highest paid female athlete in 2008.

After the 1952 Olympic Games, Soviet and later Russian athletes have been third place in gold medals collected at the Summer Olympics. The 1980 Summer Olympic Games were hosted in Moscow, while the 2014 Winter Olympics were hosted in Sochi.

For the 2018 Winter Olympics, which were held in Pyeongchang, South Korea, a lot of athletes could not compete because the International Olympic Committee found out they had been doping. Those who were not caught doping were able to play in the 2018 Olympics as "Olympic Athletes from Russia". They won two gold medals, and one in ice hockey.

In 6 appearances, Russian athletes have won a total of 425 medals at the summer Olympics and 121 at the winter Olympics. However, more than 30% of these medals were taken from Russia and its teams.

Chess is the main intellectual sport in Russia. In the 20th century, there were nine Russian World Chess Champions, more than all other nations combined.

Russian cuisine is one of the most famous in the world. It was divided: Old Russian cuisine, Old Moscow cuisine, Petersburg cuisine. The main thing of Russian food is variety of products used for cooking.

Typical Russian food includes: bliny, pelmeni, olivier salad, pies (called pirogi) etc. Russians have many soups such as okroshka, shchi, borsch, ukha, rassolnik. Russian traditional drinks are kvass, mors, sbiten , medovukha, vodka, birch sap.

The second (symbol: s), is a unit of time. There are 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, and 24 hours in a day. This tradition dates back to the Babylonians.

In science, a second is the time it takes for a caesium atom to vibrate 9,192,631,770 (around 9 billion) times. Scientists measure the second this way because the length of a day changes all the time. For example, when the dinosaurs lived, a day was about an hour shorter. Vibrations of atoms on the other hand always take the same time. This atomic second is also called the SI second.

Metric prefixes are frequently combined with the word second to denote subdivisions of the second, e.g., the millisecond (one thousandth of a second) and nanosecond (one billionth of a second). Though SI prefixes may also be used to form multiples of the second (such as “kilosecond”, or one thousand seconds), such units are rarely used in practice. More commonly encountered, non-SI units of time such as the minute, hour, and day increase by multiples of 60 and 24 (rather than by powers of ten as in the SI system).

One heartbeat of an adult at rest, will last about one second.

Under the International System of Units, the second is currently defined as the duration of 9,192,631,770 periods of the radiation  to the  between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium-133 atom. This definition refers to a caesium atom at rest at a temperature of  (absolute zero). The ground state is defined at zero magnetic field. The second thus defined is equivalent to the ephemeris second.

The international standard symbol for a second is s (see ISO 31-1)

There are 31,536,000 seconds in a common year, 31,622,400 seconds in a leap year, and 31,557,600 seconds in a Julian year

Originally, the second was known as a "second minute", meaning the second minute (i.e. small) division of an hour. The first division was known as a "prime minute" and is equivalent to the minute we know today. Third and fourth minutes were sometimes used in calculations.

The factor of 60 comes from the Babylonians who used a sexagesimal (base-60) numeral system. However, the Babylonians did not subdivide their time units sexagesimally (except for the day). The hour had been defined by the ancient Egyptians as either 1/12 of daytime or 1/12 of nighttime, hence both varied with the seasons. Greek astronomers, for example Hipparchus and Ptolemy, defined the hour as 1/24 of a mean solar day. Sexagesimally subdividing this mean solar hour made the second 1/86,400 of a mean solar day.

SI prefixes are commonly used for times shorter than one second, but rarely for multiples of a second. Instead, certain non-SI units are permitted for use in SI: minutes, hours, days, and in astronomy Julian days.

Greek time periods, for example the mean synodic month, were usually specified quite precisely because they were calculated from carefully selected eclipses separated by hundreds of years—individual mean synodic months and similar time periods cannot be measured. Nevertheless, with the development of pendulum clocks keeping mean time (as opposed to the apparent time displayed by sundials), the second became measurable. The seconds pendulum was proposed as a unit of length as early as 1660 by the Royal Society of London. The duration of a beat or half period (one swing, not back and forth) of a pendulum one metre in length on the Earth's surface is approximately one second.

In 1956 the second was defined in terms of the period of revolution of the Earth around the Sun for a particular epoch, because by then it had become recognized that the Earth's rotation on its own axis was not sufficiently uniform as a standard of time. The Earth's motion was described in Newcomb's Tables of the Sun, which provides a formula for the motion of the Sun at the epoch 1900 based on astronomical observations made between 1750 and 1892. The second thus defined is

This definition was ratified by the Eleventh General Conference on Weights and Measures in 1960. The tropical year in the definition was not measured, but calculated from a formula describing a tropical year which decreased linearly over time, hence the curious reference to a specific instantaneous tropical year. Because this second was the independent variable of time used in ephemerides of the Sun and Moon during most of the twentieth century (Newcomb's Tables of the Sun were used from 1900 through 1983, and Brown's Tables of the Moon were used from 1920 through 1983), it was called the ephemeris second.

When atomic clocks were made, they became the basis of the definition of the second, rather than the revolution of the Earth around the Sun.

Following several years of work, Louis Essen from the National Physical Laboratory (Teddington, England) and William Markowitz from the United States Naval Observatory (USNO) determined the relationship between the hyperfine transition frequency of the caesium atom and the ephemeris second. Using a common-view measurement method based on the received signals from radio station WWV, they determined the orbital motion of the Moon about the Earth, from which the apparent motion of the Sun could be inferred, in terms of time as measured by an atomic clock. As a result, in 1967 the Thirteenth General Conference on Weights and Measures defined the second of atomic time in the International System of Units (SI) as

The ground state is defined at zero magnetic field. The second thus defined is equivalent to the ephemeris second.

The definition of the second was later refined at the 1997 meeting of the BIPM to include the statement

The revised definition would seem to imply that the ideal atomic clock would contain a single caesium atom at rest emitting a single frequency. In practice, however, the definition means that high-precision realizations of the second should compensate for the effects of the ambient temperature (black-body radiation) within which atomic clocks operate and extrapolate accordingly to the value of the second as defined above.

Sometimes in role-playing games a second is used to refer to a small period of time or a single turn of combat. It is used as a standard moment of time, and does not necessarily refer to a real second, and could be shorter or longer depending on the scenario.

Sex is a type of reproduction common among living things. Sex is used by plants and animals, and also by fungi and various single-celled organisms. It usually needs two individuals which are different sexes from the same species. It works by combining genes from more than one source.

Asexual reproduction is easier than sexual reproduction, but there are benefits and drawbacks to both:

In humans, sex is normally either male or female. For example: John's sex is male. Jane's sex is female. Most of the time, the sex of a person depends on what sex chromosomes that person got from their parents. A woman's ovum (egg cell) contains one X chromosome. A man's sperm contains either an X or a Y chromosome. When a sperm and ova combine to form a fertilised egg, the baby may get either of these chromosomes from its father. If the baby gets two X chromosomes, it will develop into a female. If the baby gets one X and one Y, it will develop into a male. Before babies are born, their sex parts are already formed, but not ready yet. During puberty, the sex parts finish developing as well as other parts of the body like breasts and body hair.

There are some exceptions to this rule. Sometimes, the process of meiosis, which makes the sex cells, can go differently. This can result in a person having 3 X chromosomes, or 2 Y chromosomes or XXY instead of XY. Other times, the body may not follow exactly what their chromosomes are telling it to do.

Sexual reproduction first appeared about a billion years ago. It evolved within single-celled eukaryotes. The scientific community still discusses why it appeared, and why it still exists. Reasons commonly given include:

Sexual reproduction is a process that can only be found in eukaryotes. These cells have a nucleus and mitochondria. There are other kinds of eukaryotes (other than animals, plants and fungi) that also engage in sexual reproduction, such as the malaria parasite. Some bacteria use conjugation to transfer genetic material between bacteria. This is not the same as sexual reproduction, but it results in a similar mixture of genetic traits.

The cells used for sexual reproduction, called gametes, are either eggs or sperm. Fertilisation needs one sperm and one egg. Once a sperm enters an egg, the egg blocks other sperm from entering. The sperm and egg then fuse to become a zygote.

Sex determination in biology is about the function of sex, not what individuals look like. In humans, males and females usually look different. In many species they do not, except for the sex organs.

When there is sex determination there are basically two cases:

Usually, sex is determined by an organism's genes. With genetic sex determination, most alleles or genes that influence sexual development are on the same chromosome. That chromosome is then called the sex chromosome. Because genetic sex determination is controlled by a pair of sex chromosomes (or if of one of the chromosomes is there or not), there are usually the same number of male and female offspring. In humans, for instance, sperms carry either an X or a Y chromosome, and they occur in roughly equal numbers.

For some species sex is not determined by inheritance, but instead by environmental factors experienced during development or later in life. Many reptiles have temperature-dependent sex determination: the temperature embryos experience during their development determines the sex of the organism. In some turtles, for example, males are produced at lower incubation temperatures than females; this difference in critical temperatures can be as little as 1-2 °C.

Some fish change sex over the course of their life. This phenomenon is called sequential hermaphroditism. In clownfish, smaller fish are male, and the dominant and largest fish in a group becomes female. In many wrasse the opposite is true—most fish are female at birth and become male when they reach a certain size. Sequential hermaphrodites may produce both types of gametes over the course of their lifetime, but at any given point they are either female or male.

In some ferns the default sex is hermaphrodite. Ferns which grow in soil which has previously supported hermaphrodites are influenced by hormones remaining to develop as male.

The Sahara, in North Africa, is the largest desert in the world except for Antarctica. The Sahara is the largest hot desert. It is between  long and between  wide.

It is bounded by the Atlantic Ocean, the Atlas Mountains, the Mediterranean Sea, the Red Sea, and the Sahel region. It runs through many countries including Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, and The Sudan. Most parts are uninhabited, but some people manage to survive in places where there is water.

The Sahara Desert is about 9,200,000 square kilometers (3.6 million square miles) in size. It has been both larger and smaller at different times. After the last ice age it became more fertile, then dried up again. It is the hottest place on the Earth, but not the driest. The driest is the Atacama Desert in South America. The Sahara has about the same size as the whole United States.

Since the 1920s, the Sahara had grown by about ten percent, through a process that is known as desertification.

The Sahara has one of the world's most harsh climates. Typically, the Sahara landscape experiences little rainfall, powerful winds and wide temperature ranges. In some areas, there can be no rainfall for years at a time.

In the summer, daytime air temperatures across the Sahara often reach over 100 degrees Fahrenheit. In the winter the freezing temperatures may occur in the northern Sahara, and milder temperatures, across the southern Sahara. Snow may fall occasionally in some of the higher mountain ranges and rarely, on the desert floor.

The highest mountain is 3415 m, and is the Emi Koussi in Chad. Some mountain peaks in the Sahara Desert have snow even in the summer. The main mountain ranges is the Atlas Mountains in Algeria. The Sahara's lowest point lies in the Qattara Depression in Egypt, at about 130 metres below sea level. Sand sheets and dunes are about 25% of the Sahara. The other parts are mountains, steppes with a lot of stones, and oases.

Several rivers run through the Sahara. However, most of them come and go through the seasons, except for the Nile River and Niger River.

Metallic minerals are very important to most Saharan countries. Algeria and Mauritania have several major deposits of iron ore.  There are also uranium mines, mostly in Niger.  A lot of phosphates are in Morocco and Western Sahara.  Petroleum is mainly found in Algeria, where it is very important to the economy.  While mineral exploitation has led to economic growth in Sahara, this has rarely helped the indigenous population, as skilled workers have been brought from other countries.

Of the Sahara's around 4 million people, most live in Mauritania, Western Sahara, Algeria, Libya and Egypt.  Dominant groups of people are Sahrawis and Tuareg people.  The largest city is Nouakchott, Mauritania's capital.  Other important cities are Tamanrasset in Algeria, and Sebha and Ghat in Libya.

Only 200,000 km² of the Sahara are fertile oases, where dates, corn, and fruits are grown. The few fertile regions today are fed by underground rivers and underground basins. Many of Sahara's oases rests in depressions (areas under sea level) allowing water to surface from underground reservoirs; artesian wells.

The soil in Sahara is low in organic matter. The soil in depressions is often saline.

Other sorts of vegetation include scattered concentrations of grasses, shrubs and trees in the highlands, as well as in the oases and along river beds. Some plants are well adjusted to the climate, allowing them to germinate within 3 days of rain and sow their seeds within 2 weeks after that.

Animals living in the Sahara include gerbil, jerboa, cape hare and desert hedgehog, barbary sheep, oryx, gazelle, deer, wild ass, baboon, hyena, jackal, sand fox, weasel and mongoose. The bird life counts more than 300 species. Reptiles, including 4 species of snake also live here. In the Sahara Desert, you can find the Horned Viper, Sand Viper, Desert Cobra, and Saharan Sand Boa.  The most venomous scorpion in the world lives here.

4,000 years ago, the Sahara was a thriving savanna grassland with a great variety of wildlife.  This included animals such as elephants and giraffes.  Climate change has caused the rainfall to be less and turn the Sahara into the barren, desert wilderness as we know it today.

Roald Amundsen was a Norwegian explorer who focused on the poles. He led the first expedition to reach the South Pole and the first that could prove it made it to the North Pole. Amundsen was also the first man known to travel the Northwest Passage.

When Amundsen was young, he decided he would use his life to explore the wilderness. He was inspired by the lives of Fridtjof Nansen and John Franklin. While his mother was alive he did not go to sea, to keep a promise to her. After her death, he quit university to begin exploring the world at 21 years old.

In 1897, he went on the Belgian Antarctic Expedition as first mate. This was the first expedition to stay over winter at Antarctica, since their ship got stuck in the ice preventing them from leaving.

In 1903, Amundsen led the first expedition to make it through the Northwest Passage.

In October 1911, he began his expedition to Antarctica with four other men in attempt to be the first man to reach the South Pole. Robert Falcon Scott, an explorer from Britain, arrived in Antarctica with his own team only days after Amundsen. Both explorers raced to the South Pole, but Amundsen and his men used skis and dog sleds for transportation. This was more efficient. On 14 December 1911, Amundsen successfully became the first man to reach the South Pole.

In 1926, Amundsen and his men made it to the North Pole. Three other expeditions claimed to make it before then, but their claims have not been verified. Two of them have been considered fraud. This may make Amundsen and his men the first to reach the North Pole.

He disappeared in June 1928 while taking part in a rescue mission.

A republic is a form of government that has no monarchy and no hereditary aristocracy, and instead the head of state (the highest political authority) is an elected office It originates from Rome. In 509 BC, the Romans overthrew the Roman Kingdom and established a republic, a government in which citizens elected representatives to rule on their behalf.

National sovereignty lies in the authority of the government, not in an emperor or monarch. The word republic comes from the Latin words res publica,  meaning a "public thing". For example, the United States and India are republics. However, the United Kingdom and Canada are not republics since they have a monarch (King Charles III in both cases).

Countries with a king or other monarch and free elections is called a constitutional monarchy, not republics. A constitutional monarchy resembles a republic because the constitution has been amended to remove power from the monarch and install institutions conforming to a philosophy of republicanism. That includes the United Kingdom and the other Commonwealth realms, the Netherlands, Thailand, and countries in Scandinavia and elsewhere. What makes a republic different is that its laws are made and enforced without royal authority.

The head of state in a republic is generally a person who has been chosen by the citizens by direct election or by a group of elected representatives to act as the top representative of the people. In most republics, the head of state is called the president. In some countries, the president is elected and has a lot of political power. In others, the president does not hold much direct power but is important in the legal system for other reasons.

Sometimes, state is called a "republic" when its head is not called a "king". For example, the Roman Empire had an "emperor" and the Dutch Republic had a "stadholder", but they worked as hereditary monarchs.

Licchavi, in India, was an aristocratic state in the 6th and 5th centuries BCE and is nowadays sometimes called the first republic. The earliest republics that were much imitated later were Greek cities, for example democracy in Athens. The biggest difference from the other city-states was that people chose their leaders by voting or by lottery. Several Italian city-states during the Renaissance were ruled by a small group of aristocrats, and were called republics.

A ship is a large vehicle used to travel on water. It is bigger than a boat. Most are cargo ships, which carry most of the world's international trade. There are also many warships, passenger ships and other kinds for different purposes.

When people talk about a ship, they often use the pronoun "she". For example: She was launched on 29 December 1878.

The first ships used oars or the wind (or both) to make them move.

From about 4000 BC the Ancient Egyptians were making wooden sail boats. By 1200 BC the Phoenicians and Greeks had begun to make bigger sailing ships which were about 30 metres (100 feet) long and could carry 90180 tonnes of cargo. The Romans made even bigger ships which could carry up to 1,000 people and 1,000 tonnes of cargo. The 8th century saw the rise of the Vikings, who were famous for their "longships" and which were mainly used for raiding other countries, but also for trading. The longships had flat bottoms so they could move in shallow (not deep) rivers.

Sailing ships were used for thousands of years, but they were very important from the Age of Discovery to the 19th century. The Chinese admiral Zheng He commanded a fleet of large 'treasure ships' on seven voyages all over Asia up to East-Africa in the early fifteenth century. The most successful and largest fleet in the 17th century was the Dutch fleet (see the Netherlands). For trade and transport the Dutch often used a particular kind of trading ship, called a flute (fluyt in Dutch). Transport of people and cargo on sailing ships became rare in the early 20th century.

At one time, the steamships Titanic, Olympic, and Britannic were the largest ships in the world, Titanic sank on her maiden voyage after hitting an iceberg, becoming one of the most famous shipwrecks of all time, the Olympic was Titanic 's nearly identical twin, and actually set sail before Titanic and was scrapped in the 1930s after a very successful career including service as a passenger liner and a warship in World War I. The Britannic was the largest of these three sister ships, and was supposed to be more grand and elegant than the Titanic, but before she set sail on her maiden voyage, WWI broke out and she was stripped of her elegant furniture and elaborate paneling and became a hospital ship. During her term as a hospital ship, she was sunk by either a mine or torpedo, no one knows for sure. The Titanic lies at the bottom of the North Atlantic Ocean, off the coast of Nova Scotia, and the Britannic lies in the Aegean Sea, off the coast of the Island of Kea.

After World War II ships with diesel engines became commonplace. Passenger airliners replaced passenger ships for long trips in the late 20th century. Cruise ships continued in service for people on holiday. Cargo ships became much bigger. The main kinds are container ships for mostly manufactured goods, and bulk carriers including oil tankers.

The world's largest ship is the Prelude, owned by Shell. It is being built on Geoje Island, South Korea. It is 488m long and has the internal capacity greater than the total volume of four large aircraft carriers. It will collect natural gas off the coast of Australia, and liquify it. When liquified, the hydrocarbon takes up 600 times less space than its gas. Smaller tankers will take the liquid natural gas to its buyers. The ship will do liquifying and temporary storage, which is usually done on land. Shell believes this justifies the cost of the ship.

The shipyard builds many kinds of structures for the oil industry. It employs 30,000 workers.

Saudi Arabia (  or ), officially known as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA) ( ), is a country in West Asia including most of the Arabian Peninsula. The land area is roughly , so Saudi Arabia is geographically the 5th-largest state in Asia and 2nd-largest state in the Arab world after Algeria. Saudi Arabia is bordered by Jordan and Iraq to the north, Kuwait to the northeast, Qatar, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates to the east, Oman to the southeast, and Yemen to the south.

It is separated from Palestine and Egypt by the Red Sea. It is the only nation with both a Red Sea coast and a Persian Gulf coast, and most of its land is dry and barren. Saudi Arabia is the birthplace of Arabs and Islam  and sometimes called "the Land of the Two Holy Mosques" in reference to Al-Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca), and Al-Masjid an-Nabawi (in Medina), the two holiest places in Islam. Arabic is the only official language in Saudi Arabia.

Sunni Islam is the state religion.  The practice of non-Islamic religions is not allowed in public but it is allowed in private. The Hanbali school of faith has a big influence, and the ultra-conservative Wahhabism religious movement within Sunni Islam has been called "the predominant feature of Saudi culture".

Many Muslims from around the world visit Mecca in Saudi Arabia to make a pilgrimage.  The pilgrimage is one of the "pillars of Islam".  Other big cities are Riyadh, Jeddah and Dammam.  The pilgrimage is called hajj in the Arabic language. Somebody who makes a pilgrimage to Mecca is called a hajji in the Arabic language. People who are not Muslim are not allowed to enter Mecca. Most Saudis speak the Arabic language.

Saudi Arabia has the world's largest petroleum reserves and is the world's largest oil exporter. Oil accounts for more than 90% of exports and nearly 75% of government revenues, facilitating the creation of a welfare state. However, human rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have expressed concern about the state of human rights in Saudi Arabia. The currency of Saudi Arabia is referred to as the Saudi Riyal. Saudi Arabia became the first Arab country to take over the G20 presidency. In 2020, Saudi Arabia have a 20 riyal banknote to mark G20 presidency. Saudi Arabia virtually hosted the G20 summit in Riyadh on November 21-22 2020 due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Saudi Arabia is the largest state in western Asia by land area (most of the Arabian Peninsula) and the second-largest in the Arab World. It has an estimated population of 27 million, of which 8.8 million are registered foreign expatriates and an estimated 1.5 million are illegal immigrants. Saudi nationals comprise an estimated 16 million people. Saudi Arabia has cities that are important to the Muslim religion.

There is a national food called Kabsa. It is made with rice and meat. Many Saudi Arabian people eating Kabsa for lunch and sometimes for dinner. It can be made with spices and camel meat, lamb, chicken or fish.

The area of modern-day Saudi Arabia formerly consisted of four distinct regions: Hejaz, Najd, and parts of Eastern Arabia (Al-Ahsa) and Southern Arabia ('Asir). The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was founded in 1932 by Ibn Saud. He united the four regions into a single state through a series of conquests beginning in 1902 with the capture of Riyadh, the ancestral home of his family, the House of Saud. The country has since been an absolute monarchy,  governed along Islamic lines.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was founded by Abdul-Aziz bin Saud (known for most of his career as Ibn Saud) in 1932. The conquests which eventually led to the creation of the Kingdom began in 1902 when he captured Riyadh, the ancestral home of his family, the House of Saud, from the Rashidi Emirate. The Saudi Arabian government, which is an absolute monarchy, refers to its system of government as being Islamic. It has a strong basis in  Wahhabism, a minority school of thought in Islam. The kingdom is sometimes called "The Land of the Two Holy Mosques" in reference to Masjid al-Haram (in Mecca), and Masjid al-Nabawi (in Medina), the two holiest places in Islam.

Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarchy. However, according to the Basic Law of Saudi Arabia adopted by royal decree in 1992, the king must comply with Sharia (Islamic law) and the Quran, while the Quran and the Sunnah (the traditions of Muhammad) are declared to be the country's constitution. The primary source of law is the Islamic Sharia derived from the teachings of the Qur'an and the Sunnah (the traditions of the Prophet). Saudi Arabia is unique among modern Muslim states in that Sharia is not codified and there is no system of judicial precedent, giving judges the power to use independent legal reasoning to make a decision. Saudi judges tend to follow the principles of the Hanbali school of jurisprudence (or fiqh) found in pre-modern texts and noted for its literalist interpretation of the Qur'an and hadith.

Because the judge is empowered to disregard previous judgments (either his own or of other judges) and may apply his personal interpretation of Sharia to any particular case, divergent judgements arise even in apparently identical cases, making predictability of legal interpretation difficult. The Sharia court system constitutes the basic judiciary of Saudi Arabia and its judges (qadi) and lawyers form part of the ulema, the country's Islamic scholars.

Royal decrees are the other main source of law; but are referred to as regulations rather than laws because they are subordinate to the Sharia. Royal decrees supplement Sharia in areas such as labor, commercial and corporate law. Additionally, traditional tribal law and custom remain significant. Extra-Sharia government tribunals usually handle disputes relating to specific royal decrees. Final appeal from both Sharia courts and government tribunals is to the King and all courts and tribunals follow Sharia rules of evidence and procedure.

In Saudi Arabia, music and dance are important parts of life. People usually sing traditional songs together with poetry. They play instruments like the rabābah, which is similar to a three-string fiddle, and percussion instruments such as the ṭabl (drum) and the ṭār (tambourine). The country's national dance is Ardah, a sword dance from Najd. Men form lines or circles and sing poetry while performing it. Bedouin poetry, known as nabaṭī, is also well-liked. Saudi Arabia will open two new alcohol stores.

Since 1985, a cultural heritage festival named Jenadriyah is celebrated once every year, for two weeks.

A hijab is a traditional Islamic norm whereby women are required "to draw their outer garments around them (when they go out or are among men)" and dress in a modest manner.  Saudi Arabia is different from many Islamic societies in the extent of the covering that it considers Islamically correct hijab (everything except the hands and eyes).

Among unrelated men, women must cover the parts of the body that are awrah (private). In much of Islam, a women's face is not considered awrah. In Saudi Arabia and some other Arab states, all of the body is considered awrah except the hands and eyes. Accordingly, most women are expected to wear the hijab (head covering), a full black cloak called an abaya, and a face-veil called niqab. Many historians and Islamic scholars argue that the Quran was interpreted to require the veil as part of adapting it to tribal  traditions.

Football is the national sport in Saudi Arabia. The Saudi Professional League became the best league in Middle East and Asia. In December 2022, Portuguese footballer Cristiano Ronaldo joined Al Nassr. On 11 December 2024, FIFA officially comfirmed Saudi Arabia to host the 2034 FIFA World Cup.

Saudi Arabia is home to the largest mass of sand on earth, known as the Rub-al Khali desert (Rub-al Khali means "empty quarter"). The temperature is very hot. There are almost no rivers or lakes in the country.  There are many wadis.

The countries of Yemen and Oman are south of Saudi Arabia.  Saudi Arabia is west of Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Iraq, and Jordan. All of these countries, except Jordan and Iraq, make the Arabian Peninsula.

Animal life includes wolves, hyenas, mongooses, baboons, hares, sand rats, and jerboas. There used to be many larger animals such as gazelles, oryx, and leopards.  By the 1950s hunting from motor vehicles made these animals almost extinct. Birds include falcons (which are caught and trained for hunting), eagles, hawks, vultures, sand grouse and bulbuls. There are several species of snakes, many of which are venomous, and numerous types of lizards. There is a wide variety of marine life in the Persian Gulf. Domesticated animals include camels, sheep, goats, donkeys, and chickens.

Because it is mostly a desert Saudi Arabia’s plant life is mostly small herbs and shrubs that need little water. There are a few small areas of grass and trees in southern Asir. The date palm (Phoenix dactylifera) is widespread.

Saudi Arabia is divided into 13 provinces. The provinces are divided into 136 governorates.

Samba is a kind of music, dancing, and singing, originally from Brazil. It began as a music/dance movement in the 1920s.

Samba is a lively, rhythmical dance of Brazilian origin in 2/4 time. In ballroom dance there are three steps to every bar, making the samba feel something like a 3/4 timed dance. The timing is one, a-two, with the values about one beat, 1/4 beat, 3/4 beat.

There are two main types of samba that differ from each other: the modern ballroom samba, and the traditional samba of Brazil. Traditional Brazilian samba includes the samba which is danced solo at Carnival. In that case, the dancers take just one step on each beat.

The ballroom samba has its origins in Brazil at the beginning of the 20th century. Many steps can be traced back to the Maxixe danced in 1910s. A book published in France in 1928 already described how to perform the samba. The modern ballroom dance was created in England, mostly with steps adapted from those seen in Brazil. This version is now danced all over the world in international competitive dancing as regulated by the World Dance Council.

Ballroom samba, like other ballroom dances, is a form adapted for its suitability as a partner dance. The dance movements, which do not change depending on the style of samba music being played, borrows some movements from Afro-Brazilian traditional dances such those used in candomblé rituals.

The ballroom samba is danced to music in 2/4 time. The basic movements are counted either 1-2 or 1-a-2, and are danced with a slight bouncing action. This action is created through the bending and straightening of the knees, with bending occurring on the beats of 1 and 2, and the straightening occurring on the "a". Samba is notable for its constantly changing rhythms however, with cross-rhythms being a common feature. Thus, common step values (in beats are):

The sambista Zeca Pagodinho, one of the main singers of the pagode¢¢.

The following applies to the type of samba done during street carnivals where the musicians will move along with the dancers, sometimes on foot, sometimes on a motorized 'float' or platform.

The music is played with different instruments – bass drums (a surdo drum, used for keeping a steady beat), snare drums, a whistle (called an apito [a-peet-oh], used for beginning and ending sections of music), other types of untuned percussion, and different varieties of bells.

Other sections are when the apito blasts one rhythm, and all other instruments respond using another rhythm (that lasts the same amount of time as the first), named a call and response section; and a Samba piece can have instrument solos, when one instrument is playing an exciting rhythm. The apito caller signals the end of one section and the beginning of the next by blasting a short call. Pieces always have clear beginnings and ends.

Ballroom sambas are usually played by standard ballroom dance bands with one or two extra percussion instruments.

Shanghai (, ; Mandarin pronunciation: ) is the biggest city in China and one of the world's largest cities. It had about 24,000,000 people in 2017. It is a special province-level city in China ("municipality"), like Beijing, Tianjin, and Chongqing.

The Mandarin Chinese name of Shanghai is Shànghǎi, which is written as  in Chinese characters. This name means "On-the-Sea" because Shanghai used to be next to the East China Sea. Today, dirt from the Yangtze River has made Pudong much bigger and downtown Shanghai is about  from the open sea. The city has become so big, though, that its government now controls other areas like Pudong and Fengxian that are still beside the sea.

Shanghai's name is a little simpler than most other Chinese cities' names, because it was a small fishing village for a long time. The short way to say its name in Chinese is still Hù (). A hu was an old kind of fishing trap that was made with bamboo and nets. The people around Shanghai used to use them to catch fish and crabs in Suzhou Creek and other waterways.

Shanghai is at the mouth of the Yangtze River, where it meets the East China Sea in the middle of China's east coast. Downtown Shanghai is located just south of the place where Suzhou Creek meets the Huangpu River. This is about  southwest of where the Huangpu meets the Yangtze River. The area between downtown and the Yangtze used to be farmland and other cities like Wusong and Baoshan, but now Shanghai is so big that they are part of it.

For most of China's history, Shanghai was a small fishing village. The big cities nearby were Suzhou and Hangzhou. Under the Ming and Qing, Shanghai had a big city wall and started to grow.

Under the Ming and the Qing, people from other countries could only buy and sell things with China on an island near Guangzhou. The British effectively controlled Shanghai from the mid 19th century until World War II. Parts of Shanghai were controlled by the UK, the US, and France. This control was ended by the Japanese during World War II.

Shanghai attracts many tourists each year. Its landmarks include:

Shanghai Disneyland Park, Happy Valley, Jinjiang Amusement Park

Hongkou Football Stadium, Pudong Football Stadium, Shanghai Library, Shanghai Grand Theater, Tianzifang arts, crafts, and folklore

Shanghai Science and Technology Museum, China Art Museum, Shanghai Natural Museum,

East Nanjing Road, People's Square, Site of the First CPC National Congress, The Bund, Zhujiajiao

City God Temple of Shanghai, Confucian Temple of Shanghai, Jing'an Temple, Jade Buddha Temple, Longhua Temple, Zhenru Temple

Shanghai World Financial Center, Oriental Pearl Tower, Shanghai Tower, Jinmao Tower

Shanghai is home to the China Stock Exchange, along with Shenzhen, and is the financial center of China.

Rio de Janeiro is the second largest city in Brazil. It is the capital of the state of Rio de Janeiro. Until April 21, 1960, it was the capital city of Brazil. According to the 2022 Census, the city had 6,211,223 people, and an area of over 1,000 km2.  In 2021 Eduardo Paes became Mayor, having been mayor before in 2009 to 2017.

The city was started in 1565. It is named for a river that does not exist after Portuguese explorers mistook an oceanic bay for a river.

Copacabana Beach, Ipanema Beach, Sugar Loaf Mountain (in Portuguese, Pão de Açúcar), the statue of Christ the Redeemer (in Portuguese, Cristo Redentor), a harbor on Guanabara Bay, and Tom Jobim Airport are in Rio de Janeiro. It has much commerce and many industries, especially textiles, food, chemicals, and metallurgy. Most of these industries are in the northern and western suburbs of the city. Rio de Janeiro also has a small rural area, near the suburb of Campo Grande, where fruits and vegetables are grown.

Other cities near Rio de Janeiro, like Duque de Caxias, Nova Iguaçu, Queimados and São Gonçalo, that form the Metropolitan Region of Rio de Janeiro, also have a lot of industries and population.

The city is 420 kilometers (about 261 miles) away from São Paulo, the biggest city in South America. The cities of Rio and São Paulo are linked by the Presidente Dutra Highway (also known as Via Dutra). The region crossed by the Presidente Dutra Highway has been an important industrial zone since the 1950s.

In the city of Rio de Janeiro lies Tijuca National Park, created in 1961. This park contains some 33 km2, between the northern and the southern parts of the city. The district (in Portuguese, bairro) of Santa Tereza can be reached by taking an electric tram (in Portuguese, bonde) from central Rio de Janeiro (near Largo da Carioca subway station), crossing over the Arcos da Lapa, an aqueduct built during the colonial period to provide water to the city.

Operation Containment (Portuguese: Operação Contenção) was a large-scale joint police and military action conducted on 28 October 2025 in the Complexo do Alemão and Penha favela complexes in northern Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. It aimed to weaken the Comando Vermelho (Red Command) criminal faction and reassert state control over areas dominated by organized crime. The operation became one of the deadliest security actions in the city’s history.

The Rocky Mountains, often called The Rockies, are a range of mountains in the western United States and Canada. They stretch from the northernmost part of British Columbia, in Western Canada, to New Mexico, in the Southwestern United States. Part of the mountain range in Colorado is a national park, called Rocky Mountain National Park. The Rocky Mountains are more than 3,000 mi (4,800 km) long. The highest point in the Rocky Mountains is Mount Elbert, at 14,433 feet (4,401 m).

The Rocky Mountains are relatively new and were formed from 55 million to 80 million years ago during the Laramide orogeny. North America began to move westwards as Pangaea broke up. A number of tectonic plates began to slide under the North American plate. The angle of subduction was shallow and resulted in a broad belt of mountains running down western North America. Since then, further tectonic activity and erosion by glaciers have sculpted the Rockies into dramatic peaks and valleys.

The rocks in the Rocky Mountains had been formed long before the mountains were raised. The oldest rock is Precambrian metamorphic rock, which forms the core of the North American continent. There is also Precambrian sedimentary argillite, dating back to 1.7 billion years ago. During the Paleozoic, western North America lay underneath a shallow sea, which deposited many kilometers of limestone and dolomite.

In the southern Rocky Mountains, near present-day Colorado, the ancestral rocks were disturbed by mountain building about 300 million years ago, during the Pennsylvanian. The mountain building produced the ancestral Rocky Mountains. They consisted largely of Precambrian metamorphic rock forced upward through layers of the limestone. The limestone had been laid down in a shallow sea. The mountains eroded throughout the late Paleozoic and early Mesozoic, leaving extensive deposits of sedimentary rock.

Sharks are a superorder of fish. This superorder is also known by its scientific name Selachimorpha.

Like other Chondrichthyes, sharks have skeletons made of cartilage instead of bone. Cartilage is tough, rubbery material which is less  than bone. Other cartilaginous fish include skates and rays.

There are more than 350 different kinds of sharks, such as the great white and whale sharks. Fossils show that sharks have been around for 450 million years, since the late Ordovician period. That is 200 million years before the dinosaurs existed.

Most sharks are predators: they hunt and eat fish, marine mammals, and other sea creatures. However, the whale shark - the largest fish in the world - eats krill, like true whales.

It is widely believed that sharks are "silent killers". However, a recent study shows that sharks emit a low growl from their throats which resonates through their scales.

Common kinds of shark include the hammerhead shark, the great white shark, the tiger shark, and the mako shark. Most sharks are cold-blooded, but some, like the great white shark and the mako shark, are partially warm-blooded.

Just a few million years ago, a giant shark called Megalodon swam in the seas. It was 18 meters long, twice as long as the great white shark, and it ate whales. Megalodon died out 1.6 million years ago.

Much of what we understand about prehistoric sharks comes from the study of their fossils. While sharks have skeletons made of soft cartilage that can fall apart before fossilizing, their teeth are harder and easily fossilized. Prehistoric sharks, like their modern descendants, would grow and shed many thousands of teeth over their lifetime. For this reason, shark teeth are one of the most common fossils.

Sharks come in many different shapes and sizes, but most are long and thin (also called streamlined), with very strong jaws.

Sharks have skin covered in millions of tiny teeth-like scales that point to the tail. If you rub along a shark towards the tail, it feels smooth, but if you rub the other way, it is rough.

Sharks' teeth are constantly replaced throughout their lives. Sharks eat so violently they often break a few teeth, so new teeth grow continuously in a groove just inside the mouth and move forward from inside the mouth on "conveyor belts" formed by the skin which they are attached to. In its lifetime, a shark can lose and regrow as many as 30,000 teeth.

Even with all those teeth, though, sharks cannot chew. So they bite their prey and  it around so they can pull off a chunk to swallow. The chunks of food that a shark swallows end up in its stomach, where they are digested. This is a slow process, however, so a meal might take several days to digest. This is why a shark does not eat every day.

Sharks have different-shaped teeth, depending on what they eat. For instance, some sharks have sharp, pointy teeth, while bottom-dwelling sharks have cone-shaped teeth for crushing shells. Because there are so many different kinds of sharks, and because each kind has its own kind of special teeth, many people enjoy collecting shark teeth.

Shark teeth collectors can guess how large a shark was by measuring the shark tooth. First, they measure the length of the tooth in inches. Every inch of tooth equals 10 feet of shark length: so if a shark tooth is 2 inches long, the tooth came from a shark that was around 20 ft long. Some Megalodon teeth are 6 inches long - suggesting that this shark was 60 feet long.

Sharks come in various shapes and sizes, so their prey differs depending on the type of shark and where they live. Sharks typically eat up to 3% of their body weight every two to three days. Sharks' meals are spaced apart because they often have trouble chewing despite their large teeth; this means digestion can take anywhere from 68 to 82 hours.

While most sharks are carnivores, a recent study shows that there are exceptions. The bonnethead shark is omnivorous, feeding on small animals and sea grass. It has been discovered that wild whale sharks may be omnivorous as well, though this may be due to scarcity in their usual diet. If this is the case, we may see more sharks broaden their diet to include plant life as food scarcity worsens.

Sharks find their prey by using their sense of smell and vibrations as well as the movement of their prey. The lateral line is an organ found in the skin, which sharks use to sense the vibrations of their prey. Sharks have different hunting strategies to catch their prey depending on size and species. Larger sharks hunt down their meal and often swallow them whole or eat them in large chunks. Some will twist their prey into the sand or stun them with their tail, while others will hunt for small animals such as crustacean.

Prey for different shark species varies greatly. Hammerhead sharks eat a lot of squid and octopus. Dolphins and small whales are often prey for large sharks like the great white or tiger sharks, while whale sharks mainly subsist on animals like plankton and krill.

Sharks use their fins for swimming, stabilizing, steering, and lift. Each fin is used in a different manner.

There are one or two fins present along the dorsal midline called the first and second dorsal fin.  These fins help the shark from constantly rolling around. They may or may not have spines.  When spines are present, they are used for defense, and may also have skin glands with them that produce an irritating substance.

The pectoral fins are behind the head and extend outwards. These fins are used for steering during swimming and help to provide the shark with lift.

The pelvic fins are behind the pectoral fins, near the cloaca, and are also stabilizers.

Not all sharks have anal fins, but if they do have them, they are found between the pelvic and caudal fins.

The tail region itself consists of the caudal peduncle and the caudal fin. The caudal peduncle sometimes has notches known as "precaudal pits", which are found just ahead of the caudal fin. The peduncle may also be horizontally flattened into lateral keels. The caudal fin has both an upper lobe, and a lower lobe, which can be of different sizes; the shape depends on the shark species.

The primary use of the caudal fin is to provide a "push" while the shark swims. The upper lobe of the caudal fin produces most of the push, and usually forces the shark downwards. The pectoral fins and the shape of the body (like an airfoil) work together to counter this force.

The strong, non-lunate caudal fin in most benthic shark species allows the shark to swim close to the seabed (such as the nurse shark). However, the fastest swimming sharks (such as the mako sharks) tend to have lunate-shaped (crescent-shaped) caudal fins.

Sharks have keen olfactory (smelling) sense organs in the short duct between the front and back nasal openings. They can detect blood from miles away: as little as one part per million of blood in sea water may be enough.

Sharks can determine the direction of a certain scent based on the timing of scent detection in each nostril. This is similar to the method mammals use to determine direction of sound. Some species, such as nurse sharks, have external barbels that greatly increase their ability to sense prey.

Sharks are attracted to the chemicals found in the intestines of many species. For this reason, they often linger near or in sewage outfalls.

Shark eyes are similar to the eyes of other vertebrates; they have similar lenses, corneas and retinas. Their eyesight is well adapted to the marine environment. They can contract and dilate their pupils, like humans, something no teleost fish can do. A tissue behind the retina reflects light back, thereby increasing sight in darker waters.

Sharks have tiny holes all over their snouts, especially between the eyes and the tip of the snout. Inside these holes are nerve receptors called the ampullae of Lorenzini. p23 They can sense electricity in the water.

Animals in the water give off electricity: every time an animal's heart beats or moves, tiny currents of electricity are created. These tiny electric currents make signals that travel through water. Sharks can sense these currents and may use this sense when they catch their prey, even more than they use their sight.

It is hard to test sharks' hearing. However, they may have a sharp sense of hearing and can possibly hear prey many miles away. A small opening on each side of their heads (not the spiracle) leads directly into the inner ear through a thin channel.

The lateral line detects changes in water pressure. It is open to the environment by a line of pores. This and the sound-detecting organs are grouped together as the 'acoustico-lateralis system', because they have a common origin. In bony fish and tetrapods, the external opening into the inner ear has been lost.

This system is found in other fish as well. It detects motion or vibrations in water. The shark can sense frequencies in the range of 25 to 50 Hz.

About 70% of all known shark species give birth to live young, with the gestation period lasting from 6 to 22 months.

Baby sharks (called pups) are born with a full set of teeth, and are capable of taking care of themselves. Once born, they quickly swim away from their mothers, who sometimes feed on the pups. Litters vary from one or two pups (as with great white sharks) to one hundred pups (blue sharks and whale sharks).

Some sharks are oviparous and lay their eggs in the water. Shark eggs (sometimes called "mermaid's purses") are covered by a tough, leathery membrane.

Most sharks are ovoviviparous, meaning the eggs hatch inside the female's body. The babies develop within the mother, but there is no placenta to nourish the pups. Instead the young feed on the egg's yolk. The pups eat any unfertilized eggs and sometimes each other. Very few pups in a litter survive until birth due to this form of sibling cannibalism.

Great white sharks, mako sharks, nurse sharks, tiger sharks, and sand tiger sharks give birth this way.

Some sharks are viviparous, meaning that the females give live birth: the eggs hatch inside the female's body, and the babies are fed by a placenta. The placenta helps transfer nutrients and oxygen from the mother's bloodstream, and transfers waste products from the baby to the mother for elimination.

Examples of viviparous sharks include the bull sharks, the whitetip reef sharks, the lemon sharks, the blue sharks, the silvertip sharks, and the hammerhead sharks. Although long thought to be oviparous, whale sharks are viviparous, and pregnant females have been found containing hundreds of pups.

New sharks are still being found. Dave Ebert found ten new species in a Taiwan market. Over the past three decades he has named 24 new species. They include sharks, rays, sawfish and ghost sharks  these cartilaginous fish are all related.

Some sharks are not endangered, but some are hunted for food (like shark fin soup) or sport fishing.  In 2013 five species of shark, along with two species of manta ray, received international protection as part of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.

It is thought that 100 million sharks are killed by commercial and recreational fishing. Sharks are a common seafood in many places, including Japan and Australia.

In the Australian state of Victoria, shark is the most commonly used fish in fish and chips, in which fillets are battered and deep-fried or crumbed and grilled. In fish and chip shops, shark is called "flake".

In India, small sharks or baby sharks (called sora in Tamil and Telugu languages) are sold in local markets. Since the flesh is not matured (not adult), cooking the flesh breaks it into powder. The powder is then fried in oil and spices (called sora puttu/sora poratu). The soft bones can be easily chewed. They are considered a delicacy in coastal Tamil Nadu.

Shagreen is a fabric made of shark skin. It is often described as being an untanned leather, often dyed green.

Seoul () is the biggest city of the Republic of Korea (South Korea), and its capital. Its official name is Seoul Special City ( Seoul Teukbyeolsi). It has a population of 10 million which is about 1/5 of the Korean population and 1/7 of Korea peninsula, and covers an area of 610 km² that is only 0.6% of South Korea. It is the 6th most populated city in the world, and 7th most crowded. Seoul is the center of politics, economy, culture, transportation, and education for South Korea.

Seoul is in the middle of Korea. Han River (한강 Han-gang) is a major river in South Korea and the fourth longest river on the Korean peninsula. This river goes across Central Seoul.

Seoul hosted the 1986 Asian Games and the 1988 Olympic Games.

Seoul is thought to be the capital of Baekje Kingdom (백제) from 18 BC. At that time, the name of the city was Wiryeseong (). Wiryeseong is thought to be Songpa-gu, Seoul. During the Silla Period (신라시대), Hanju (한주) was name of Seoul. During Goryeo Period (고려시대), the name of Seoul was Namgyeong (남경) which means "the south capital". There was a palace of Goryeo Dynasty. Hanyang was name of Seoul in late Goryeo Period. After establishment of Joseon Dynasty, the name of Seoul was Hanseong (한성) and Hanseong became the capital of Joseon Kingdom.

From 1910 to 1945 the time of Korea under Japanese rule, the name of Seoul was Gyeongseong (경성). Since South Korea was started in 1948, it has been the capital, except for a short time during the Korean War. Seoul became a special city in 1949. The April 19th Revolution (4.19혁명) and June Democratic Struggle (6월 민주항쟁) happened in Seoul.

The most famous soccer team in Seoul is FC Seoul. Their stadium is Sang-am World cup Stadium. It can seat 66,806 people.

Seoul has three famous baseball teams that all play as part of the Korea Baseball Organization. One is The Doosan Bears and they have many famous players. The LG Twins won the Korean Series in 1990 and 1994. Both of these teams play at Jamsil Stadium. Lastly The Nexen heroes who use Mokdong stadium .

Seoul has many stadiums such as Olympic stadium, Jamsil Stadium, Sang-am World Cup Stadium, and Mokdong Stadium. Olympic Stadium was built in 1988 for the Olympics. It was used for the opening and closing ceremonies. World Cup stadium was used for several games in the 2002 FIFA World Cup.

Seoul has been known in past by the names Wirye-seong (위례성), Hanju (한주), Namgyeong (남영), Hanseong (한성), Hanyang (한양), Gyeongseong (경성). It’s current name comes from the Korean word meaning “capital city.” The name Seoul is thought to come from the Seorabeol (서라벌) which is Gyeongju’s old name. Gyeongju was the kingdom Silla’s capital city.

There are many universities in Seoul. Seoul National University, Yonsei University, Korea University, Sungkyunkwan University, Chungang University are in Seoul too. Seoul National University is Korea’s first national university. Yonsei University is widely acknowledged as one of the country’s oldest, largest and top-ranked universities in Korea.

Seoul’s transportation dates back to the Korean empire, when the first streetcar lines were laid and a railroad between Seoul and Incheon was completed. Today, because of the effectiveness of Seoul’s transportation network it has become a great transportation center for Asia.

63 building is 249m high. It has cinema (63 IMAX), observatory - 60th floor (63 Sky Art), aquarium (63 Seaworld), and lots of amenity. The 63 building has 60 stories high and 3 stories below so it became 63 building. The elevator’s speed is 540m/min. Before Daehan Life Insurance’s building but it’s now Hanwha’s building.

N Seoul tower is 236.7m high. It has restaurant and observatory. In the first floor, you can see Seoul only. But you can see Incheon in the fifth floor. YTN take over the building and it became YTN Seoul building (N Seoul building for short).

Gyeongbokgung is Joseon’s castle. It has Gangnyeongjeon, Geunjeongjeon, Gwanghwamun, Gyeonghoeru, Gyotaejeon, Hyangwonjeong, Jagyeongjeon, Jibokjae, Sajeongjeon, Sujeongjeon, Taewonjeon, Donggung, and Geoncheonggung.

Sungnyemun is Joseon’s south big door. It is national treasure number 1 in Korea. But, it had a fire in 2008. So it was fixed. And on May 4th 2013, it was done.

The Rhine River (, , ) is  long. Its name comes from the Celtic word "renos", which means 'raging flow'.

The Rhine is an important waterway.  can be used by ships, and boats can go to the Black Sea using the Rhine-Main-Danube Canal. Many goods are transported over the Rhine, and the Rhine valley is also an important wine producing region. The river Rhine begins at Tomasee, a lake in the canton of Graubünden in Switzerland, and runs through Switzerland, Germany and the Netherlands. It is the border between Switzerland and Liechtenstein and also the border between Germany and France. It is also the border between Switzerland and Austria. It is also the border between the Netherlands and Germany. It is the border between France and Switzerland. It runs through Basel, Bonn, Cologne and Duisburg. It also separates the cities of Mainz and Wiesbaden. The Rhine has 50 species of fish. The Rhine is one of the longest and most important rivers in Europe.

The river runs through only one lake on its way, Lake Constance, which is on the border of Switzerland, Germany and Austria.

The middle Rhine has many castles.  Robber barons used some of them during the 15th–18th centuries.  When the Industrial Revolution hit Europe, factories set up along its banks and emptied their waste into the River.  The Salmon left and other fish became rare.  After World War II, the Rhine Action Programme was set up to boost the Rhine's wildlife and reduce the pollution there.

Together with the Danube it formed most of the northern frontier of the Roman Empire.

René Descartes (31 March 1596 – 11 February 1650) was a famous French philosopher and physicist. He wrote books that are very important in the fields of maths, physics and especially philosophy. His dualism statement combined soul, mind, body theories and elements into one concept; a dualistic theory of mind and matter.

In his Rules for the Direction of the Mind (1628) and his Discourse on Method (1637) Descartes wrote about the scientific method that deals with scientific approach, thinking, a method which he had invented. He also wrote about shapes (Geometry), light (optics), and the weather (Meteorology). He then invented a way of describing shapes now called the Cartesian coordinate system, and a theory of what a rainbow is. Descartes' physics was important for a later famous thinker, Sir Isaac Newton, who said about him and so did James Hook: "If I have seen further it is because I was standing on the shoulders of giants!"

In his Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Descartes used his scientific method to look at philosophical questions. He argued against skepticism (the view that the world was not real, and did not exist).

He found that he himself must be real (exist), because he felt that he was thinking; and if he was thinking, then he must be real. This is because if he were not real, then how would he have this feeling that he was thinking. He shortened this view, saying in Latin, "Cogito ergo sum," meaning "I think, therefore I am."

He also thought he could show that God exists, in the same way that he felt that he was thinking. Descartes said that God was the same as infinity and that he could clearly see infinity because he could think of every larger object but no largest object. Descartes said that if God exists then the world must exist as well, since God was good and would not let us think the world is real (exists) if it was not real.

Finally, Descartes thought that because he knew he was thinking, but could only know anything else about himself (for example that he had two arms and two legs) because he knew that God exists, then he must be made up of two things: the mind that thinks and the body that is independent of thinking, yet they are united together. This is called "Cartesian Dualism".

Descartes used a lot of ideas related to Plato, while most people at that time used ideas related to Aristotle. He is often called a rationalist, because he looked inside his mind for answers to his questions. Although Descartes wanted to fight skepticism, his description of it in the meditations has become very famous and is often called Cartesian Skepticism after him.

Rosa Luxemburg (5 March 1871 in Zamość, Russian Poland – 15 January 1919 in Berlin) was a Polish-Jewish Marxist politician working in both Poland and Germany. Her birth name was Rosalia Luxemburg. She was born into a Jewish family. She was the fifth child of her parents. Her father was a wood trader/timber trader. His name was Eliasz Luxemburg III. Her mother's name was Line (maiden name: Löwenstein).

In one of her earliest publications, 'Reform or Revolution?' (1900) Luxemburg accepted Marx's argument that capitalism promoted exploitation and was at odds with humanity's natural, fraternal instincts. She also agreed that evolutionary socialism was impossible: only revolution could create real change. However, like Lenin, she had little sympathy for Marx's 'historicism' and denied that for a revolution to occur, capitalism would have to reach an advanced stage of development. However, Luxemburg's analysis of how the revolution should come would distinguish her from both Marx and Lenin.

After WW1 Luxemburg helped establish the German Communist Party (KDP). She organised a socialist uprising in Germany but was killed by a right-wing group called the Freikorps. Rosa Luxemburg made many new communist ideas that continue to influence communism today. Rosa Luxemburg supported the Russian Revolution led by Lenin and Trotsky, but she saw them both as making undemocratic mistakes in organizing what was supposed to be a more democratic nation. She also insisted the freedom of assembly, freedom of the press, freedom of speech and abolition of death penalty. In 1913 she published an essay "The Accumulation of Capital" that urges that capital accumulation causes the imperialism.

Rosa Luxemburg was executed by the Garde-Kavallerie-Schützendivision of the Freikorps.

A screw is a sharp piece of threaded metal similar to a nail. Unlike a nail, a screw has spiral grooves down its spike. A screw is pressed down against wood and turned with a screwdriver. Turning the screw to the right makes it go into the wood. The grooves cut into the wood. This prevents the screw from falling out, as a nail might. Turning the screw to the left pulls it out of the wood.

Screws can be made of steel, iron, brass, bronze, plastic, etc.

There are also machine screws and self-tapping screws. Machine screws are bolts which have screw threads. The threads matched with nuts with female threads.

Screw threads are measured either in millimeters or in numbers. They are used in furniture, doors, appliances, etc.

Screwing is the neatest way of holding together two materials. If no glue is involved, then the screwing can be dismantled.

Use the right size screwdriver for the screw head. A screwdriver that is too slim can damage the slot, too wide can tear the materials. Screw threads in both wood and metal can become stripped, resulting in loss of holding power, and can also be difficult to remove.

Reptile is the common name for one of the main groups of land vertebrates. It is not used so much by biologists, who use more accurate terms.

The name "reptile" comes from Latin and means "one who creeps". All living reptile species are cold blooded, have scaly skin, and lay cleidoic eggs. They excrete uric acid (instead of urea), and have a cloaca. A cloaca is a shared opening for the anus, urinary tract and reproductive ducts. Reptiles also share an arrangement of the heart and major blood vessels which is different from that of mammals. Birds have all of these features.

Many important groups of reptiles are now extinct, for example the mosasaurs. We used to say the dinosaurs were extinct, but they survive in the form of their feathered descendants (birds). Ancient reptiles that do survive include the turtles, the crocodiles and the Tuatara, the lone survivor of its group. The great majority of present-day reptiles are snakes and lizards.

Some reptiles are more closely related to birds than they are to other reptiles. Crocodiles are more closely related to birds than they are to lizards. Theropod dinosaurs are even more closely related, because birds evolved from them.

Cladistic writers prefer to put the birds (over 10,000 species) with what people usually call reptiles. (see Sauropsida)

Reptilia is an evolutionary grade rather than a clade. The main reason is that the term 'reptile' in common parlance does not include birds, the descendents of theropod dinosaurs . Another reason is that the word 'reptile' is misleading because many extinct types were very different from living reptiles.

So instead of Reptilia as a taxonomic class, today many experts use Class Sauropsida (which includes birds and non-avian reptiles, living and extinct). Class Synapsida includes mammals and all their forebears. Reptile is still the usual  term to describe living snakes and lizards. Mammals are a genuine clade, and so Mammalia is still the taxonomic term.

Since reptiles are not monophyletic, reclassifying them is one of the key aims of researchers. Some taxonomists, such as Benton, make Sauropsida and Synapsida class-level taxa. The two groups split in the Carboniferous, from stem-group Amniotes (the early tetrapods, which laid cleidoic eggs).

A membrane forms an inner eyelid in reptiles and birds. Whitish or translucent, it can be drawn across the eye to protect it from dust and keep it moist. It is called the nictitating membrane.

Reptiles can live in large and small sizes. Their land sizes can be both bigger and smaller than mammals. Titanosaurs were the largest land reptiles, and the smallest land reptile is a chameleon 13.5mm long.

Salah ad-Din Yusuf ibn Ayyub (; 25 December 1138–1193), better known as Saladin, was a famous Kurdish Muslim Sultan of Egypt and Syria during the Crusades.

A Muslim of Kurdish origin, Saladin led the Muslim opposition to the European Crusaders in the Levant. At the height of his power, his sultanate included Egypt, Syria, Mesopotamia, Hejaz, Yemen and other parts of North Africa.

His father, who worked for the Seljuk governor, decided to raise him in Syria where he received his education. Another influential figure in his life was his uncle Shirkuh who was a military leader and later commanded for Saladin during the wars. The Muslim world consider him a hero for defeating the Crusaders over 20 years of battles and capturing their capital, Jerusalem. The Crusades were a series of battles between Christian Europe and Islamic Middle East over holy land in what is now known as Israel and Palestine. Saladin’s army protected Egypt from the Crusaders in 1168, though more of his fighting in Egypt was either for or against the Zengid dynasty.

The ruler of the Fatimid Caliphate of Egypt made him Vizier, meaning prime minister, even though he was not a Shia. Just before the Caliph died, Saladin was crowned Sultan of Egypt and Syria. His greatest victory was at the Horns of Hattin in July 1187 AD, after which Jerusalem fell to the Muslim army (October 1187) and was never again recovered by the Crusaders. He is also remembered for his series of battles and wins and losses against King Richard I of England. These were inconclusive and in the end resulted in a moral victory for Sultan Salah ad-Din, when Richard's Crusade failed and returned to Europe.

He founded the Ayyubid Sultanate of Egypt, Syria, Yemen (except for the Northern Mountains), Iraq, Mecca Hejaz and Diyarbakır. Salah ad-Din is a title which translates to The Righteousness of the Faith from Arabic.

Saladin was very famous among Christians. After the more successful wars of Al-Malik al-Zahir Rukn al-Din Baybars al-Bunduqdari he got less attention among Muslims. Baybars not only defeated the Seventh Crusade of King Louis IX of France; he also defeated the Mongol forces of Hulagu Khan who invaded Syria. However, in the 20th century Saladin became as famous as he was among Westerners.

Saint Petersburg () is a Russian city in northwestern Russia, near the Gulf of Finland of the Baltic Sea. Over five million people live in St. Petersburg as of 2015, and it is the second biggest city in Russia. It is a major port, connecting with the world's shipping paths through the Neva River and the Baltic.

Part of Saint Petersburg is designated a World Heritage Site called The Historic Centre of Saint Petersburg and Related Groups of Monuments.

Saint Petersburg was started by the Russian Tsar, Peter I as the capital of the Russian Empire in 1703, to take the place of the earlier capital, Moscow. It was the capital of Russia until 1918. Peter the Great established Saint Petersburg as a warm-weather port in order to show Russian dominance in the Baltic and to increase trading opportunities. Peter sought to modernize Russia, therefore he tried to make Saint Petersburg as different as possible from the former capital, Moscow, by modernizing the city.

Saint Petersburg has changed its name many times. During World War I, when Russia and Germany were fighting each other, Russians thought the name Sankt Peterburg sounded too German, so Tsar Nicholas II, on August 31 (August 18, Old Style), 1914 decided that the city was renamed Petrograd.  In 1918 during the Russian revolution, the Soviet capital was moved to Moscow, still the capital of Russia now.

On January 26, 1924, five days after Lenin's death, Petrograd was renamed Leningrad in his honor. During World War II, the city was surrounded by the German army and under siege for twenty-nine months until January 1944.

Leningrad again took its old name of St. Petersburg on September 6, 1991, when Russia stopped being communist. In every-day Russian, the city is often called just "Piter". The Oblast (administrative province) where the city is the capital is still called "Leningrad Oblast".

Saint Petersburg was a beautiful city planned by Peter I. There are many man-made rivers (or canals) in the city, so the city is sometimes called the Venice of the North. There are also beautiful buildings built by Russian emperors in other places of the city. Some of these buildings are the Hermitage Museum and the Winter Palace.

Saint Petersburg is located in Northwestern Federal district of Russia. The area of the city  is 605.8 km². Saint Petersburg has an area called Leningrad oblast. The city has also many islands such as Vasilyevsky Island,  Kotlin Island, Kamerny Island, Aptekarsky Island etc.

The sensory system is the way animals find out about their nearby environment and their bodies. To do this they have special devices for collecting data called sense organs. The sense organs act as transducers: they turn energy from the outside or inside of the body into nerve signals. The signals are then very rapidly processed by the brain. The whole arrangement is the sensory system.

There are other senses. For example, we have a sense of equilibrioception which checks our balance, and proprioception which is the sense of the relative position of one's own parts of the body and strength of effort being employed in movement. Fishes have a sense system which no land animal has. It is called the lateral line system. This senses movement and vibration in the water pressure and other functions. Some fish can sense patterns of electrical current in the water.

A huge amount of data comes in from the sensory system. About 11 million pieces of information per second is one estimation, of which ten million comes from our eyes. Of this huge number we only handle about 40 in our conscious mind. The rest is handled non-consciously.

Rock music is a genre of popular music. It developed in the late 1900s, chiefly in the United States. It originally started in the 1940s and 1950s with the start of rock and roll. "Rock and roll" grew out of R&B (Rhythm & Blues) and country after the electrification of the guitar (and music in general) in the 1940s. Rock has a lot in common with other genres like blues and folk. It has influences from jazz, classical, and other music genres.

Rock music usually uses the electric guitar, bass guitar, a singer, and the drumset. It has a 4/4 beat and it has verse-chorus form. Rock music has also helped to spread cultural and social movements. This led to large sub-cultures including modernists and rockers in the UK and the "hippie" culture that spread out from San Francisco in the US in the 1960s. Rock music has the same folk tradition as the protest song. Rock music has been involved with political activism. It has also spread awareness for race, sex, and drug-use issues. It is often seen as an expression of critic about totalitarism and conformity.

However, rock has become really varied since the 1960s and it is hard to say what its lyrics are "mostly" about. They can express romantic love, or comment all of global society. Rock music does place a focus on musical skill and live performance. By the late 1960s, rock had spread all across the United States and across the Atlantic to Great Britain. "Rock n roll's" influence in local music genres in these places created hybrids like blues rock, folk rock, country rock, jazz-rock fusion, and psychedelic rock By the 1970s progressive rock, glam rock and heavy metal began to become popular. Progressive rock uses symbolic lyrics and long instrumental sections. Glam rock focuses on showmanship and what you can see. Heavy metal focuses on raw emotion instead of technical skill.  Punk rock became more popular in the second half of the 1970s. It is inspired by other types of rock, as well as 1970s youth counterculture. Punk rock is a noisy type of rock music with political and social critiques. Punk rock influenced other sub-genres in the 1980s, including New Wave, post-punk and later alternative rock. From the 1990s, alternative rock (or "Alt Rock") became the most popular type of rock music. Alt Rock includes grunge, Britpop, and indie rock. Since the 2000's, the Rock-'n'-roll Hall of Fame in Cleveland Ohio has inducted increasingly varied artists. It's difficult to say what is Rock.

Sanskrit (संस्कृत) is an ancient Indo-European language. Many languages in the Indian subcontinent today are derived from Sanskrit. Today, only about 14,000 people use it as their daily language.

Sanskrit is a standardized dialect of Old Indo-Aryan and has a linguistic ancestry that can be traced back to Proto-Indo-European. The Indo-European Aryan migration theory proposes that the Indo-Europeans migrated from the Central Asian steppes into the Indian subcontinent during the early 2nd millennium BC and brought the Indo-European language Sanskrit with them. The main script used to write Sanskrit today is Devanāgarī. Historically, it was also written in the Kharoshti and Brahmic scripts.

William Jones, working as a judge in India in the 18th century, studied Sanskrit and recognised its similarities to Latin, Greek and other European languages. That led to the Indo-European languages being recognised as a group of related languages stretching from Europe to India.

It is also one of the 22 officially recognised languages of India.

Sanskrit literature includes poetry and drama and has also scientific, technical, philosophical and religious texts. Sanskrit continues to be widely used as a sacred language in Hindu religious rituals, and also some Buddhist and Jain practice in the form of hymns and chants.

Sanskrit  has a very complex grammar, with eight grammatical cases, three grammatical genders, and three grammatical numbers. Words are also described based on their qualities. Sanskrit is considered highly scientific, words in a sentence can describe the subject's number, gender and action.

A sexually transmitted infections (STI) is a disease which spreads by having sex.  STIs can spread through oral sex or anal sex, or when two people's genitals touch.

STIs can be caused by viruses, bacteria, or parasites.  Examples of the most common STIs are listed on this page.

HIV causes the immune system - the system in the body that is supposed to fight off infection - to not work as well as it should.  This makes people with HIV more likely to get infections and some other diseases, like some cancers.  HIV is the virus that causes AIDS.

There are about 40 different kinds of HPV that can be spread through sex and affect the anus and genitals.  Examples of diseases that HPV can cause include:

Hepatitis is an infection of the liver.  There are three common types of hepatitis: hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C.

Hepatitis A causes a short-term liver infection.  It can be spread by having sex, though this is not the most common way to get hepatitis A.

Hepatitis B and hepatitis C cause much more serious, long-lasting liver problems.  Both can cause very bad liver disease, like cirrhosis, and death.  They are more likely than hepatitis A to be spread by having sex.

The herpes simplex virus (HSV) causes genital herpes.  Genital herpes can cause painful blisters on the genitals and anus.  Herpes can also cause sores on the mouth.

Chlamydia is one of the common STIs in the world.  In humans, it is the most common STI caused by bacteria.  In the United States alone, about 2.8 million more people get chlamydia infection every year.

If chlamydia is not treated, it can cause serious problems, like diseases of the genitals and eyes.  It can even cause blindness.  Chlamydia can also cause permanent damage to a woman's reproductive system if it is not treated.

Gonorrhea can infect the genitals, rectum, mouth, throat, and eyes.  In bad cases, it can spread through the blood to infect the body's joints.  In the worst cases, it can spread through the blood and infect the heart (causing endocarditis, an infection of the heart's valves) or the spinal cord (causing meningitis).

Syphilis can cause many serious problems if it is not treated.  It makes a person much more likely to get HIV, because it causes sores on the genitals that make it easier for HIV (and other STIs) to get spread.  After a few years, if people with syphilis do not get treated, they can have serious problems with the organs in their body.  Eventually - without treatment - syphilis infects the brain and causes death.

Trichomoniasis is the most common STI in the world that is not caused by a virus.  It can cause inflammation swelling of the vagina (vaginitis, urethra (urethritis), or penis.  It can also cause more serious problems.  If it is not treated, it can cause permanent damage to a woman's reproductive system.  It can also cause prostate cancer, and makes a woman more likely to give birth to a premature baby.

The only way for a person to be sure they will not get an STI is for that person not to have sex.  This includes sex of any kind.

There are some things that a person can do to make it less likely to get an STI:

The Russian Revolution was a period of political and social reform in Russia, starting in 1917. This period saw Russia abolish its monarchy and adopt a socialist form of government following two successful revolutions and a civil war. The revolution was seen as an example for the other revolutions that occurred in the aftermath of World War I, such as the German Revolution of 1918–1919 and the Turkish revolution. The Russian Revolution was one of the key events of the 20th century.

The Russian Revolution began with the February Revolution in early 1917, during World War I. With the German Empire dealing major defeats on the war front, Russian suffered heavy losses as the army was poorly trained and equipped. High officials were convinced that if Tsar Nicholas II abdicated, the unrest would calm. Nicholas agreed and stepped down, creating a provisional government led by the Russian Duma (the parliament).

During the civil unrest, soviet councils were formed by the locals in Petrograd that initially did not oppose the new Provisional Government; however, the Soviets did insist on their influence in the government and control over various militias. By March, Russia had two rival governments. The Provisional Government held state power in military and international affairs, while the Soviets held more power concerning domestic affairs. The Soviets held the allegiance of the working class, as well as the growing urban middle class. During this time, there were many mutinies, protests and strikes. Many socialist and other leftist political organizations were competing for influence within the Provisional Government and the Soviets. Notable factions included the Mensheviks, Social Revolutionaries, Anarchists, as well as the Bolsheviks, a far-left party led by Vladimir Lenin.

The Bolsheviks won popularity with their program promising peace, land, and bread: end war with Germany, give land to the peasantry, and end the wartime famine. After Bolsheviks gained power, the Provisional Government chose to continue fighting in spite of public opposition.

During the 1890s, improvements in Russian industry produced many more jobs in cities, which made them larger as people moved there. The workers in the cities, with their increasing levels of education, began to develop an interest in politics and the creation of political parties to try to improve their lives. The conditions in which they lived and worked were horrible. Poor people from other parts of the Russian Empire like Poland and Ukraine also created their own parties to try to stop the Russians from oppressing them.

That added to the people's anger, and after the tsar's guards fired at a peaceful protest of workers, a rebellion began. That did not really change anything, but Tsar Nicholas II promised to create an elected parliament, the Duma.

The Duma was elected for the first time in March 1906. It had both left-wing and right-wing opponents, including socialists and people who were very loyal to the tsar. There were also arguments over whether or not to take power from the tsar and give it to more ordinary people.  Nicholas eventually dissolved the Duma three times. Without any Parliament that could say anything against him, people became angry.

In 1914, Russia joined World War I against Germany. At first, people supported the war, and the country was united by patriotism. However, there were huge problems with supplies, and by 1915, many soldiers were being sent to fight without ammo or guns. Communications were bad, and army officers argued so much that they did not make plans well. The soldiers became unhappy, and over 3,000,000 Russians died.

Saint Petersburg was also renamed to Petrograd by the tsar in 1914 because he thought that the name sounded too German, especially for a capital.

In 1915, the tsar took personal control of the Russian Army and moved to the army headquarters. That was a mistake since he did not improve the situation but now began to be blamed for it. The fact that he was not near the government also meant that his wife, Queen Alexandra, was left in charge. Whenever the Duma tried to warn her that the people were angry, she would say that they were lying and so she would ignore them. She even ignored a report by the secret police, the Okhrana, which said that a revolution might happen if things did not get better for ordinary people. She was unpopular also because she had been born in Germany.

The February Revolution began with a series of strikes in early February 1917. People in food queues in Petrograd, began a demonstration and were joined by thousands of women, who left the fabrics factories in which they worked. The strike spread through the capital. By February 25, most of Petrograd's factories had to close.

That evening, the tsar sent the chief of the army in Petrograd a telegram, which told him to use his soldiers to stop the strikes. The army chief did so, but the soldiers joined the workers, instead of stopping them, and the police also joined them. The government's power collapsed.

On March 15, Nicholas abdicated, and control of Russia was given to the socialist Provisional Government.

After the February Revolution, the Provisional Government, led by Alexander Kerensky, was challenged by a large group of workers, the Petrograd Soviet. Kerensky tried to improve things by allowing freedom of speech and freeing political prisoners, but people were becoming more unhappy because there was not enough food, wages went down, and the national debt grew to 10 million rubles.

Vladimir Lenin arrived in Petrograd in April 1917. He was a communist, and the Provisional Government was socialist. He had been exiled to Switzerland by the tsar, but the Provisional Government allowed him to come back. He began to lead a communist group called the Bolsheviks.

In July, the Bolsheviks spent four days demonstrating against the government. The military attacked them. Lenin was forced to escape to Finland until August, when the Bolsheviks were asked to help defend the government against a takeover by the army. The result was that their reputation improved, and the government gave them weapons.

The Provisional Government's reputation kept getting worse. The Bolsheviks' reputation got better because they refused to work with the Provisional Government until both sides compromised.

On October 10, the Bolsheviks' Central Committee voted to start a revolution. One began in Estonia on October 23. Another started in Petrograd two days later. This time, the revolution was mostly peaceful. The Bolsheviks' Red Army took over many government buildings without a fight, and only two people were killed. The revolution ended with the takeover of the old tsar's Winter Palace on the morning of October 26, when the Provisional Government was arrested.

The Bolsheviks took power and formed a Congress and a new government, which began on October 25. Some members who were not Bolsheviks walked out during its first few meetings, but that made little difference to its decisions. The people who left were taunted by Leon Trotsky on their way out. He told them to go "where you belong... the dustbin of history!" All parties that opposed the Bolsheviks were eventually broken up, and their leaders were arrested.

The Congress began to get rid of private property. That meant that all land and money was to be owned by the people, and control of factories was given to their workers.

Several places that had been in the Russian Empire before the Revolution, such as Estonia and Ukraine, had been asking for independence since February. They declared and were allowed independence as the new government formed.

In Russia, enemies of the Bolsheviks organized a White Army and began the Russian Civil War. In July 1918, countries including the United States, the United Kingdom, and France, sent more than 15 armies to help the White Army. The ex-tsar and his family were shot to stop them from being freed. To win the war, Lenin diverted food and supplies to the Red Army. The plan worked since the Bolsheviks won the war, but between 3 and 10 million people died of hunger.

The Third Russian Revolution was an anarchist revolution against both the Bolsheviks and the White Army and lasted from 1918 to 1922.

Some European countries recognized the Soviet Union as a proper country in the early 1920s, but the United States refused to do so until 1933.

Set theory is the study of sets in mathematics. Sets are collections of s. We refer to these objects as "elements" or "members" of the set. To write a set, one wraps the numbers in {curly brackets}, and separates them with commas. For example. the set  holds 1, 2, and 3. Sets are also often referred to using capital roman letters such as , , .

There are three methods one can use to describe a set: Description method, Roster method (tabular form) and Rule method (set builder form).

Set theory was created around 1874 by Georg Cantor. It had to be made better because collections of objects can cause problems if we work with them without explaining them better. Russell's paradox was one of the problems. Think about the set of all sets that are not members of themselves. If it were inside itself, then the rule which defines it would mean that it is not inside itself. But, if it were not inside itself, then the rule which defines it would mean that it is inside itself. This was a serious problem, and it meant that the old set theory was broken.

It was improved by people including Zermelo and Bertrand Russell.

Set theory begins by giving some examples of things that are sets. Then it gives rules in which you can make other sets from the already known sets. Collections of objects that are not sets are called (proper) classes. It is possible to do mathematics using only sets, rather than classes, so that the problems that classes cause in mathematics do not occur.

A binary relation between two sets is the subset relation, also called set inclusion. If all the members of set  are also members of set , then  is a subset of , marking . For example,  is a subset of , but  is not. From this example, it is clear that a set is a subset of itself. In cases where one wishes not to have this, the term proper subset is meant not to have this possibility.

The self-considering objects in set theory was considered too, with some example numbers being 1={1}, 2={1, 2}, 3={1, 2, 3} and so on.

Rodents (from Latin rodere, "to gnaw"), are mammals of the order Rodentia, which are characterized by a single pair of continuously growing incisors in each of the upper and lower jaws.

Rodents comprise about 40% of all mammal species. They are native to all major land masses except for New Zealand, Antarctica, and several oceanic islands, though they have subsequently been introduced to most of these land masses by human activity.

Rodent is the naming term of all members of Rodentia order of mammals and can be identified by their teeth. Their incisors (upper and lower) grow throughout their lives. Gnawing on hard material keeps the teeth worn down and sharp. Lagomorphs such as rabbits and hares are often mistaken for rodents. These animals have an additional pair of upper incisors that rodents lack, a very successful number of mammals that form the order Rodentia.

They have no more than 2 incisors. These keep growing, and must be kept worn down by gnawing (eroding teeth by grinding them on something hard); this is the origin of the name, from the Latin rodere, "to gnaw", and dent, "tooth".

Most rodents are small. Examples of commonly known rodents are mice, rats, chipmunks, and squirrels. Some other small rodents sometimes kept as pets are Guinea pigs, hamsters, and gerbils.

Examples of larger rodents are porcupines, beavers, and the largest living rodent, the capybara, which can grow to between 105 and 135 cm (40-55 in) in length, and weigh 35 to 65 kg (75-140 lbs).

Almost half of all mammal species are rodents. More examples of rodents are voles, prairie dogs, groundhogs, and chinchillas.

Rabbits, hares, and pikas are sometimes called rodents, because they also have teeth that keep growing. But in 1912 biologists decided to put them in a new, separate order, Lagomorpha, because they have two extra incisors in their upper jaw.

Shrews are sometimes called rodents, because they look like mice, but that is not correct. They are in the order Insectivora.

There are more families than these. The list includes the more common families.

Richard Wagner (22 May 1813 in Leipzig – 13 February 1883 in Venice) was a German opera composer. He was one of the most important opera composers in Germany during the Romantic period. Apart from some music that he wrote as a student he wrote ten operas which are all performed regularly in opera houses today. Most of his operas are about stories from German mythology. He always wrote the words himself.

Wagner changed people's ideas of what operas should be. He thought that the drama (the story that is being told with all its tensions) was very important, and he chose the singers for his operas himself, so that he could train them into his way of thinking. The music in his operas did not give the audience a chance to applaud after big solos as it had done in the 18th century: it continues throughout the whole act. He made his music tell the story by using what he called “leitmotifs”. These were melodies or short musical phrases which belonged to particular characters in the opera, or to particular ideas. He had more influence on other composers than anybody else in his time, largely because of his harmonies which became more and more chromatic (using lots of sharps and flats), with many changes of key. He built an opera house to his own design in the German town of Bayreuth. Nearly all musicians in Europe tried to make a journey to Bayreuth to hear Wagner's music. The Wagner festival still takes place every year there.

He studied at the University of Leipzig, although he was not allowed to be a full student because he did not have proper school qualifications. Although he lived a wild life he worked hard at his music. He studied the scores of Beethoven's string quartets and symphonies and he wrote his own symphony which was performed in 1833 at the famous Leipzig Gewandhaus. He wrote his first opera, Die Feen (The Fairies) in Würzburg. He became the conductor of a travelling opera group and fell in love with one of the singers called Minna Planer and he married her in 1836. His second opera, Das Liebesverbot, based on Shakespeare's play Measure for Measure was a failure.

Wagner always liked spending money, and he soon found he owed money to a lot of people, so he went away to Paris where he lived for three years. He was not successful at all there, none of the French musicians showed any interest in him and he was very poor. He still managed to write an opera Rienzi in 1841, and this was soon followed by Der fliegende Holländer, (The Flying Dutchman), which still remains a favourite to opera lovers today. It was first performed in Dresden in 1843. The audience did not like it much because they were used to operas like Rienzi which were written in the old way. Wagner was given the job of court opera composer in Dresden. He stayed there until 1849. During that time he worked very hard to make opera performances better, improve the orchestra and train the singers. In 1845 he wrote another great opera, Tannhäuser. People gradually started to understand the way that Wagner's music was telling the drama of the story. After this all his operas were great successes, although there always remained some people who hated his music, e.g. the music critic Eduard Hanslick.

In 1848 he finished working on Lohengrin but it was not performed because he was supporting the Revolutions of 1848 in the German states, joining in the demonstrations. Although he did join the fighting he was going to be arrested, so Franz Liszt helped him to escape to Switzerland. He lived in Zürich until 1858. There he wrote about music, conducted, and read stories from Norse mythology. He was starting to think about writing operas about these stories. It was something that would take him over 25 years to complete. They were to become the four operas known as Der Ring des Nibelungen (The Ring of the Nibelung) which, together, tell one long story. The four operas which make up this famous Ring cycle are Das Rheingold (The Rhinegold), Die Walküre (The Valkyrie), Siegfried and Götterdämmerung (Twilight of the Gods). Because of the political situation in Germany at the time, Wagner expected the rise of a socialist state. The operas in the Ring cycle were a new kind of music drama (which Wagner simply called “drama”). These operas can be seen as describing a new kind of world in which humans are free. The music used the idea of leitmotif (in English: “leading motive”), where musical ideas represent characters or emotions, and help the development and understanding of the story.

By 1857 Wagner had written the first two operas as well as Acts One and Two of Siegfried. However, the third Act of Siegfried was not written until many years later, because he could see that at that time there was no suitable opera house to have these operas performed. He fell in love with a woman called Mathilde Wesendonk, whose husband was very rich. This affair led to a separation with his wife, Minna. He wrote an opera about an unhappy love affair: Tristan und Isolde (Tristan and Isolde).

Meanwhile, he wrote another opera: Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg (The Mastersinger of Nűrnberg). It is the only comedy Wagner wrote.

By 1864 Wagner was in debt once more. He fled to Stuttgart to avoid being put into prison (Germany at that time was still made up of many small countries, each with their own laws). Then he had a big stroke of luck. The new king of Bavaria, Ludwig II, who was only 18 years old, adored the music of Wagner. He had read the poem about the Ring of the Nibelungs (Wagner had written the words, but had not finished the music). King Ludwig invited Wagner to finish the Ring cycle for performances in Munich. He gave him somewhere to live, and his new operas were performed in Munich: Tristan und Isolde in 1865, Die Meistersinger von Nűrnberg in 1868, Das Rheingold in 1869 and Die Walkűre in 1870. There were plans for a new opera house in Munich, but it was never built because people were angry with Wagner for being in debt in spite of having lots of money from the king. Another thing people did not like was that he fell in love with the wife of the man who had conducted his operas, Hans von Bülow. Her name was Cosima. Her father was the composer Franz Liszt who had not been married to Cosima's mother. Wagner had already left Munich in 1865, but the king still supported him, making it possible for him to live in a large house called Triebschen on Lake Lucerne. Cosima divorced von Bülow in 1870 and married Wagner in the same year.

By now Wagner was working hard at the Ring cycle again. He had promised the king that the four operas would be performed in Munich when they were ready, but he realized that they would need a special kind of opera house. So he designed his own opera house and had it built in the town of Bayreuth. He spent a lot of time travelling and conducting in order to raise money for this huge project. The King Ludwig also gave him a lot of money, and a lovely new house in Bayreuth which Wagner called Wahnfried (the name of the house means something like: Peace from the mad world). Finally, the complete cycle of four operas was performed in August 1876 in the new opera house, the (Bayreuth Festspielhaus). The third and fourth operas of the cycle, Siegfried and Götterdämmerung  were being performed for the first time.

Wagner spent the rest of his life living in Wahnfried. Sometimes he travelled. He went to London and made several trips to Italy. He wrote his last opera, Parsifal, which almost has a religious feeling to it. The story is related to the legends about King Arthur and the Holy Grail. Wagner dictated his memoirs to his wife. His autobiography is called Mein Leben (My Life). He died of a heart attack when he was staying in Venice. He was buried in the grounds of Wahnfried.

Wagner had enormous influence on the development of music. Many composers imitated his harmonies, or let themselves be influenced by them. By the early 20th century some composers like Arnold Schoenberg had gone even farther in making more and more complicated harmonies, and composers had to find new ways of composing.

Wagner made his orchestras much bigger than usual. The woodwind, for example, need four of each instrument (four flutes, four oboes etc.), and there are extra instruments like the bass clarinet and Wagner tubas. His ideas about music drama were very important. His music helps the drama to be told because it develops all the time, like the music in a symphony.

Wagner was anti-semitic. Wagner's writings on Jews, including ‘Jewishness in Music’, corresponded to some existing anti-semitic trends of thought in Germany during the 19th century. The published essay attacks two Jewish composers and Jews in general.

Wagner died long before the Nazis arose. Wagner's widow and heirs established direct political links with the Nazis. Their actions to belittle Jewish artists and involvement in anti-semetic organisations after 1914 helped prepare the ground for state-organised expulsion of Jewish artists after 1933.

When Hitler came to power in the 1930s he liked Wagner's music and thought that it was something typically German. Wagner's ideas in Die Meistersinger von Nűrnberg about German art suited some of Hitler's thoughts. After the war, the music was wrongly thought of as being something of the Nazis. Wagner wrote things that freely expressed his dislike of Jewish composers, although he praised Felix Mendelssohn for his Hebrides Overture. Wagner also had some Jewish friends. Wagner's music is played very rarely in Israel. Daniel Barenboim made people in Israel angry by conducting Wagner's music at a Jerusalem festival in 2001.

The reproductive system is the part of an organism that makes them able to sexually reproduce. human and other animals use their reproductive systems to have sexual intercourse as well as reproduce. The reproductive system is one of the human organ systems and one example is the penis in man.

The illustrations (pictures) here show only human reproductive systems. Other mammals have similar reproductive systems.

A domestic sheep (Ovis aries) is a domesticated mammal related to wild sheep and goats. Sheep are owned and looked after by a sheep farmer. Female sheep are called ewes. Male sheep are called rams. Young sheep are called lambs.

They are kept for their wool and their meat. The wool of sheep, after cleaning and treating, is used to make woolen clothes. The meat of young sheep is called lamb, and the meat from adult sheep is called mutton. Both are economically important products which have been used since prehistoric times.

Sheep are domesticated animals which have been bred by man. There are breeds which specialize in wool or meat.

A group of sheep is called a flock.  Sheep follow each other in basically the same way all the time, so there are special names for the different roles sheep play in a flock. The sheep that is farthest away from the others is called the outlier, a word that is also used in statistics. This sheep is willing to go out farther away from the safety of the flock to graze but takes a chance that a predator like a wolf will attack it first, because it is alone. Another sheep, the bellwether, which never goes first but always follows an outlier, is the one that signals to the others that it is  to go that way. When it moves, the others will also move. Tendency to be outliers or to be bellwethers, or stick in the middle of the flock, seems to stay with a sheep its whole life. There might be genes that make them repeat this role behavior.

Probably the most famous sheep was Dolly the Sheep. She was named after Dolly Parton and was the first large mammal clone. She did not live as long as a regular sheep, because clones have health problems. This is only known because of Dolly.

These sheep are so named because they can store large amounts of fat in the tail and the region of the rump. They are kept mainly because they make more milk than other types of sheep; but their wool is rough and long and is mostly used for making carpets. Fat-tailed sheep are found mainly in the very dry parts of Africa, the Middle East, and Asia, and they represent about 25 percent of the sheep in the world. The major breeds are the Awassi, Bakhtiari, Karakul, Ghashghai, and Kermani.

People may be called "sheep" if they follow a leader without thinking or people can be called "Sheepish" if they are showing or feeling embarrassment from shame or a lack of self-confidence. This is what is called a figurative meaning: it's a figure of speech.

Domesticated sheep are one species known to show exclusive homosexuality, like we see in humans. The biologist Charles Roselli has found that 6 to 8% of rams (male sheep) only show interest in other rams over a long period of time, instead of ewes. He has cut open the brains of homosexual rams and found that a region of the brain in the hypothalamus called the SDN was the same size of the SDN in a ewe (female sheep). The size of this brain region appears to determine whether a ram likes female or male and is determined by sex hormones while it was growing during its mothers pregnancy.

Salvador Domingo Felipe Jacinto Dalí i Domènech, 1st Marquess of Dalí of Púbol  (; ; ; 11 May 1904 – 23 January 1989) was a Spanish painter who became famous for the unusual images he used in his paintings. He was born in Figueres, Catalonia, Spain. He was a key figure in surrealist art.

His most famous work was The Persistence of Memory (1931), which is now in MoMA, the Museum of Modern Art in New York. It is a dream-like landscape with a soft,  pocket-watch.

Dalí died of cardiac arrest on January 23, 1989 in Catalonia, Spain. Salvador Dalí had a wife called Gala Dalí.

A semiconductor is a material that in some cases will conduct electricity but not in others. Good electrical conductors, like copper or silver, easily allow electricity to flow through them. Materials that block the flow of electricity, like rubber or plastic, are called insulators. Insulators are often used to protect people from electric shock. As the name , a semiconductor does not conduct as well as a conductor. Silicon is the most used semiconductor, but gallium arsenide is also used.

By the addition of different atoms into the crystal lattice (grid) of the semiconductor it changes its conductivity by making n-type and p-type semiconductors. Silicon is the most important commercial semiconductor, though many others are used. They can be made into transistors, which are small amplifiers. Transistors are used in computers, mobile phones, digital audio players and many other electronic devices.

Like other solids, the electrons in semiconductors can have energies only within certain bands (i.e. ranges of energy levels) between the energy of the ground state, corresponding to electrons tightly bound to the atomic nuclei of the material, and the free electron energy, which is the energy required for an electron to escape entirely from the material.

Semiconductors were being studied in laboratories as early as the 1830s. In 1833 Michael Faraday was experimenting with silver sulfide. He discovered that as the material was heated it conducted electricity better. This was the opposite of how copper acted. When copper is heated it conducts less electricity. A number of other early experimenters discovered other properties of semiconductors. In 1947 at Bell Labs in New Jersey, the transistor was invented. This led to the development of integrated circuits, which power almost all electronic devices today.

Doping is the process of adding a small impurity to a pure semiconductor to change its electrical properties. Lightly and moderately doped semiconductors are called extrinsic. A semiconductor doped to such high levels that it acts more like a conductor than a semiconductor is referred to as degenerate. Most semiconductors are made out of silicon crystals. Pure silicon has little use but doped silicon is the basis for most semiconductors. Silicon Valley was named for the large number of semiconductor startup companies that were located there.

Today, semiconductors are used far and wide. Semiconductors can be found in nearly every electronic device. Desktop computers, the Internet, tablet devices, smartphones all would not be possible without semiconductors.

Semiconductors can be made into very precise switches with a small amount of voltage. The voltage that the semiconductor doesn’t need can be sent to other electrical components in the device. Semiconductors can also be made very tiny and many of them can fit into a rather small circuit. Since they can be made so small, electrical devices today can be made thin and lightweight without compromising processing power.

Some of the dominating companies in the semiconductor business are Intel Corporation, Samsung Electronics, TSMC, Qualcomm and Micron Technology.

Shia Islam () is a sect of Islam which believes that Prophet Muhammad was commanded by Allah to choose Ali as caliph, his successor,  Muhammad's cousin and son-in-law, and his descendants, and that Muhammad publicly declared it during his last sermon after the Hajj at Ghadir Khumm. The belief is seen as supported by the Qur'an and Islamic history, with Shia scholars citing verses that highlight the special status of the family of certain prophets, including Ali.

Shi'a Muslims believe in the teachings of the Qur'an and of Muhammad's family, whom they call the Ahl al-Bayt. They consider the first three ruling caliphs to have little importance in their faith. The Arabic singular/adjective form is Shī'ī  () meaning follower. The term "Shia" comes from the Arabic phrase "Shīʿat ʿAlī," meaning "followers of Ali."

The 1979 Iranian Revolution led by Ruhollah Khomeini propelled Shia Islam from a marginalized sect to a powerful geopolitical and ideological force worldwide.

A resistor limits the electric current that flows through a circuit. Resistance is the restriction of current. In a resistor the energy of the electrons that pass through the resistor are changed to heat and/or light. For example, in a light bulb, the tungsten filament acts as a resistor that heats up because of the current going through it, causing it to glow.

Resistors can be linked in various combinations to help make a circuit:

There are many different types of resistors. Resistors have different power ratings to tell engineers how much power they can handle before they break and how accurate their value is. Connecting two resistors in series results in a higher resistance, and connecting them in parallel makes a lower resistance.

Nowadays the electrical industry in many cases uses so called surface-mount technology based resistors which can be very small.

The formula for Ohm’s law, V=I*R, states that the voltage drop across a component is equal to the product of the current flowing in the component multiplied by the resistance of the component. When  using Ohm’s law, you are able to switch the formula around if needed to find a different outcome: I=V/R or R=V/I

Resistor's values are rated by the colors that are painted on the resistor. The colored bands that are used on the sides of a resistor are black, brown, red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple, gray, and white.  Each color represents a different number. The black band represents the number 0, brown band represents the number 1, red is 2 and so on all the way to white which is the number 9. These numbers are very important in the electronic field.

A resistor has multiple bands of color on its side. The most common have four or five but they can range all the way up to 6 per resistor. On a four band resistor, the last band is usually gold or silver. The gold band represents a positive or negative 5% tolerance. The silver band on a resistor represents a positive or negative 10% tolerance. Hold this band on the right side, and read the colors from left to right. The first two bands are read as the numbers that they represent in the color code. The third band acts as a multiplier for the other bands, so for example, if the third band was an orange band which is a 3, it would mean you multiply the two numbers by 1000. In short you add the value of the color in zeros at the end, so add three zeros.

Online calculators are available to calculate color codes. When the color codes are put into the calculator, it will automatically calculate the value of the resistor, along with the tolerance.

Resistors are used in many different ways. First of all, they are put in circuits to protect components from damage such as LEDs.

They also control the amount of current flowing in a circuit, for example, if you want less current to flow you would put in a resistor with a higher value. Resistors can also split voltage between different parts of a circuit and control time delay.

Electric heaters use very large resistors to turn electricity into heat. Usually, engineers try to make resistors heat up as little as possible to not waste power, but in a heater, this "waste" is a good thing. You can also use resistors for soldering electronics.

Many different types of resistors are made. They are made with a resistive material encased in a non-conductive material, such as plastic or ceramic. Fixed resistors are usually made of carbon encased in a plastic cylinder, with a connecting wire on either end. Most resistors used in electronics today are carbon resistors. Older resistors were made of other poorly conducting metals, in order to restrict the flow of charge.

Renewable energy comes from renewable resources. It is different from fossil fuels as it does not produce as many greenhouse gases and other pollutants as fossil fuel combustion.

People have used traditional wind power, hydropower, biofuel, and solar energy for many centuries, all around the world. The mass production of electricity using renewable energy sources is now becoming more common.

From the end of 2004, worldwide renewable energy capacity grew at rates of 10–60% annually for many technologies. For wind power and many other renewable technologies, growth sped up in 2009 relative to the previous four years. More wind power was added during 2009 than any other renewable technology. However, grid-connected PV increased the fastest of all renewables technologies, with a 60% annual average growth rate.

Projections vary, but scientists have advanced a plan to power 100% of the world's energy with wind, hydroelectric, and solar power by the year 2030.

Wind power capacity has expanded quickly to 743 GW in 2020, and wind energy production was about 5% of total worldwide electricity usage, and growing fast.  Wind power is widely used in European countries, and more recently in the United States and Asia. Wind power accounts for approximately 19% of electricity generation in Denmark, 11% in Spain and Portugal, and 9% in the Republic of Ireland. These are some of the largest wind farms in the world, as of January 2010:

A wind farm is a group of wind turbines in the same location used for production of electricity. A large wind farm may consist of several hundred individual wind turbines distributed over an extended area, but the land between the turbines may be used for agricultural or other purposes. A wind farm may also be located offshore.

Solar photovoltaic cells convert sunlight into electricity and many solar photovoltaic power stations have been built, mainly in Europe. As of December 2010, the largest photovoltaic (PV) power plants in the world are the Sarnia Photovoltaic Power Plant (Canada, 97 MW), Montalto di Castro Photovoltaic Power Station (Italy, 84.2 MW), Finsterwalde Solar Park (Germany, 80.7 MW), Rovigo Photovoltaic Power Plant (Italy, 70 MW), Olmedilla Photovoltaic Park (Spain, 60 MW), the Strasskirchen Solar Park (Germany, 54 MW), and the Lieberose Photovoltaic Park (Germany, 53 MW). Larger power stations are under construction, some proposed will have a capacity of 150 MW or more.

Solar is one of the fastest-growing renewable energy sources in the world. Solar energy capacity has increased by approximately 60% since 2013, rising to 485.82GW in 2018.

Many of these plants are integrated with agriculture and some use innovative tracking systems that follow the sun's daily path across the sky to generate more electricity than conventional fixed-mounted systems. There are no fuel costs or emissions during operation of the power stations.

Large solar thermal power stations include the 354 megawatt (MW) Solar Energy Generating Systems power installation in the USA, Solnova Solar Power Station (Spain, 150 MW), Andasol solar power station (Spain, 100 MW), Nevada Solar One (USA, 64 MW), PS20 solar power tower (Spain, 20 MW), and the PS10 solar power tower (Spain, 11 MW). The 370 MW Ivanpah Solar Power Facility, located in California's Mojave Desert, is the world’s largest solar thermal power plant project currently under construction.

The solar thermal power industry is growing fast with 1.2 GW under construction as of April 2009 and another 13.9 GW announced globally through 2014.  Spain is the epicenter of solar thermal power development with 22 projects for 1,037 MW under construction, all of which are projected to come online by the end of 2010. In the United States, 5,600 MW of solar thermal power projects have been announced. In developing countries, three World Bank projects for integrated solar thermal/combined-cycle gas-turbine power plants in Egypt, Mexico, and Morocco have been approved.

Variable renewable energy is a renewable energy source that is non-dispatchable due to its fluctuating nature, like wind power and solar power, as opposed to a controllable renewable energy source such as hydroelectricity, or biomass, or a relatively constant source such as geothermal power or run-of-the-river hydroelectricity. Critics of wind and solar power warn of their variable output, but many studies have shown that the grid can cope, and it is doing so in Denmark and Spain.

The International Energy Agency says that there has been too much focus on issue of the variability. Its significance depends on a range of factors which include the market penetration of the renewables concerned, the balance of plant, and the wider connectivity of the system, as well as demand side flexibility. Variability will rarely be a barrier to increased renewable energy deployment. But at high levels of market penetration it requires careful analysis and management.

Brazil has one of the largest renewable energy programs in the world, involving production of ethanol fuel from sugar cane, and ethanol now provides 18 percent of the country's automotive fuel. As a result, Brazil, which years ago had to import a large share of the petroleum needed for domestic consumption, recently reached complete self-sufficiency in oil.

Most cars on the road today in the U.S. can run on blends of up to 10% ethanol, and motor vehicle manufacturers already produce vehicles designed to run on much higher ethanol blends. Ford, DaimlerChrysler, and General Motors Corporation are among the automobile companies that sell "flexible-fuel" cars, trucks, and minivans that can use gasoline and ethanol blends ranging from pure gasoline up to 85% ethanol (E85). By mid-2006, there were approximately six million E85-compatible vehicles on U.S. roads.

Reproduction is to create or recreate something, (usually) a new living thing, such as a baby. In biology, the two types of reproduction are sexual and asexual reproduction. Sexual reproduction involves two organisms of the same species, each supplying half the genes for the descendant. Asexual reproduction only involves a single organism; it works by division (or splitting) of the cell. Most bacteria reproduce by asexual reproduction. Some organisms can either reproduce sexually or asexually.

Sarah Bernhardt (; born Henriette-Rosine Bernard; 22 or 23 October 1844 – 26 March 1923) was a French stage actress, and has often been called "the most famous actress in the history of the world". Bernhardt made her fame on the stages of Europe in the 1870s, and was soon working in Europe and the United States. She developed a reputation as a serious actress, getting the nickname "The Divine Sarah."

She was born in Paris as Marie Henriette Bernardt, the daughter of Julie Bernardt and a Dutch father. She added the letter "H" to her first and last name, and used the name of Edouard Bernardt, her mother's brother, as the name of her father. This was probably done to hide the fact that her father was unknown.

Bernhardt's career started in 1862, when she was a student at the Comédie-Française. She was not very successful there, and left to become a courtesan by 1865. She became famous in Europe in the 1870s, and was soon in demand all over Europe and in New York. She may have been the most famous actress of the 19th century. She coached many young women in the art of acting, including Liane de Pougy.

In 1905, while performing in Rio de Janeiro, Bernhardt hurt her right knee during the final scene when she jumped from a high wall. The leg never healed properly, showing signs of bruising. By 1915, gangrene had set in and her entire right leg was amputated, meaning she was in a wheelchair for several months. Nonetheless, she continued her career. She carried out a successful tour of America in 1915, and died on returning to France. On 26 March 1923, Bernhardt died of uremia following kidney failure. She is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

Sarah Bernhardt has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1751 Vine Street.

Rye is a type of grass, usually grown as a grain or forage crop (meaning that it is fed to animals). It is a member of the wheat family of plants and is similar to wheat and barley. It is used to make flour, food for animals, and many types of alcoholic drinks.

Rye has not always been a plant humans can use. It was originally a wild plant. There are several wild plants in Turkey that are similar to rye.

Since the Middle Ages, rye has been used widely in Central and Eastern Europe. In these parts of the world, it is still one of the main ingredients in making bread. However, the number of people and businesses using rye is becoming lower. Rye is usually sold to buyers near to where it is grown.

Rye can be planted to feed animals or can be harvested for hay (dry grass). Rye is a strong plant that can survive in soil with a high or low pH. This means it can survive even if the soil is very acidic or alkaline. Other plants may struggle to survive in these pH levels.

Rye has been used to make many foods for humans. It includes rye breads, like pumpernickel, a popular bread in north and east Europe. It has also been used to make some alcoholic drinks, such as rye whiskey.

The respiratory system, also called the gas exchange system, is the body getting rid of carbon dioxide and taking in oxygen. Carbon dioxide, a waste product, goes out of the body.  Oxygen, which the body needs, comes in. In humans the lungs are the main organ to do this. In other words, the way oxidation of organic compounds happens in cells and energy is released is called the respiratory system.

The first step is breathing in air, or inhaling (inspiration). Inhalation means bringing air rich in oxygen into the body.  Exhalation means giving out air rich in carbon dioxide from the body.  The second step is gas exchange in the lungs where oxygen is diffused into the blood and the carbon dioxide diffuses out of the blood.  The third step is cellular respiration which makes the chemical energy that the cells in the body need, and carbon dioxide. Finally, the carbon dioxide from cellular respiration is breathed out of the body from the lungs.

Breathing is the first step in the process of respiration. For respiration to happen, the body needs a constant supply of oxygen, which is done by breathing. Inhalation is the breathing in of air.  To inhale, the lungs expand, decreasing the air pressure in the lungs.  This is caused by two actions.  The diaphragm (a sheet of muscular tissue that separates the lungs from the abdomen) is pulled downward. Also the muscles between the ribs contract to expand the chest. Both of these actions expand the lungs. To fill the enlarged lungs, air from outside at higher pressure comes rushing into the area of low pressure in the lungs. Air first passes through the nose and mouth, then through the larynx (voice box), then down the trachea (windpipe), and into the lungs.

The lungs are made of many tubes or branches.  As air enters the lungs, it first goes through branches called the bronchi, then through smaller branches called bronchioles, and finally into the air sacs. Gas exchange occurs in the air sacs where oxygen is exchanged with carbon dioxide.

The carbon dioxide in the air sacs now needs to be exhaled or breathed out. The diaphragm and the rib muscles relax, making the lungs smaller.  As the air pressure in the lungs is greater when the lungs are smaller, the air is forced out. The air sacs are able to contract and expand because they are coated with a lubricant, surfactant, this lubricant helps the air sacs inflate while also preventing the collapse of the lungs during deflation. The exhaled air has a high concentration of carbon dioxide and a low concentration of oxygen.  The maximum volume of air that can be breathed in and breathed out is called the vital capacity of the lungs and is up to five liters.

The inhaled air goes down to the air sacs at the end of each bronchiole.  The air sacs are called alveoli — they have a large surface area and are moist, thin, and close to a blood supply.  The inhaled air has a much greater concentration of oxygen than carbon dioxide whilst the blood flowing to the lungs has more carbon dioxide than oxygen.  This creates a concentration gradient between the air in the air sacs and the blood, meaning there is more oxygen in the air than the blood.

As the membrane, oxygen can easily diffuse in and out. Oxygen at high concentration in the air sacs diffuses into the blood where oxygen concentration is low, and carbon dioxide at high concentration in the blood diffuses into the air sacs where carbon dioxide concentration is low.  The oxygen in the blood enters the circulatory system and is used by the cells in the body.  The carbon dioxide in the air sacs is exhaled out of the body.

Satyajit Ray () (2 May 1921–23 April 1992) was a Bengali Indian movie director. Many people consider him as one of the greatest film-makers of 20th century movie business.

He was born in the city of Kolkata. His Bengali family was prominent in arts and letters. Ray studied at Presidency College and at the Visva-Bharati University. He started his career as a commercial artist. Ray was interested in filmmaking by meeting French filmmaker Jean Renoir and seeing the Italian movie Bicycle Thieves during a visit to London.

Ray directed thirty-seven movies. These include feature movies, documentaries and shorts. Ray's first movie, Pather Panchali, won eleven international prizes, including Best Human Document at Cannes Film Festival. This movie along with Aparajito and Apur Sansar form the Apu trilogy. Ray did scripting, casting, scoring, cinematography, art direction, editing and designed his own credit titles and publicity material. He was a fiction writer, publisher, illustrator, graphic designer and movie critic. Ray won an Academy Award in 1992.

Sergei Mikhailovich Eisenstein (; January 23, 1898 – February 11, 1948) was a Soviet Russian movie director and movie theorist.  He was known mostly for his silent movies Strike, The Battleship Potemkin and .  He was also known for his historical epics Alexander Nevsky and Ivan the Terrible. His work had a major impact on early movie directors because of his creative use of and writings about montage.

Eisenstein was born in Riga, Latvia but his family moved a lot in his early years. Eisenstein continued to move often during his life. Eisenstein's father Mikhail Osipovich Eisenstein was of German-Jewish  and Swedish descent and his mother, Julia Ivanovna Konetskaya, was from a Russian Orthodox family. He was born into a middle-class family. His father was an architect and his mother was the daughter of a wealthy merchant. Julia left Riga the year of the 1905 Revolution.  She brought Sergei with her to St. Petersburg. Sergei would return at times to see his father.  His father would later move to join them around 1910. His mother soon divorced his father and moved to France away from the family.

At the Petrograd Institute of Civil Engineering, Sergei studied architecture and engineering, the job of his father. At school with his fellow students however, Sergei would join the military to serve the revolution.  His father did not support his joining the army. In 1918 Sergei joined the Red Army with his father, Mikhail, supporting the opposite side. This brought his father to Germany after defeat, and Sergei to Petrograd, Vologda, and Dvinsk. In 1920, Sergei was transferred to a command position in Minsk, after success providing propaganda for the October Revolution. At this time, Sergei studied Japanese.  He learned some three hundred kanji characters which he cited as an influence on his pictorial development. This also allowed him to see Kabuki theatre. Because of his studies, he traveled to Japan.

In 1920 Eisenstein moved to Moscow, and began his career in theatre working for Proletkult. His productions there were named Gas Masks, Listen Moscow, and Wiseman. Eisenstein would then work as a designer for Vsevolod Meyerhold. In 1923 Eisenstein began his career as a theorist, by writing The Montage of Attractions for LEF. Eisenstein's first movie, Glumov's Diary, was also made in that same year. Dziga Vertov hired at first as an "instructor" for the film The movie formed part of his theatre production Wiseman.

"Strike" (1925) was Eisenstein's first full-length movie. The Battleship Potemkin (1925) was well liked by critics throughout the world.  Because he was known throughout the world, Eisenstein was able to direct  (also known as Ten Days That Shook The World).  The movie was part of the tenth anniversary celebration of the October Revolution of 1917.  He then directed The General Line (also known as Old and New). People in the outside world praised the movies. However, in the Soviet Union, Eisenstein's focus on structural issues such as camera angles, crowd movements and montage, was not liked by the much of the Soviet movie community.

In the autumn of 1928, Eisenstein left the Soviet Union for a tour of Europe.  He was joined by Grigori Aleksandrov and cinematographer Eduard Tisse. The trip was supposed to allow Eisenstein and others to learn about sound motion pictures.  It would also show the famous Soviet artists to the capitalist West. For Eisenstein, however, it was also an opportunity to see landscapes and cultures outside those found within the Soviet Union. He spent the next two years touring and lecturing in Berlin, Zurich, London, and Paris. In 1929, in Switzerland, Eisenstein supervised an educational documentary about abortion directed by Edouard Tissé entitled Frauennot - Frauenglück.

In late April 1930, Jesse L. Lasky, working for Paramount Pictures, offered Eisenstein the chance to make a movie in the United States. He accepted a short-term contract for $100,000 and arrived in Hollywood in May 1930. However, this agreement failed. Eisenstein's approach to filmmaking did not work with the style and way movies were made in American movie studios.

Eisenstein  a biography of munitions invester Sir Basil Zaharoff and a movie version of Arms and the Man by George Bernard Shaw.  He also made plans for a movie of Sutter's Gold by Jack London. But the studio's producers did not like the plan. Paramount then proposed a movie version of Theodore Dreiser's An American Tragedy. This excited Eisenstein, who had read and liked the work, and had met Dreiser at one time in Moscow. Eisenstein completed a script by the start of October 1930. Paramount disliked it completely.  They also found themselves intimidated by Major Frank Pease, president of the Hollywood Technical Director's Institute. Pease, an anti-communist, started a public campaign against Eisenstein. On October 23, 1930, Paramount and Eisenstein declared their contract canceled. Eisenstein and his movie partners were given return tickets to Moscow, at Paramount's expense.

Eisenstein was faced with returning home as a failure. The Soviet movie industry was solving the sound-movie issue without him and his movies. His methods and ideas were becoming increasingly attacked as 'ideological failures'.  They were called examples of formalism. Many of his theoretical articles from this period, such as Eisenstein on Disney, have been found decades later as important scholarly texts.  These are used in movie schools around the world.

Eisenstein spent a large amount of time with Charlie Chaplin. Chaplin recommended that Eisenstein meet American socialist author Upton Sinclair who Chaplin thought might help Eisenstein. Sinclair's works had been accepted by and were widely read in the Soviet Union, and were known to Eisenstein. The two liked each other's work. Between the end of October 1930, and Thanksgiving of that year, Sinclair had gotten an extension of Eisenstein's leave from the Soviet Union.  He also received permission for Eisenstein to travel to Mexico to make a movie to be produced by Sinclair and his wife, Mary Craig Kimbrough Sinclair.  They joined with three other investors to make the Mexican Film Trust.

On November 24, Eisenstein signed a contract with the Trust.  The deal was "upon the  of Eisenstein's desire to be free to direct the making of a picture according to his own ideas of what a Mexican picture should be, and in full faith in Eisenstein's artistic ." The contract also said that the movie would be "non-political." The money first came from Mrs. Sinclair and would be "not less than Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars." The schedule for making the movie would be "a period of from three to four months,".  The contract also said that "Eisenstein...agrees that all pictures made or directed by him in Mexico, all negative film and positive prints, and all story and ideas embodied in said Mexican picture, will be the property of Mrs. Sinclair..." An addition to the contract, dated December 1, allowed that the "Soviet Government may have the [finished] movie free for showing inside the U.S.S.R."  Reportedly, it was verbally decided that the movie was expected to be an hour long.

By December 4, 1930, Eisenstein was on his way to Mexico by train.  He was joined by Alexandrov and Tisse. Later he came up with a short summary of the six-part movie which would come. This would be the final plan Eisenstein would settle on for his project. The title for the project, ¡Que viva México!, was decided on some time later. While in Mexico, Eisenstein mixed socially with Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera. Eisenstein liked these artists and Mexican culture in general. They inspired Eisenstein to call his movies, "moving frescoes."

After a long time away from the Soviet Union, Stalin sent a telegram saying he was worried that Eisenstein had become a deserter. Eisenstein blamed Mary Sinclair's younger brother, Hunter Kimbrough, for the film's problems. Kimbrough had been sent along to act as a line producer on the movie. Eisenstein hoped to pressure the Sinclairs to stop Stalin, so Eisenstein could finish the movie in his own way.

The upset Sinclair shut down production.  He ordered Kimbrough to return to the United States with the remaining movie footage.  The three Soviets came as well to see what they could do with the movie already shot. For the unfinished filming of the "novel" of Soldadera, Eisenstein had gotten 500 soldiers, 10,000 guns, and 50 cannons from the Mexican Army. This was lost due to Sinclair's canceling of production.

When Eisenstein arrived at the American border, a customs search of his trunk revealed sketches and drawings of Jesus along with other material of a pornographic nature. Eisenstein's re-entry visa had expired, and Sinclair's contacts in Washington were unable to secure him an additional extension. Eisenstein, Alexandrov and Tisse were, after a month's stay at the U.S.-Mexico border outside Laredo, Texas, allowed a 30-day "pass" to get from Texas to New York. From there, they would be allowed to leave for Moscow. Kimbrough returned to Los Angeles with the remaining movie.

Eisenstein toured the American South, on his way to New York. In mid-1932, the Sinclairs were able to get the services of Sol Lesser. Lesser had just opened his own distribution office in New York, Principal Distributing Corp.. Lesser agreed to supervise post-production work on the miles of negative — at the Sinclairs' expense — and distribute any finished product. Two short movies and a short subject — Thunder Over Mexico based on the "Maguey" footage, Eisenstein in Mexico, and Death Day respectively — were completed and released in the United States between the autumn of 1933 and early 1934.

Eisenstein never saw any of the Sinclair-Lesser movies, nor a later effort by his first biographer, Marie Seton, called Time In The Sun. He would publicly say that he had lost all interest in the project.

Eisenstein's trip to the west made the Soviet movie business look at him with a suspicion that would never completely go away. He apparently spent some time in a mental hospital in Kislovodsk in July 1933. This was possibly a result of depression because he realized that he would never be allowed to edit the Mexican footage which was turned over by Sinclair to Hollywood editors.

He was then given a teaching job with the movie school GIK (now Gerasimov Institute of Cinematography) where he had taught before.  In 1933 and 1934 he was in charge of writing the education plan. Eisenstein married filmmaker and writer Pera Atasheva (1900–65) in 1934. They remained married until his death in 1948. There is some question about his sexuality.

In 1935, he began another project, Bezhin Meadow. It appears the movie had many of the same problems as Que Viva Mexico.  Eisenstein decided to movie two versions of the plot. One was for adult viewers and one was for children.  He failed to set a clear shooting schedule.  He also used a lot of film which meant a lot of costs and missed deadlines. The movie ran into problems because it was not fully supported by its American financers.

The thing that may have saved Eisenstein's career at this point was that Stalin ended up saying that the Bezhin Meadow problems, along with several other problems facing the business, had less to do with Eisenstein's approach to filmmaking as with the executives who were supposed to have been watching him. In the end, this made Boris Shumyatsky, "executive producer" of Soviet movies since 1932 to blame.  In early 1938, he was denounced, arrested, tried and convicted as a traitor, and shot. (The production executive at movie studio Mosfilm, where Meadow was being made, was also replaced, but without more executions).

Eisenstein was then able to impress Stalin again for "one more chance", and he chose, from two offerings, the job of a movie of Alexander Nevsky, with music composed by Sergei Prokofiev. This time, however, he was also given a co-writer, Pyotr Pavlenko, to bring in a completed script. He had professional actors to play the roles.  He also had an assistant director, Dmitri Vasilyev, to make the filming faster.

The result was a movie critically received by both the Soviets and in the West.  He won the Order of Lenin and the Stalin Prize. It was an obvious allegory and hard warning against the growing forces of Nazi Germany. This was started, completed, and put in theatres all within 1938. It was Eisenstein's first movie in nearly a decade.  It also his first movie with sound.

But, within months of its release, Stalin entered into his agreement with Hitler. Nevsky was quickly pulled from distribution. Eisenstein returned to teaching.  He was assigned to direct Richard Wagner's Die Walküre at the Bolshoi Theatre. Eisenstein had to wait until Hitler's sent German troops across the Soviet border in a fatal first strike, to see Nevsky receive wide distribution and real international success.

With the war coming to Moscow, Eisenstein was one of many filmmakers evacuated to Alma-Ata. There is where he first considered the idea of making a movie about Czar Ivan IV. Eisenstein wrote letters to Prokofiev from Alma-Ata.  Prokofiev joined him there in 1942. Prokofiev composed the score for Eisenstein's movie. Eisenstein designed sets for an opera version of War and Peace that Prokofiev was creating.

Eisenstein's movie, Ivan The Terrible, Part I, showing Ivan IV of Russia as a national hero, was liked by Joseph Stalin (and it won a Stalin Prize). The sequel, Ivan The Terrible, Part II, was not approved of by the government. All the film from the not-finished Ivan The Terrible: Part III was taken away, and most of it was destroyed (though several filmed scenes still exist today).

Eisenstein's health was also failing. He had a heart attack during the making of this movie. He died soon after of another heart attack at the age of 50. He is buried at Novodevichy Cemetery in Moscow.

Eisenstein was one of the first to use montage, a specific form of movie editing. He and Lev Kuleshov, two of the first movie theorists, said that montage was the basis of movies. His articles and books — especially Film Form and The Film Sense — explain the need for montage in detail.

His writings and movies have continued to have a major impact on later filmmakers. Eisenstein believed that editing could be used for more than just explaining a scene or moment through a "linkage" of related images. Eisenstein felt the "collision" of shots could be used to control the feelings of the audience and create movie metaphors. He believed that an idea should be concluded from comparing two different shots. This is what made a collage or montage within movie. He developed what he called "methods of montage":

Eisenstein taught movie making during his career at GIK. He also wrote the lessons for the directors' course there. His classroom illustrations are reproduced in Vladimir Nizhniĭ's Lessons with Eisenstein. Exercises and examples for students were based on literature such as Honoré de Balzac's Le Père Goriot. Another situation students had to produce was the staging of the Haitian struggle for independence as depicted in Anatolii Vinogradov's The Black Consul,. Eisenstein also taught the specifics of directing, photography, and editing.  He encouraged his students' development of individuality, expressiveness, and creativity. Eisenstein's teaching, like his movies, were politically charged and contained quotes from Vladimir Lenin.

In his first movies, Eisenstein did not use professional actors. His narratives did not focus on individual characters.  Instead, they addressed broad social issues, especially class conflict. He used basic characters, and the roles were filled with untrained people from the matching classes. He avoided using stars. Eisenstein's vision of communism brought him into conflict with officials in the ruling system of Joseph Stalin. Like many Bolshevik artists, Eisenstein pictured a new society which would pay for artists totally.  This would free them from bosses and budgets. It would leave them free to create. But budgets and producers were as important to the Soviet movie business as the rest of the world. The isolated, post-revolution, new nation did not have the resources to nationalize its movie business at first. When it did, limited resources — both monetary and equipment — required production controls as big as in the capitalist world.

A sea is a large body of salt water. It may be an ocean, or may be a large saltwater lake which like the Caspian Sea, lacks a natural outlet.

Seawater is salty. The open ocean has about  solids per litre, a salinity of 35 part per thousand. The Mediterranean Sea is a little higher at 37part per thousand and the Dead Sea has as much as  dissolved solids per litre. Sodium chloride is the main salt present, making up about 85% of the solids in solution. There are also  per litre of the chlorides of other metals such as potassium and magnesium and  of sulphates, carbonates, bromides and other salts. A kilogram (2.2 lb) of salt can be found in 28 litres or one cubic foot of typical ocean water. Despite differences in the levels of salinity in different seas, the relative composition of the dissolved salts is very stable throughout the world's oceans.

The temperature of the sea depends on the amount of sunlight falling on the surface. In the tropics, with the sun nearly overhead, the temperature of the surface layers can rise to over . Near the poles the temperature in balance with the sea ice is about . Cold water is denser than warm water and tends to sink.  There is a continuous circulation of water in the oceans. Warm surface currents cool as they move away from the tropics, the water becomes denser and sinks. The cold water moves back towards the equator as a deep sea current, driven by changes in the temperature and  density of the water, eventually welling up again towards the surface. Deep sea water has a temperature between  and  in all parts of the globe.

The amount of oxygen found in seawater depends mostly on the plants growing in it. These are mainly algae, including phytoplankton, but also include some vascular plants such as seagrasses. In daylight the photosynthetic activity of these plants produces oxygen which dissolves in the seawater where it is used by marine animals. At night, photosynthesis stops, and the amount of dissolved oxygen declines. In the deep sea where not enough light penetrates for plants to grow, there is very little dissolved oxygen.

Seawater is a little alkaline and during historic times has had a pH of about 8.2. The pH is expected to reach 7.7 by the year 2100, an increase of 320% in acidity in a century. One important element for the formation of skeletal material in marine animals is calcium but it is easily precipitated out in the form of calcium carbonate as the sea becomes more acid. This is likely to have profound effects on certain planktonic marine organisms because their ability to form shells will be reduced. These include single-celled algae called coccolithophorids and foraminifera. These are important parts of the food chain. Reducing their numbers will have significant results. In tropical areas, corals will be affected by a lack of calcium, with knock-on effects for other reef residents.

Wind blowing over the surface of a body of water forms waves. The friction between air and water caused by a gentle breeze on a pond causes ripples to form. A strong blow over the ocean causes larger waves as the moving air pushes against the raised ridges of water. The waves reach their greatest height when the rate at which they travel nearly matches the speed of the wind. The waves form at right angles to the direction from which the wind blows. In open water, if the wind continues to blow, as happens in the Roaring Forties in the southern hemisphere, long, organized masses of water called swell roll across the ocean.

Sound is caused by waves of pressure called sound waves. It can be heard when it goes through a medium to the ear. All sounds are made by vibrations of molecules. For example, when a person hits a drum or a cymbal the object vibrates. These vibrations make air molecules move. Sound waves move away from where they came from. When the vibrating air molecules reach our ears, the eardrum vibrates, too. The bones of the ear vibrate in the way the object that started the sound wave vibrates.

There are three different mediums. They are solids, liquids and gas. Sound travels fastest through solids because the particles in a solid are closer together than they are in gases and liquids.

These vibrations let you hear different things. Even music is vibrations. Irregular vibrations are noise. People can make very complex sounds. We use them for speech.

Sound waves are longitudinal waves with two parts: compression and rarefaction. Compression is the part of the sound waves where the air molecules are pushed (compressed) together. Rarefaction is the part of the waves where the molecules are far away from each other. Sound waves are a sequence of compression and rarefaction.

Since sound is a vibration of a transmission medium, it cannot go through a vacuum. A vacuum is a place where there is no medium, for example in outer space. The word comes from the Latin adjective vacuus for "vacant" or "void".  This is why astronauts cannot talk to each other in space: they need a radio to hear each other.

Sound waves can travel through solids, liquids, and gases.   Sound can travel through water faster than through air; and even faster in solids like stone, iron, and steel. At room temperature and normal atmospheric pressure, sound travels at 344 m/s (1134 ft/s), 761 miles per hour). Because the temperature and pressure change with altitude in the atmosphere, speed will vary as well.

Pitch is the highness or lowness of sound. Pitch is how humans hear different frequencies. Frequency is determined by the number of vibrations per second. The highest key played on a piano, for instance, vibrates 4,000 times per second. It has a frequency of 4000 hertz (Hz), or 4 kilohertz (kHz). Lower keys have lower frequencies. A note an octave higher than another note has a frequency twice of that note.

The intensity of sound is how much sound energy goes through a square meter in one second. Sound waves with higher amplitude (bigger vibration) have higher intensity. The intensity of sound is higher closer to the sound source. Farther away, it's less intense. The inverse-square law shows how sound intensity becomes smaller, farther from the source. "Inverse square" says that when distance gets multiplied by a number, sound intensity gets divided by that number squared (the number times itself). Thus, twice the distance means a quarter the intensity.

Sound intensities can be very different. They can range from 0.000000000001, which are barely heard, to 1 W/m2  (painfully loud). The decibel scale makes sound intensity numbers easier to work with. A 0.000000000001 W/m2 intensity is 0 dB (decibels). It is an exponential scale, so when the decibel number increases by 10, the intensity is ten times as much. So, a 1 W/m2 intensity is 120 dB.

Loudness is how people sense the intensity of sound. Loudness depends on sound intensity, sound frequency, and the person's hearing.

There is a limit on how loud a sound can be before it is considered a shockwave. In the Earth's atmosphere, this limit is 194 dB. Anything beyond that, the sound does not move through the air, the sound pushes the air along with it, creating a wall of pressurized air.

Audible sound has frequencies between 20 Hz to 20 kHz. Human beings can hear audible sound. Sound waves that have a frequency above 20 kHz are called ultrasound waves. Sound waves that have a frequency below 20 Hz are called infrasound waves. Human beings cannot hear ultrasound waves and infrasound waves, but some animals, like bats and dolphins, use them. Older people have an even smaller hearing range. People are best at hearing sounds between 1000 Hz and 6000 Hz.

When a sound source is moving towards someone, the frequency seems to increase. The same thing happens when someone moves toward the sound source. Frequency seems to decrease when someone moves away from the sound source. It also decreases when the sound source moves away from someone. This is called the Doppler effect.

Society is the term to describe human beings together as a collective entity – the sum of their social networks and social interactions.

The term comes from the Latin idea of societas, or the connection between friends or allies – friend or ally being socius. It can also mean a specific group of people who interact, as well as a wider society of which they are members. People form societies to gain greater benefits as a group than would be possible separately.  Many animals beside humans also do this, such as wolves or eusocial insects. Sociology is the name for the study of society.

A society is often considered in terms of citizenship, rights and ethics. The strength and unity of any society's members' willingness to help each other is to be measured can be called social capital.

A social contract sets out the rules and roles for this kind of cooperation. One kind of social contract is a constitution, which outlines to some extent what society at a given state is intended to be.

Sport usually means athletic games that involve a degree of competition, such as football, basketball or cross-country Olympic skiing. Some games and many kinds of racing are called sports. A professional at a sport is called an athlete. Many people do sports with their friends. They need coaches to teach or train teams or individuals how to do better.  Sports can be played indoors or outdoors and by individuals or team.

Sports are helpful for health and can help reduce diseases such as heart attacks, many types of cancer, depression and anxiety, and dementia. Different types of sports help our body in different ways. For children, sports play an extremely important part in their lives by providing all round development of the child, physically, mentally and emotionally.

Some people like to watch other people play sports. Those who watch others playing sports are called fans. While some fans watch sports on television, others actually go to stadiums or other places where people pay to watch them in person. These fans are called spectators.

The skin is the outer covering of mammals and some other animals. It has many important jobs. First, it helps protect the body by stopping pathogens such as bacteria and parasites from getting inside. Second, it helps control the body's temperature. It does this by allowing evaporation from the skin and by making changes to help the body stay at the right temperature. The skin is a physical barrier. In some animals it is very strong, while in humans it is less protective. The skin and hair of mammals also have several uses. Besides temperature regulation and protection, some hair is used to send signals to other animals.

Most animals have extra protection on their skin. Mammals have hair or fur. Birds have feathers. Most fish and reptiles, such as snakes and lizards, have scales.

The skin is the largest organ in the human body. Without skin, people would easily get infections and diseases. As part of the immune system, the skin can also help show signs of some diseases. Keeping the skin clean is important for good health. All mammals clean and care for their hair and skin. Skin care is an important part of staying healthy.

Humans can have different skin colours, such as black people and white people. These differences happen because of how their genes have adapted to different environments and climates over many generations. Humans can also have different skin types. The main skin types are oily, dry, combination, and sensitive.

A simple way to understand your skin type is to wash your face with a gentle cleanser and leave it without any skin care products for about one hour. If your skin feels tight and dry, you may have dry skin. If your forehead, nose, and chin (called the T-zone) become oily while the rest of your face stays fairly dry, you may have combination skin. If your face becomes red, irritated, itchy, or flaky, you may have sensitive skin.

The skin also helps protect the body by blocking harmful bacteria and viruses. It helps reduce the harmful effects of UV rays from the Sun. The skin also helps control body temperature.

Animal skins can be made into leather. Leather is used to make many things, including shoes, bags, and balls.

Statistics is a branch of applied mathematics that deals with collecting, organizing, analyzing, reading and presenting data. Descriptive statistics make summaries of data. Inferential statistics makes predictions. Statistics helps in the study of many other fields, such as science, medicine, economics, psychology, politics and marketing. Someone who works in statistics is called a statistician. In addition to being the name of a field of study, the word "statistics"  can also mean numbers that are used to describe data or relationships.

The first known statistics are census data. The Babylonians did a census around 3500 BC, the Egyptians around 2500 BC, and the Ancient Chinese around 1000 BC. Several mathematicians during the Islamic Golden Age studied statistical inference, mainly for use in cryptanalysis.

Starting in the 16th century, mathematicians such as Gerolamo Cardano developed the probability theory; this led statistics closer to being a science. Since then, people have collected and studied statistics on many things. Trees, starfish, stars, rocks, words, almost anything that can be counted has been a subject of statistics.

Before we can describe the world with statistics, we must collect data. The data that we collect in statistics are called measurements. After we collect data, we use one or more numbers to describe each observation or measurement. For example, suppose that we want to find out how popular a certain TV show is. We can pick a group of people (called a sample) out of the total population of viewers. Then we ask each viewer in the sample how often they watch the show. The sample is data that one can see, and the population is data that one cannot see (assuming that not every viewer in the population are asked). For another example, if we want to know whether a certain drug can help lower blood pressure, we could give the drug to people for some time and measure their blood pressure before and after.

Numbers that describe the data one can see are called descriptive statistics. Numbers that make predictions about the data one cannot see are called inferential statistics.

Descriptive statistics involves using numbers to describe features of data. For example, the average height of women in the United States is a descriptive statistic: it describes a feature (average height) of a population (women in the United States).

Once the results have been summarized and described, they can be used for prediction. This is called inferential statistics. As an example, the size of an animal is dependent on many factors. Some of these factors are controlled by the environment, but others are by inheritance. A biologist might therefore make a model that says that there is a high probability that the offspring will be small in size—if the parents were small in size. This model probably allows to predict the size in better ways than by just guessing at random. Testing whether a certain drug can be used to cure a certain condition or disease is usually done by comparing the results of people who are given the drug against those who are given a placebo.

Most often, we collect statistical data by doing surveys or experiments. For example, an opinion poll is one kind of survey. We pick a small number of people and we choose questions to ask them. Then, we use their answers as the data. This process of choosing which data to collect is called choosing a measurement; and the process of collecting data (in this case, who to ask) is called sampling.

The choice of how to collect data is important; that choice can change the values that are seen. Suppose we want to measure the water quality of a big lake. If we take samples next to the waste drain, we will get different results than if the samples are taken in a far-away and hard-to-reach spot of the lake.

There are two kinds of problems which are commonly found when taking samples:

We can reduce chance errors by taking a larger sample, and we can avoid some bias by choosing randomly. However, sometimes large random samples are hard to take. And bias can happen if different people are not asked, or refuse to answer our questions, or if they know they are getting a fake treatment. These problems can be hard to fix. See standard error for more.

Often, people find it easier to decrease the numbers that make up a set of data and work with a single number instead; many people think that the best number to choose is a number in the middle of the data (a "typical" value of the population). This number in the middle of the data is called its central tendency. There are three kinds of central tendencies that are often used: the mean (sometimes called the average), the median and the mode.

The formula for the commonly used mean (the so-called "arithmetic mean") is

Where  are the data and  is the population size (see also Sigma Notation).

This means that one calculates the mean by adding up all the values, and then divide by the number of values. For the example above, the mean is:

The problem with the mean is that it is affected by very large or very small values. In statistics, these extreme values might be errors of measurement, but sometimes the population really does contain these values. If a set of data has one of these values, then the mean may not be similar to most or all of the original values. For example, if there are 10 people in a room who make $10 per day and 1 who makes $1,000,000 per day, then the mean of the data is $90,918 per day.

The average also does not work if a set of data includes multiple groups that are much different that each other. In a room of 10 people with five people who make $10 and five people who make $100 per day, the average of these data is $55 per day.

In both cases, the mean is not the amount any single person makes; this fact makes the mean not very useful for some purposes.

Other kinds of means exist, like the geometric mean; other means are useful for other purposes.

The median is the middle item of the data. For a given data , this is sometimes written as . To find the median, we sort the data from the smallest number to the largest number, and then choose the number in the middle. If there is an even number of data, there will not be a number right in the middle, so we choose the two middle ones and calculate their mean. In our example above, there are 10 items of data, the two middle ones are "57" and "64", so the median is (57+64)/2 = 60.5.

As another example, like the income example presented for the mean, consider a room with 10 people who have incomes of $10, $20, $20, $40, $50, $60, $90, $90, $100, and $1,000,000. Here, the median is $55, because $55 is the average of the two middle numbers, $50 and $60.  If the extreme value of $1,000,000 is ignored, the mean is $53.  In this case, the median is close to the value obtained when the extreme value is thrown out.  The median solves the problem of extreme values as described in the first example in the definition of mean above.

However, the median still does not work as well for data made of multiple groups. In a room of 10 people with five people who make $10 and five people who make $100 per day, the median of these data is still $55 per day, which is still not similar to most of the people in the room.

The mode is the most frequent item of data. For example, if there are 10 people in a room with incomes of $10, $20, $20, $40, $50, $60, $90, $90, $90, $100, and $1,000,000, then the mode is $90, because $90 occurs three times and all other values occur fewer than three times.

There can be more than one mode. For example, if there are 10 people in a room with incomes of $10, $20, $20, $20, $50, $60, $90, $90, $90, $100, and $1,000,000, the modes are $20 and $90. This is bi-modal, or has two modes. Bi-modality is very common, and it often indicates that the data is the combination of two different groups.  For instance, the average height of all adults in the U.S. has a bi-modal distribution.  This is because males and females have separate average heights of 1.763 m (5 ft 9 + 1⁄2 in) for men and 1.622 m (5 ft 4 in) for women.  These peaks are apparent when both groups are combined.

The mode is the only form of average that can be used for data that can not be put in order.

Another thing we can say about a set of data is how spread out it is. A common way to describe the spread of a set of data is the standard deviation. If the standard deviation of a set of data is small, then most of the data is very close to the average. If the standard deviation is large, though, then a lot of the data is very different from the average.

The standard deviation of a sample is generally different from the standard deviation of its originating population . Because of that, we write  for population standard deviation, and  for sample standard deviation.

If the data follows the common pattern called the normal distribution, then it is very useful to know the standard deviation. If the data follows this pattern (we would say the data is normally distributed), about 68 of every 100 pieces of data will be off the average by less than the standard deviation. Not only that, but about 95 of every 100 measurements will be off the average by less than two times the standard deviation, and about 997 in 1000 will be closer to the average by less than three standard deviations.

We also can use statistics to find out that some percent, percentile, number, or fraction of people or things in a group do something or fit in a certain category.

For example, social scientists used statistics to find out that 49% of people in the world are males.

In order to support statisticians, many statistical software have been developed:

In politics, a state is the government of a country which has control over a geographic area or territory. States have three main features:

There are different forms of government a state may have, for example a republic or a monarchy. Sometimes states form their own countries. In its origin the United States had different kinds of states, but they agreed to join together. Most states also have armed forces, civil service, law and police.

Government institutions in a country are commonly referred to as "the state".

The definition above is very broad. It  is based on ideas by Georg Jellinek (1851-1911). Other people had other ideas:

Because of the different definitions, there's no universally accepted definition of state. The one given at the start of the article is now part of international law.

The earliest states could not be just human settlements. They had to be more than tribes. An example is New Guinea, which has many small tribes, but no larger organisations. Amazonia in the 18th century was also like this, with many small tribes. They are not states. To be a state, tribes have to be bounded together, for example, by a monarch. They may also be bonded by their language, and by living in the same region.

An example of monarchy is early Egypt under the Pharaohs.  Similar military-based states included the Babylonian Empire and the huge Roman Empire and early China.

Some early states were based on cities.  Some Ancient Greek city-states had democracy in a limited form.  Other states had inheritance of kingship or even challenges and fighting to decide leadership.  Early city states had a feature that modern society cannot match.  Every man got to see and know the leading citizens.  "Man" because most city-states limited the vote to male heads of families. One reason was that the adult men would do the fighting if the group were attacked.

When the military-based state, the Roman Empire, fell, lots of little states were made and each was also military-based and controlled by a king. These states did not often work together and war raged. However, once people within the state itself started fighting (what's called a Civil war), the kings had to make peace and start parliaments.

Modern states soon started in the late 15th century. The main states in Europe were:

These states all tried to improve their politics and economy. They became more and more like the states today. They formed proper boundaries for their lands and worked with the powers in the state, such as the Church and the nobility. They made armies, tax systems and embassies to make them more powerful and stable.

Types of state can be separated into two categories: democracy and dictatorship. However, just because a group of states are all democratic does not mean that they follow the same rules. Iran, Pakistan, France, Germany and the United States of America are all states. Each of them sees itself as a democracy. Each of them however has a different idea of what democracy really means.

Different states of the same 'category' can also function differently. For example, two democratic states may be quite different if one has a well-trained police or army while the other does not. Therefore, the word 'state' only tells us what type of government that state follows (democratic or dictatorship) and does not tell us about the country itself.

There are lots of sub-types of state branching off from democracy and dictatorship. The main ones are Pluralism, Marxism and Institutionalism.

Pluralism has been very popular in the United States. It shows the state as a neutral place for settling arguments between other states. Pluralism allows each group of people to tell the state what to do. This type of state is called a polyarchy.

Also in a pluralist state, politics, the military and the economy are all united and work together. This means that all power in the state is 'diffused' across the people who live there.

Marxism is an ideology advocating for the rights of workers and labourers of society. It was started by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Marxism rejects the idea that a state is there to protect business interest, and is definitely not a neutral place for settling arguments.

The main job of a Marxist state is to protect the labour and financial situation of the working classes. With such reforms, a Marxist state focuses on collectivising resources and creating a planned economy to ensure the well-being of the workers.

Both Marxist and Pluralist states have to react to the activities of groups of people in the state itself. Institutionalist states do not see themselves as 'instruments' to be controlled, they are more just geographical areas. In this area, the people just form groups themselves. An institutionalist state can be made up of both Marxist and Pluralist people, both which have the power to control themselves and not influence the other parties of the state.

Anarchism is when a group of people have complete freedom and do not believe in having a state at all. Anarchists share the same roots as Marxists, coming from workers movements, but they believe (opposite to Marxists) that a society can work without a state controlling the people.

Anarchists (such as Bakunin and Kropotkin in the 19th century), often want a form of Marxism but ignoring some of their rules. They want workers to manage themselves and simply get paid for what they do, rather than getting paid in wages.

The Solar System is a group of space objects that are held together by gravity, with the Sun in the center. The Sun is a huge ball of hot glowing gas that gives off light and heat. Everything else in the Solar System moves around the Sun. The Solar System formed about 4.6 billion years ago when a giant cloud of gas and dust collapsed and started to spin.  Scientists call this process the solar nebula theory. As the cloud collapsed, gravity caused it to spin faster and flatten into a disk. The Sun formed at the center, while the remaining material in the disk slowly stuck together to form planets through a process called accretion.

Most of the material went into forming the Sun, and the rest became planets and other objects. There are eight main planets, including Earth, and many moons that orbit them. There are also dwarf planets like Pluto, as well as asteroids, comets, meteoroids, and tiny particles called interplanetary dust. Our Solar System is part of a galaxy called the Milky Way. It lies in a part of the galaxy called the Orion Arm, about 27,000 light-years from the center of the Milky Way.

There are eight planets in our Solar System. Starting from the closest to the Sun, they are: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Scientists often group them into two main types. Terrestrial planets (Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars) are small and made mostly of rock and metal. Giant planets include gas giants (Jupiter and Saturn), made mostly of hydrogen and helium, and ice giants (Uranus and Neptune), which have more icy materials like water, methane, and ammonia. Each planet moves around the Sun in an oval-shaped path called an ellipse. These paths are all mostly in the same flat area of space, called the ecliptic plane.  The ecliptic plane is the flat, disk-shaped region formed by the rotation of the original cloud of gas and dust. Because the planets formed from this rotating disk, they orbit the Sun in nearly the same plane, with only slight variations in their tilt.

Many planets have moons, which are natural objects that orbit them. Some planets, like Saturn and Jupiter, also have rings made of ice and dust particles that circle around them.

Far beyond the planet Neptune is a region called the Kuiper Belt. This area is filled with icy objects, including small worlds called dwarf planets, like Pluto, Haumea, and Makemake. These objects are made mostly of rock and ice and orbit the Sun just like the planets, but they are much smaller. Even farther out is a zone called the scattered disk, and beyond that is a mysterious, faraway area called the Oort Cloud. Scientists think the Oort Cloud is a huge, invisible shell of icy objects surrounding the Solar System. It may be where long-period comets come from, those that take hundreds or thousands of years to travel around the Sun. These distant regions are at the edge of the Sun’s power. The Sun’s gravity and solar wind stretch out to form a giant bubble called the heliosphere. This marks the boundary of the Sun’s influence, even farther than where the planets orbit.

The Solar System has more than just planets and moons. It also has thousands of space rocks called asteroids. Most of these are found in a big area between the planets Mars and Jupiter. This area is called the asteroid belt. Some asteroids, called Trojan asteroids, share their paths around the Sun with planets. There are also comets. Comets are made mostly of ice and dust. They move in long, stretched-out paths around the Sun. When a comet gets close to the Sun, the heat makes it grow a glowing tail that points away from the Sun. Smaller pieces of rock and metal, called meteoroids, also float around in space. If one of these enters Earth’s atmosphere, it burns up and creates a bright streak in the sky. That’s what we call a meteor or a shooting star. If part of it survives the trip and lands on the ground, it is called a meteorite.

The Sun is by far the biggest and most powerful object in the Solar System. It makes up more than 99.8% of all the mass, which means almost all the weight in the Solar System comes from the Sun. The Sun is a type of star that produces energy in its center through a process called nuclear fusion. This means it turns a gas called hydrogen into another gas called helium. When it does this, it releases a huge amount of energy. This energy spreads out in all directions as light, heat, and other types of radiation. The Sun also sends out a flow of tiny, charged particles called the solar wind. This wind can hit the magnetic fields and atmospheres of planets like Earth. When this happens, it can cause things like the auroras, the colorful lights in the sky near the North and South Poles. The solar wind also affects space weather, which can sometimes interfere with satellites and power systems on Earth.

Scientists believe the Solar System formed from a big spinning cloud of gas and dust. This idea is called the nebular hypothesis. Over time, the cloud began to collapse and spin faster, forming a flat disk. Most of the material gathered in the center to form the Sun, while the rest started forming planets. Closer to the Sun, it was very hot, so only rocky materials could stick together. That’s why the inner planets like Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars are made of rock. Farther out, it was much colder, so gases and ices could join together to form the giant planets like Jupiter and Saturn. Over billions of years, the planets moved around, crashed into other objects, and were affected by gravity. These changes helped shape the Solar System into the way we see it today.

People have been studying the Solar System for thousands of years. Ancient civilizations watched the sky and noticed how the planets and stars moved. They used this knowledge to make calendars and guide their lives. A big change came in the 1500s, when a man named Nicolaus Copernicus said that the Sun, not the Earth, was at the center of the Solar System. This idea is called the heliocentric model, and it replaced the older belief that everything moved around the Earth. It was a major turning point in how people understood space. Later, in the 1600s, Isaac Newton came up with the laws of motion and gravity. These laws helped explain how the planets move and why they stay in orbit around the Sun. In more recent times, the 1900s and 2000s, we have sent robotic spacecraft to explore the Solar System. Missions like Voyager, Cassini, Juno, and the Mars rovers have taught us a lot about the planets, moons, and even the chance of finding life somewhere else in space.

The formation and  of the Solar System began 4.6 billion years ago with the gravitational collapse of a small part of a giant molecular cloud. The solar nebula was the cloud of gas and dust that eventually formed the Sun and all the planets. This cloud did not just appear out of nowhere. It came from the interstellar medium, which is the thin, spread-out stuff that fills the space between stars. The part of space that formed our solar system was probably in a giant molecular cloud. These are cold, thick areas in space where new stars are often born. That’s why scientists sometimes call them stellar nurseries. These clouds were made mostly of hydrogen and helium, the two lightest elements. But they also had tiny amounts of heavier elements like carbon, oxygen, silicon, and iron. These heavier elements were made by older stars that had exploded in huge blasts called supernovas. When these stars exploded, they sent these elements out into space, mixing them into the cloud. Because of these ingredients, our part of the cloud had everything needed to form rocky planets like Earth and even the building blocks of life.

The formation of our Solar System began with a triggering event, something that caused part of a giant cloud of gas and dust to start collapsing. Scientists are not completely sure what started it, but there are a couple of good guesses. One idea is that a nearby supernova, a huge explosion at the end of a star’s life, sent out a powerful shockwave. This shockwave may have hit the cloud, pushing and squeezing the gas and dust until it became dense enough for gravity to take over. Another possibility is that small instabilities inside the cloud caused it to start collapsing on its own. Once gravity became stronger than the pressure trying to push the gas outward, the center of the cloud started to collapse inward. As it collapsed, it began to spin and flatten, forming a thicker, spinning area called the protosolar nebula. This was the early stage of what would eventually become the Sun and planets.

As the center of the giant cloud of gas and dust collapsed, it started to spin faster. This happened because of a rule in physics called conservation of angular momentum, kind of like how a figure skater spins faster when they pull their arms in. As the spinning increased, the cloud also flattened into a disk. In the middle of this spinning disk, more and more gas and dust gathered, making the center hotter and denser. As this cloud got smaller, most of the material started gathering in the center, forming a growing ball of gas called a protostar. This was the very early stage of what would become the Sun. As more gas and dust fell into the center, the protostar got hotter and denser. The particles inside began to crash into each other more often, causing the pressure to rise. When the core reached a temperature of about 10 million Kelvin, a powerful reaction called nuclear fusion started. During fusion, hydrogen atoms joined together to form helium, and this released a huge amount of energy. At this moment, the Sun officially came to life as a main-sequence star. Once fusion began, the Sun started giving off strong light, heat, and solar wind, a stream of tiny, charged particles. This wind helped blow away the extra gas and dust in the inner Solar System. This clearing-out process is called photoevaporation. It helped stop more material from falling into the Sun and made room for the planets to start forming. Even though the Sun was still young, it now had strong gravity and energy that controlled everything around it. The Sun had become the center of the Solar System.

Surrounding the young Sun was a large, spinning disk of gas and dust called the protoplanetary disk. This material was left over from the cloud that formed the Sun. The disk was flat like a pancake and rotated around the Sun. This disk was not the same all over, it had different temperatures in different places. The part closest to the Sun was very hot because of the Sun’s strong light and heat. In this hot area, only tough materials like metals and rocks could stay solid. These materials came together to form the rocky planets like Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. Farther away from the Sun, the disk was much cooler. In this colder area, things like water, ammonia, and methane could freeze into ice. These icy and gassy materials helped form the gas and ice giants, planets like Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. So, the different temperatures in the disk helped decide what kind of planets would form in different parts of the Solar System. This model, known as the nebular hypothesis, was developed in the 18th (1700s) century by Emanuel Swedenborg, Immanuel Kant, and Pierre-Simon Laplace. It has been adjusted by scientific disciplines such as astronomy, physics, geology, and planetary science. As our knowledge of space has grown, the models have been changed to account for the new observations.

One important part of the protoplanetary disk was something called the snow line (also known as the ice line). This was an invisible boundary in the disk that marked the point where it was cold enough for water and other gases to freeze into ice. Inside the snow line, closer to the Sun, it was too hot, so only rock and metal could stick together and form solid objects. That’s why the inner planets, like Earth and Mars, are made mostly of rock. Beyond the snow line, it was much cooler, and there were lots of ices in addition to rock. These ices made it easier for large planet cores to grow quickly. Once these big cores formed, they had strong enough gravity to pull in lots of gas from the disk around them. This is how the giant planets like Jupiter and Saturn were able to form.

The process of forming planets began inside the spinning disk of gas and dust around the young Sun. It all started with tiny dust grains made of things like rock, metal, and ice. These grains were spread all throughout the disk. At first, the dust grains were tiny. But as they floated in the gas, they bumped into each other and started to stick together. This happened because of electrostatic forces, the same kind of static electricity that makes a person's hair stand up. Over time, the grains grew bigger and turned into pebbles, then clumps, and finally into objects that were about a kilometer wide. These larger bodies are called planetesimals, and they were the first real building blocks of planets. As the planetesimals (small space rocks) kept growing, something important started to happen, gravity became a big deal. The larger planetesimals had stronger gravity, which let them pull in more nearby dust and rocks. This made them grow even faster. This fast-growing phase is called runaway accretion. During runaway accretion, the biggest planetesimals kept getting bigger and bigger, leaving the smaller ones behind. These big ones started to take over certain parts of the disk, becoming the main objects in their areas. After most of the smaller pieces were gone, the growth slowed down. This slower stage is called oligarchic growth. In this phase, several large bodies, called planetary embryos, formed. These were about the size of the Moon or even Mars. Each embryo controlled a small area of the disk. Over millions of years, the large space rocks called planetary embryos began to crash into each other, join together, or pull on each other with gravity. These actions helped shape the final layout of the planets in the Solar System. In the inner part of the Solar System, where there were mostly rocky materials, these giant collisions eventually formed the rocky planets like Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. In the outer part, beyond the snow line where it was much colder, some embryos grew so big that their gravity could pull in thick layers of gas, mainly hydrogen and helium. These became the huge gas and ice giants like Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.

One of the most important events in the story of how planets formed is the creation of Earth’s Moon. Scientists believe the Moon was formed by a giant impact. This idea is called the giant impact hypothesis. According to this theory, about 4.5 billion years ago, a space object about the size of Mars, which we call Theia, crashed into the young Earth. The crash was so powerful that it melted parts of both worlds and sent a huge amount of debris into space around Earth. This debris, made mostly of rock from Earth’s outer layers, slowly came together because of gravity. Over time, the pieces joined to form the Moon. Scientists believe this theory is true because the Moon is made of materials very similar to Earth’s outer layers, especially the mantle. Also, the Moon does not have many gases or a large iron core, which supports the idea that it formed from Earth’s surface material, not from a separate object that was captured.

As young planets were forming, something important called planetary differentiation began to happen. This is the process where the inside of a planet becomes layered, with heavier materials sinking and lighter ones rising. As the planets grew bigger, they got hotter inside. This heat came from radioactive decay, big impacts, and the pressure of gravity squeezing the planet. The heat was so strong that parts of the inside of the planet began to melt. When a planet is melted, the materials inside can separate by weight. Heavy materials like iron and nickel sank to the center to form the core. Lighter materials, such as silicate rocks, floated upward to form the mantle and crust. Differentiation helped planets develop many important features. One major result was the formation of metallic cores inside planets like Earth. These cores moved and flowed, creating magnetic fields that protect the planet from harmful space radiation. At the same time, volcanoes released gases from inside the planet in a process called outgassing. These gases, along with materials delivered by space rocks, helped form the planet’s atmosphere. On Earth, this made it possible for life to eventually develop. The leftover heat from the planet’s formation, along with moving materials inside the planet, caused ongoing geological activity. This includes things like volcanoes, earthquakes, and tectonic plate movement. These processes helped shape the planet’s surface and kept the planet active.

The gas giants, like Jupiter and Saturn, formed in a different way than the smaller rocky planets like Earth. This is because they were born in the colder, outer parts of the Solar System, beyond a boundary called the snow line, where ices could form and last. Scientists have two main ideas about how these big planets formed. The most popular one is called the core accretion model. According to this idea, the process began with icy space rocks, called planetesimals, slowly sticking together to form a large solid core. This core had to be about 10 times the size of Earth to be strong enough. Once the core got that big, its gravity became powerful enough to pull in large amounts of gas, especially hydrogen and helium, from the surrounding disk. This made the planets grow very quickly and gain their thick, gassy outer layers. But this had to happen fast, within just a few million years, before all the gas in the protoplanetary disk disappeared. If the gas was gone, the planet could not grow into a gas giant. Another idea about how gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn formed is called the disk instability model. Instead of starting with a solid core, this theory suggests that parts of the gas disk around the Sun became unstable and collapsed under their own gravity. These collapsing clumps of gas could have turned directly into gas giants, without needing a rocky center first. This model could explain how gas giants formed very quickly, which is something the core accretion model struggles with. However, scientists do not have much direct evidence that this happened in our Solar System, so the core accretion model is still the more popular idea.

The ice giants, Uranus and Neptune, formed differently from both the rocky planets and the gas giants. They were born farther from the Sun, in a place where there was less material to build planets. According to the core accretion model, these planets started out by forming solid cores, just like Jupiter and Saturn. But because there was not as much gas around, or because the gas did not last very long, they could not pull in as much hydrogen and helium. So, they ended up with only thin layers of gas. Instead of having thick, gassy atmospheres, ice giants are made mostly of volatiles, substances like water, ammonia, and methane. Even though we call them “ice” giants, much of this material is actually in a hot, thick, fluid form deep inside the planets because of the high pressure. This is why Uranus and Neptune are smaller than Jupiter and Saturn and have a different makeup.  At the same time as the planets were forming, the outer edges of the Solar System were creating dwarf planets and other icy objects. Far beyond Neptune, there’s a region called the Kuiper Belt. In this area, leftover pieces from the early Solar System came together to form objects like Pluto, Eris, and Haumea. These icy bodies are like frozen time capsules. They have not changed much since they first formed, so they give scientists clues about what the outer Solar System was like long ago. Their icy make-up and stable orbits tell us about the cold, quiet conditions far from the Sun. Some of these objects might not have started out in the Kuiper Belt. They may have formed closer to the Sun and were later pushed outward by the strong gravity of the moving gas giants, like Jupiter. This idea supports theories like the Nice model, which explains how the planets and other objects ended up where they are today.

One of the most important steps in the Solar System's history was the clearing of the protoplanetary disk. This was the spinning cloud of gas and dust around the young Sun where planets were forming. As the Sun got older and became a full main-sequence star, it started sending out strong solar winds, streams of tiny, charged particles. It also gave off intense ultraviolet radiation. Together, these forces began to blow away the leftover gas and dust in the disk. This process is called photoevaporation. Photoevaporation was especially strong in the inner part of the Solar System, where the Sun's heat and light were most powerful. Once the gas was gone, planets could not grow much more, especially gas giants, because the materials they needed had disappeared. Scientists believe this clearing happened within about 10 million years after the Solar System began. We know this by looking at other young stars and their disks in space today. The clearing of the disk marked the end of major planet formation and shaped the Solar System as we know it.

After the planets finished forming and started to settle into their orbits, the Solar System went through a chaotic time called the Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB). This happened about 4.1 to 3.8 billion years ago and was a period when the inner planets, like Earth, the Moon, Mars, and Mercury, were hit by tons of asteroids and comets. Scientists know this happened because of rock samples from the Moon that were brought back by the Apollo missions. Scientists studied the craters on the Moon and used special techniques to figure out how old the rocks were. They found that many of the Moon’s biggest craters, like the Imbrium and Orientale basins, were all made around the same time. This shows that there was a sudden increase in space impacts, not just a slow decline over time. The same thing probably happened on Earth and other nearby planets. Meteorites found on Earth and information from Mars also support the idea that this was a Solar System-wide event with a huge number of collisions happening in a short period.

Scientists are still trying to figure out exactly what caused the Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB), but one popular idea is called the Nice model (named after a city in France). This model suggests that the giant planets, like Jupiter and Saturn, did not always stay in the same orbits. They might have moved. At some point in the early Solar System, Jupiter and Saturn may have crossed a special point in their orbits called a resonance. This happens when their orbits line up in a way that their gravitational pulls reinforce each other. In this case, it created a powerful gravitational effect that caused destabilized the orbits of many icy bodies in the Kuiper Belt and rocky objects in the asteroid belt. These objects were either flung out of the Solar System or sent crashing inward toward the inner planets, like Earth, Mars, and Venus. This sudden movement of so many objects led to the Late Heavy Bombardment, when the inner planets were hit by lots of asteroids and comets. These impacts helped shape the surfaces of the planets and may have even brought water and organic materials to Earth, ingredients that later made life possible.

One idea in planetary science is the Grand Tack hypothesis. This theory tries to explain some strange things about our Solar System by suggesting that Jupiter did not always stay where it is now. Instead, it says that Jupiter once moved inward, getting much closer to the Sun, about 1.5 times the distance from Earth to the Sun, before turning around and moving back outward to where it is today. This big change in direction, or "tack" (like a sailboat changing course), may have happened because of Saturn. After Jupiter formed, Saturn also started forming, and the gravity between the two may have caused Jupiter to change direction. As Jupiter moved inward, it would have pushed away or scattered a lot of dust, rocks, and planetesimals. This would have cleared out space in the Solar System and changed how the rocky planets, like Earth and Mars, formed. When Jupiter moved back outward, it may have pulled in a new mix of material, adding both rocky and icy objects into the asteroid belt. This helps explain why the asteroid belt today has a mix of different types of asteroids, some rocky, some icy.

One big area scientists study is how the orbits of planets, moons, asteroids, and comets change over time. These changes happen slowly and are often caused by gravity pulling on objects in special ways. One important idea is called a resonance. This happens when two objects go around the Sun in a regular pattern, like one going around twice for every three times the other one goes around. These simple ratios (like 2:1 or 3:2) can keep orbits stable or sometimes make them unstable. Resonances help explain why the asteroid belt looks the way it does, why certain moons are in just the right spots, and why icy objects beyond Neptune tend to cluster in certain areas. Another idea is called secular variation, which means slow, long-term changes in things like a planet’s orbit shape, tilt, or direction. These changes happen because planets gently pull on each other over millions of years. For example, Earth’s orbit and tilt slowly shift because of the gravity from Jupiter and Saturn. These changes affect Earth’s climate over a long time, in something called Milankovitch cycles. Sometimes, gravity can even throw objects off course or capture them. This is called gravitational scattering. For example, Neptune’s moon Triton orbits backward, which suggests it did not form around Neptune but was a Kuiper Belt object that got caught by Neptune’s gravity. Mars’s tiny moons, Phobos and Deimos, may also be captured asteroids because of their strange shapes and materials.

Another important force that helps shape the Solar System is tidal interaction, especially between planets and their moons. Tidal forces happen because of gravity. Planets pull on their moons, and moons pull back on their planets. This tugging creates bulges, which causes energy to be lost and leads to slow changes in orbits and rotation. One famous example is the Earth and Moon. Because of tidal forces, the Moon always shows the same side to Earth. This is called being tidally locked. Also, Earth’s rotation is slowly slowing down, and the Moon is very slowly moving farther away from us. Tidal forces can also create heat inside moons, especially those that orbit big planets like Jupiter and Saturn. For example, Europa (a moon of Jupiter) and Enceladus (a moon of Saturn) are squeezed and stretched as they move around their planets. This squeezing, called tidal flexing, creates heat inside them. That heat might keep liquid oceans under their icy surfaces. These hidden oceans could have geysers or even cryovolcanoes (volcanoes that erupt ice instead of lava). Because of this, Europa and Enceladus are interesting places to look for life beyond Earth.

At the very center of the Solar System is the Sun, which is a middle-aged star called a G-type main-sequence star. The Sun is very massive, it holds more than 99.8% of all the mass in the Solar System. The Sun gives off light and heat, which make life on Earth possible. It also creates the gravity that keeps all the planets, moons, asteroids, and comets moving in their orbits. Even though the Sun looks calm in the sky, it is actually very active. It gives off radiation and sends out a stream of charged particles called the solar wind. This wind stretches far out into space and helps create the edge of a giant bubble called the heliosphere, which surrounds the entire Solar System.

Surrounding the Sun are the eight major planets, which are split into two main groups. The first group is the terrestrial planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. These are small, rocky planets made mostly of rock and metal. The second group includes the gas and ice giants, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. These planets are much bigger and made mostly of gases like hydrogen and helium, and ices such as water, ammonia, and methane. All the planets move in oval-shaped orbits (called elliptical orbits) around the Sun, and they mostly stay in the same flat area called the ecliptic plane. Most of them spin in the same direction as the Sun, but there are a couple of exceptions. Venus spins backward, and Uranus spins on its side. Besides the planets, the Solar System also has lots of smaller objects. Between Mars and Jupiter is the asteroid belt, which contains millions of space rocks. Some as small as dust, and others as big as the dwarf planet Ceres. Even farther out is the Kuiper Belt, which is full of icy objects like Pluto, Haumea, and Makemake. These are called trans-Neptunian objects (TNOs), and they are leftovers from the Solar System's early days. They never became planets because the gravity from the big planets, like Jupiter, kept pulling things around and disturbing them. Way beyond that, scientists think there is something called the Oort Cloud. It is a giant, round shell of icy objects that surrounds the Solar System. Scientists have not seen it directly, but they think it is there because it is likely the home of long-period comets. The ones that take hundreds or thousands of years to orbit the Sun. The Oort Cloud is believed to be the very edge of the Sun’s gravitational reach.

The Solar System is always changing. It is not just made of planets and moons, there are lots of smaller objects moving around too, like comets, meteoroids, and centaurs. Centaurs are unusual because they have features of both asteroids and comets. Sometimes, comets from faraway places like the Kuiper Belt or the Oort Cloud travel into the inner part of the Solar System. As they get closer to the Sun, the heat causes their ice to melt, creating bright tails of gas and dust. These tails can be really beautiful and are often visible from Earth. Meteoroids are small rocks that sometimes enter Earth’s atmosphere. When they burn up in the sky, we see them as meteors or "shooting stars." If a bigger piece makes it all the way to the ground, it is called a meteorite. While big impacts are rare, scientists still keep an eye on near-Earth objects (NEOs) just in case. Centaurs are icy objects with unstable orbits between Jupiter and Neptune. They might one day become short-period comets that visit the inner Solar System more often. In recent years, astronomers even discovered objects from outside our Solar System, like ‘Oumuamua and Comet 2I/Borisov. These interstellar visitors came from far beyond the Sun’s reach, giving us clues about how other star systems might form.

There are over 800 known moons in our Solar System, and they come in all shapes and sizes. Some moons are fiery and active, like Io, which has volcanoes constantly erupting. Others, like Europa and Enceladus, are covered in ice but may have liquid oceans hidden underneath. These icy moons are interesting because they might even have the right conditions for life. Some planets, like Saturn and Neptune, have lots of moons, creating huge moon systems that scientists are still exploring and learning about. Besides natural moons, the Solar System also has many spacecraft and satellites that humans have sent into space to learn more about our Solar System. Some of these orbit Earth, while others go much farther. For example, Voyager 1 has traveled so far that it has entered interstellar space, beyond the edge of the Solar System. Other missions like Juno (orbiting Jupiter), Perseverance (exploring Mars), the James Webb Space Telescope, and New Horizons (which flew past Pluto) are helping us study planets, moons, and stars in detail.

Over billions of years, the planets in our Solar System have settled into stable orbits. This means that even though their paths can slowly change, they mostly stay the same over time. These changes happen very slowly and are caused by gravity pulling on the planets from other planets and the Sun. The way the planets are arranged now is called the current epoch, and it is expected to stay stable for billions more years. The orbits might change a little in shape or tilt, but not in a way that causes big problems. This stability is really important because it means we can predict how planets move far into the future. It also helps keep Earth safe and habitable, making life possible for a long time.

The future of the Solar System depends a lot on what happens to the Sun, since it is the star at the center and controls everything with its gravity and energy. Right now, the Sun is in the main part of its life, called the main sequence. During this time, it is turning hydrogen into helium through a process called nuclear fusion, which creates the light and heat Earth gets. But this would not last forever. In about 5 billion years, the Sun will start to run out of hydrogen fuel. When that happens, the core will shrink, and the outer layers will puff up, making the Sun grow much bigger. This next stage is called the red giant phase. As a red giant, the Sun will become so large that it might swallow up Mercury and Venus, and it could even reach Earth, depending on how much it expands.

When the Sun becomes a red giant, it will also start to lose a lot of its mass. This happens because strong solar winds will blow material off the Sun and into space. As the Sun gets lighter, its gravity will weaken, and the planets that survive will slowly move into wider orbits. Even if Earth is not swallowed by the Sun, it will still be in big trouble. The intense heat and radiation will likely destroy Earth's atmosphere and oceans, making it impossible for life to survive. Earth will become dry and lifeless. The inner Solar System will turn into a very dangerous and hostile place. The outer planets, like Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, will probably survive, but their moons and rings might change. At some point, the core of the Sun will get hot enough to start burning helium. This process is called helium fusion. However, the Sun will only be able to burn helium for a short time compared to how long it burned hydrogen. The Sun is not big enough or heavy enough to fuse heavier elements like carbon or oxygen. So after the helium runs out, the nuclear reactions in the core will stop. Without these reactions, the Sun would not be able to hold up its outer layers.

After the Sun finishes its red giant phase, it will shed its outer layers and leave behind a small but very hot core called a white dwarf. A white dwarf is about the size of Earth, but it still holds about half the mass of the original Sun. Even though it would not make energy anymore, it will still be very hot and dense. When the Sun's outer layers float away into space, they might create a cloud of glowing gas called a planetary nebula. This is a bright shell of gas that shines in space for a short time. These outer layers are made of material that once belonged to the Sun, but now they contain heavier elements like carbon that were made inside the Sun over its lifetime. This gas will go back into the interstellar medium, the space between stars, where it can help form new stars and planets one day.

Over time, the white dwarf will cool down slowly, taking trillions of years to lose its heat. It would not shine like the Sun does now, but it will still have gravity strong enough to keep the outer planets and moons orbiting around it. However, over a very long time, the orbits of those planets might change slightly because there will be less gravity and other forces acting on them. Over an even longer period of time, tens or even hundreds of billions of years, the Solar System may start to break apart. Tiny changes, like the pull from passing stars or forces from the galaxy, can slowly change the orbits of planets and other space objects. Some planets or moons might get knocked out of the Solar System and drift off into deep space, becoming free-floating objects. Others might spiral inward and crash into the white dwarf that used to be the Sun. Eventually, the Solar System could completely fall apart, with its planets and moons scattered across the galaxy. This slow breakup is a natural part of how gravity works over a long time, and it would be the end of the Solar System.

The Solar System is held together by gravity, with the Sun at the center. The Sun is so huge that it makes up more than 99.8% of all the mass in the entire Solar System. Because of its strong gravity, all the major objects, like planets, moons, asteroids, and comets, orbit around the Sun. This setup is called the heliocentric system, which means “Sun-centered.” The Solar System is divided into different regions, and each region has its own kinds of space objects and special features.

Closest to the Sun are the terrestrial planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. These planets are small, rocky, and heavy, made mostly of rock and metal. This part of the Solar System is called the inner Solar System, and all the planets here are packed close together. Just past Mars is the asteroid belt. This is a doughnut-shaped area filled with many rocky objects. These space rocks did not come together to form a planet, mostly because Jupiter’s strong gravity kept pulling things apart. The asteroid belt is like a border zone between the inner rocky planets and the outer giant planets.

Farther from the Sun are the giant planets. First come Jupiter and Saturn, known as gas giants because they are made mostly of hydrogen and helium. Then come Uranus and Neptune, called ice giants because they have more icy materials like water, ammonia, and methane. These outer planets are very big, have many moons, and also have ring systems, though not all are as big as Saturn’s rings. Beyond Neptune is the Kuiper Belt, a cold, flat region full of icy objects, including dwarf planets like Pluto. There are also many tiny frozen bodies out there. Even farther away is something called the Oort Cloud. It is a giant, round cloud of icy objects that surrounds the Solar System. Scientists think this is where long-period comets come from. It is also where the Sun’s gravity starts to fade.

The objects in the Solar System are grouped into different categories based on how they move and what they are made of. First, there are the planets, like Earth and Jupiter. These are big enough to control their orbits by pulling in or pushing away other objects nearby. Next are dwarf planets, like Pluto, Eris, and Haumea. These are round like planets, but they do not clear their orbits, which means other objects still share their paths around the Sun. Then we have natural satellites, which are moons that orbit planets. Finally, there are small solar system bodies like asteroids, comets, and meteoroids. These are smaller chunks of rock, metal, or ice that travel through space in all kinds of orbits.

The Solar System is huge, way bigger than what humans can easily imagine. The distances and sizes of the planets and other space objects are so big that it is hard to picture them using everyday ideas. The Sun is the biggest thing in the Solar System. It is so massive that it makes up almost all the mass in the entire Solar System. The Sun’s radius is about 700,000 kilometers (or 400,000 miles). Even though Earth feels big to us, about 1.3 million Earth's would fit inside the Sun. Jupiter is the largest planet. It is 5.2 times farther from the Sun than Earth and is so big that over 1,300 Earths could fit inside it. Its diameter is more than 11 times that of Earth. On the other hand, Mercury, the smallest planet, is just a little bigger than Earth’s Moon. And even smaller are dwarf planets like Pluto and tiny space rocks like comets and asteroids, which can be just a few kilometers wide.

Because the Solar System is so big, scientists use a special unit called the Astronomical Unit (AU) to measure distances in space. One AU is the average distance between the Earth and the Sun, which is about 149.6 million kilometers (or 93 million miles). Using AU makes it easier to talk about how far planets are from the Sun. For example, Venus is about 0.72 AU from the Sun, Mars is about 1.52 AU, and Neptune, the farthest main planet, is about 30 AU away. The Kuiper Belt, which contains icy objects like Pluto, stretches from around 30 AU to 50 AU. Even farther out is the Oort Cloud, a mysterious area that might reach 100,000 AU from the Sun. Usually, the farther a planet is from the Sun, the bigger the gap between it and the next planet. For instance, Venus is only about 0.33 AU farther from the Sun than Mercury, but Saturn is 4.3 AU farther out than Jupiter, and Neptune is 10.5 AU beyond Uranus. In the past, scientists tried to find patterns in these distances, like the Titius–Bode law or Kepler's ideas, but as more planets and objects were discovered, those ideas did not hold up.

There is a lot of empty space between the planets in our Solar System. Even though the planets follow paths around the Sun, the distances between them are huge compared to how big the planets are. For example, Earth is about 12,700 kilometers wide, but the closest it ever gets to Mars is around 96 million kilometers away. Because of these huge distances, even fast spacecraft take a long time, months or years, to travel between planets. The farther you go, the longer it takes. For instance, light from the Sun takes only 8 minutes to reach Earth, but it takes over 4 hours to reach Neptune. All this space makes it harder to explore and communicate with the outer planets. Sending missions to places like Neptune or beyond is a big challenge and a major achievement for science and engineering.

Some models of the Solar System are made to help people understand just how big and spread out everything really is. Since the real Solar System is way too large to picture easily, scientists and educators sometimes build scale models to shrink it down while keeping the sizes and distances in the right proportion. Some of these models are small and mechanical, like orreries, which are devices that show planets moving around the Sun. Others are huge and can stretch across cities or even entire regions. One of the biggest models is the Sweden Solar System. In it, the Avicii Arena in Stockholm represents the Sun, and it is about 110 meters wide (361 feet). In this model, Jupiter is a 7.3-meter ball (about 24 feet wide) located at an airport 40 kilometers (25 miles) away. Sedna, an object far out in the Solar System, is shown as a 10-centimeter ball (about 4 inches) placed 810 kilometers (500 miles) away. If we shrank the distance from the Sun to Neptune down to just 100 meters (about the length of a soccer field), then the Sun would only be about 3 centimeters wide (a little bigger than a marble), the giant planets would be all smaller than about 3 mm (0.12 in), and Earth and the other small planets would be tiny dots, smaller than a flea. These kinds of models help us understand that even though planets can be big, they are still tiny compared to the space between them.

The Solar System’s mass and the way its parts are spread out tell us a lot about how it formed and changed over time. Most of the Solar System’s mass, about 99.86%, is in the Sun, which is a huge ball made mostly of hydrogen and helium. The Sun’s gravity controls the movement of all the planets, asteroids, comets, and space dust. It’s incredibly massive, weighing about 1.989 × 10³⁰ kilograms. This huge mass creates a strong gravitational pull that keeps everything else in the Solar System in orbit, and it also helps determine how things spin and move. Only about 0.14% of the Solar System’s total mass is in everything else, like the eight planets, dwarf planets, moons, asteroids, objects in the Kuiper Belt, and the Oort Cloud. Out of this small portion, more than 70% is found in Jupiter, the largest planet. Jupiter weighs about 1.9 × 10²⁷ kilograms, which is 318 times heavier than Earth. Because of its size, Jupiter has a very strong gravitational pull. It affects the movement of asteroids, helps keep the orbits of other planets stable, and played a big role in clearing out leftover space rocks when the Solar System was still forming.

The giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune, make up about 99% of the total mass of all the planets in the Solar System. This shows that the Solar System has a bimodal structure, meaning most of the mass is in these large gas and ice giants, not the smaller rocky planets closer to the Sun. Saturn is the second largest planet, with a mass about 95 times that of Earth. Like Jupiter, it is mostly made of hydrogen and helium, but Saturn has more ices and heavier elements deep inside. Uranus and Neptune are called ice giants. They also have atmospheres made of hydrogen and helium, but inside they have a lot of water, ammonia, and methane ices. Each of them has a mass between 14 and 17 times the mass of Earth.

On the other hand, the terrestrial (rocky) planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, have only a tiny amount of the Solar System’s mass. Earth makes up more than half of the total mass of these four rocky planets because it’s the biggest and densest. These inner planets are made mostly of silicate rock and metal, with common elements like iron, oxygen, silicon, and magnesium. They do not have much hydrogen or helium because, when the Solar System was forming, the area close to the Sun was too hot for light gases to stick around. The Sun’s heat pushed those gases away, so only heavier materials like rock and metal were left behind to form the inner planets.

Besides the major planets, the Solar System has many smaller objects. Even though these objects have only a small amount of mass compared to the planets, they are very important for helping scientists understand how the planets formed. One group of these small objects is the asteroid belt, which is found between Mars and Jupiter. The asteroid belt has less than 4% of the Moon’s mass, but it contains materials that were part of the early building blocks of the rocky planets. The biggest object in the belt is Ceres, which is about 940 kilometers wide. Ceres makes up about one-third of the asteroid belt’s total mass and is made mostly of rock and water ice. Farther away from the Sun is the Kuiper Belt, which holds thousands of icy objects. Some of the best-known are Pluto, Eris, Haumea, and Makemake. These objects are much smaller than the giant planets, but their mix of rock and ices like methane, nitrogen, and carbon monoxide helps scientists learn about the chemistry of the early outer Solar System. The total mass of the Kuiper Belt is only a small fraction of Earth’s mass, between 0.01 and 0.1 times the mass of Earth, because over billions of years, much of its mass was lost in space due to collisions and gravitational forces.

Even farther out is the Oort Cloud, which scientists think is a huge, round shell of icy objects surrounding the Solar System. It is believed to contain trillions of comets made mostly of water ice, carbon dioxide ice, and other frozen gases. The total mass of the Oort Cloud is not known for sure, but it might be several times the mass of Earth. It stretches as far as 100,000 astronomical units (AU) from the Sun (1 AU is the distance from Earth to the Sun). The Oort Cloud is thought to be the source of long-period comets, comets that take hundreds or thousands of years to orbit the Sun and sometimes come close enough to be seen from Earth.

Moons and rings around planets add a little bit of mass to the Solar System, but not very much compared to the planets. For example, Earth’s Moon is the fifth largest moon in the Solar System. It is pretty big compared to Earth, with a mass that is about 1.2% of Earth’s mass. The Moon is mostly made of silicate rock, which is similar to the material found in Earth’s crust and mantle. The outer planets have some very large moons too, like Ganymede, Titan, Callisto, and Io. These moons are made of a mix of rock and ice. Some of them, like Europa and Enceladus, even have oceans beneath their icy surfaces, which shows that there are many different kinds of icy, possibly habitable places beyond Earth.

The types of elements found in different parts of the Solar System also tell us a lot about how it formed. These elements were created in earlier generations of stars and then spread out into space. In the outer Solar System, there are more volatile elements (which are lighter and can turn into gas easily), while the inner Solar System has more refractory materials (which are heavier and can stay solid at high temperatures). This difference shows how temperature, sunlight, and the movement of planets affected where different materials could collect and form planets.

The Earth's orbit around the Sun is nearly a perfect circle, but in a very slightly oval shaped orbit, an elliptical orbit. The other planets in the Solar System also orbit the Sun in slightly elliptical orbits. Mercury has a more elliptical orbit than the others, and there is obviously some explanation for this. Some of the smaller objects orbit the Sun in very eccentric orbits. The planets all orbit the Sun in the same direction.

A full account of the planetary motion needs an account of the n-body problem, which is not treated on this wiki. A page can be found on En wiki.

For thousands of years, people had no need for a name for the "Solar System". They thought the Earth stayed still at the center of everything (geocentrism). The Greek philosopher Aristarchus of Samos suggested that there was a special order in the sky. Nicolaus Copernicus was the first to develop a mathematical system that described what we now call the "Solar System". This was called a "new system of the world". In the 17th century, Galileo Galilei, Johannes Kepler and Isaac Newton began to understand physics more clearly. People began to accept the idea that the Earth is a planet that moves around the Sun, and that the planets are worlds, and that all worlds are governed by the same physical laws. More recently, telescopes and space probes sometimes let us see details directly. All inner planets have surface features. The gas giants (as the name suggests) have surfaces whose make-up is gradually being discovered.

The planets are the biggest objects that go around the Sun.  It took people many years of using telescopes to find the objects that were farthest away.  New planets might still be found, and more small objects are found every year.  Most of the planets have moons that orbit around them just as the planets orbit the Sun. There are over 400 of these moons in the Solar System.

Pluto was discovered by American astronomer Clyde Tombaugh in 1930. It was declared the ninth planet of the Solar System.

Pluto's planet status changed in 2006, when the International Astronomical Union (IAU) decided on a definition of the word "planet" for the first time. By this definition, Pluto was not a planet due to its irregular orbit and size. Thus, Pluto lost its planet status.

Eris was first announced in 2005. It was found to be 27% more massive than Pluto. Pluto did not fit in with the rest of the planets. So, the IAU defined a new category called "dwarf planet", into which Pluto did fit, along with some other small Solar System bodies. These small bodies are sometimes called plutinos.

There is an unknown number of dwarf planets in the Solar System. As of 2025, these nine small Solar System bodies are often called dwarf planets:

There are a few main parts of the Solar System. Here they are in order from the Sun, with the planets numbered, and dwarf planets marked with letters.

The first four planets closest to the Sun are called the inner planets. They are small and dense terrestrial planets, with solid surfaces. They are made up of mostly rock and metal with a distinct internal structure and a similar size. Three also have an atmosphere. The study of the four planets gives information about geology outside the Earth.

The Oort cloud is separate from the trans-Neptune region, and much farther out. It contains the long-period comets.

The plane of the ecliptic is defined by the Earth's orbit around the Sun. All of the planets orbit the Sun roughly around this same orbital plane. The farther away from this plane a planet orbits, the more inclined is its orbit to the ecliptic. If you could look at the Solar System "edge on" then all the planets would be orbiting more or less in the plane of the ecliptic.

Slavery is when a person is treated as the property of another person. This person is usually called a slave, and the owner is called a slavemaster. It often means that slaves are forced to work, or else they will be punished by the law (if slavery is legal in that place) or by their master. There is evidence that even before there was writing, there was slavery. Almost all cultures and continents have a history of slavery. Some societies had laws about slavery or had an economy that was built on it. Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome had many slaves.

In the 20th century, almost all countries made laws making slavery illegal. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights says that slavery is wrong. Slavery is now banned by international law, including International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery. Despite this, there are still different forms of slavery in some countries. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania was the last country in the world to officially ban slavery. In 2007, "under international pressure", its government passed a law allowing slaveholders to be prosecuted. However, in 2019, approximately 40 million people, were still enslaved throughout the world despite slavery being illegal. About 26% of these were children. In the modern world, more than half of the people who are slaves provide forced labour, usually in the factories and sweatshops of the private sector of a country's economy.

In industrialised countries, human trafficking is a modern form of the slave trade. In non-industrialised countries, enslavement by debt bondage is a common form of enslaving a person. There are many types of modern slavery. Some of these include captured domestic servants, people in forced marriages, and child soldiers.

The English word slave comes from the Middle English word .  came from the Old French word .  The French word came from Late Latin sclavus.  There are many theories for where the word sclavus came from. A common theory is that the word came from Slavic peoples in Central Europe and Eastern Europe who were often put into slavery. Another theory is that sclavus came from Byzantine Greek . The Greek word means to steal from an enemy that was killed in war.

Slavery has existed in various forms since antiquity. The earliest records of slavery can be traced to Babylon 18th Century BC, in texts such as the Code of Hammurabi (c. 1760 BC), which codifies slavery as law.

In the Ancient Near East, slaves were often prisoners of war, which was determined as lawful by the book of Deuteronomy. There were many distinctions made to categorize those by factors such as class, gender, age and race. For example, Israelites were not allowed to enslave other Israelites. The Deuteronomic Code calls for the death penalty for the crime of kidnapping Israelites to enslave them.

In Ancient Egypt, slaves were mainly prisoners of war. Many times, slaves inherited the status of their slave parents. Others became slaves over unpaid debts. Some slaves were poor peasants who offered themselves into servitude in exchange for food and shelter. The lives of slaves were normally better than that of peasants. Young slaves could not be put to hard work, and had to be brought up by the mistress of the household. Not all slaves went to houses. Some sold themselves to temples, or were assigned to temples by the king.

In many places, citizens were partly or fully protected from being enslaved, so most slaves were foreigners.

Slaves were important in society and the economy of ancient Rome. They did simple manual labor and domestic services, but also could have complex jobs and professions. Teachers, accountants, and physicians were often slaves. Greek slaves were often well educated. Most slaves, such as those who were made slaves as punishment, worked on farms, in mines, and at mills. Their living conditions were very bad, and they did not live for very long.

Slaves were considered property under Roman law and were not legally people. Unlike Roman citizens, they could suffer corporal punishment, sexual exploitation (sex workers were often slaves), torture, and summary execution. A slave's testimony could not be accepted in a court of law unless the slave was tortured. This was because they thought that slaves would be too loyal to their masters to reveal damaging evidence unless coerced. Over time, however, slaves gained some legal protection, including the right to file complaints against their masters. Attitudes changed in part because of the influence among the educated elite of the Stoics, whose egalitarian views of humanity extended to slaves, and also because of slave rebellions. Better treatment meant fewer rebellions.

Roman slaves could hold property which, even though it belonged to their s, they were allowed to use as if it were their own. Upper class slaves were allowed to earn their own money. With enough money they could buy their freedom.

After the Roman Empire broke up, slavery gradually changed into serfdom. Serfdom was similar to slavery but the worker received a set amount of wages and had certain civil rights and could leave the employment of the master.

Both non-Muslims and Muslims in Southeast Asia during the 18th century bought Japanese girls who came by sea. Japanese slave girls were still owned by India-based Portuguese (Lusitanian) families according to Francisco De Sousa, a Jesuit who wrote about that in 1698. This was long after the 1636 edict by Tokguawa Japan had expelled Portuguese people.

China imported Korean slaves and Indochinese slaves. Japanese children in medieval Japan could be taken as slaves if debts were not repaid by their parents. Japanese parents sold their daughters to Portuguese in Kyushu. Japanese children and women from the Bungo domain were sold as slaves to Europeans in Higo after Bungo was attacked in 1586 by the Satsuma domain.

Historians estimate that between 650 AD and the 1960s, 10 to 18 million people were enslaved by Arab slave traders. They were taken from Europe, Asia and Africa across the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, and Sahara desert. Male slaves were often employed as servants, soldiers, or workers by their owners. Many male slaves were castrated and became eunuchs. It has been claimed that as many as six out of every ten boys bled to death during the process, though the source may not be reliable. Eunuchs fetched a higher price: that made castration worthwhile. According to Ronald Segal, author of Islam’s Black Slaves: the other black diaspora (2002), "The calipha in Baghdad at the beginning of the 10th Century had 7,000 black eunuchs and 4,000 white eunuchs in his palace”. Women and children taken as slaves were mainly used as servants and concubines. While the later Atlantic slave trade concentrated on men for labor, the Arab slave trade started with men and boys, but shifted over time to concentrate more on woman and young girls for sexual purposes. By the 1900s, Arab slave traders had taken between 10 and 18 million slaves out of Africa.

For four centuries, beginning in the late 15th century, millions of Africans were taken as slaves by Europeans. Europeans began exporting Africans to the New World as a source of cheap labor on colonial plantations.

Between 1452 and 1455, Pope Nicolas V issued a series of papal bulls authorizing the Portuguese to take African slaves. At first slave traders raided coastal areas and carried black people off. But the mines and fields of the colonies needed more and more slaves. In the early 1700s, Spain began to issue licenses and contracts to supply slaves. By the 1750s, large slaving companies were established. Most of Europe at the time was involved in the slave trade.

Many Europeans who arrived in North America during the 17th and 18th centuries came under contract as indentured servants. The change from indentured servitude to slavery was a gradual process in Virginia. The earliest legal documentation of such a shift was in 1640. This is where an African, John Punch, was sentenced to lifetime slavery for attempting to run away. This case also marked the disparate treatment of Africans as held by the Virginia County Court, where two white runaways received far lesser sentences.

After 1640, planters started to ignore the expiration of indentured contracts. They kept their servants as slaves for life. This was demonstrated by the case Johnson v. Parker. The court ruled that John Casor, an indentured servant, be returned to Johnson who claimed that Casor belonged to him for his life. According to the 1860 U. S. census, 393,975 individuals, representing 8% of all US families, owned 3,950,528 slaves. One-third of Southern families owned slaves. Slavery in United States was legally abolished by the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1865. That year, Gordon Granger (a military officer) and his men, set the last slaves free in Galveston, Texas.

In the 2010s, ISIL (or Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant), were taking part in slave trade (of non-Muslim women), on the largest territory that they controlled.

Scholars of Islamic law have condemned the revival of the slave trade of non-Muslim women by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant. ISIL had to flee (later in the 2010s), from most of the areas that they once controlled.

Slavery has officially been abolished, in all countries of the world. Slave-like conditions still exist, but talking about 'slavery' has become more difficult, because people no longer agree on the terms. Things like threats, violence, the use of force, abuse of power and trickery are used to get or keep people in a situation where they can easily be exploited.  Common forms of modern-day slavery include:

Millions of people are still slaves in some parts of the world, mostly in South Asia and Africa. It is less common in the developed world partly because of differences in financing law enforcement, but it still happens there as well. The ways in which it is done have changed.

Some of the countries where there is still slavery are in Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.

While people are still bought at sold, like beforehand, this is less common today. Today, people get trapped in slave-like conditions in other ways. Modern slavery is often linked with poverty. There are countries and areas, where people are poorly-educated, and where there is little or no rule of law. This can create a setting where slavery is seen as acceptable. It is commonly seen in impoverished countries, and those where there are vulnerable minorities. Tens of thousands of people work in slave-like conditions in industries such as mining, farming, and factories; they produce goods for consumption inside the country or export to more  nations.

In the older form of slavery, slave-owners spent more on getting slaves. It was more difficult for them to be disposed of. The cost of keeping them healthy was considered a better investment than getting another slave to replace them. In modern slavery people are easier to get at a lower price so replacing them when exploiters run into problems becomes easier.

Modern slavery can be quite profitable. Total annual revenues of traffickers were estimated in 2014 to over $150 billion, though profits are substantially lower.

Corrupt governments  allow it, even though it is outlawed by international treaties such as Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery and local laws.

Today, slaves may work because of things like a high debt. Many victims are told that their families will be harmed if they report the slave owners. Many slaves are forced to be domestic servants. In some cases, their families sell their children because of poverty. Some slaves have been trafficked from one part of the world to another. These people are illegally in their host country, and therefore do not report the abuse. Forced prostitution is a type of slavery. Another form of slavery still happening today is forced child labor. Some children have to work in mines or in plantations, or they have to fight wars as child soldiers.

One study says that there are 27 million people (but others say there could be as many as 200 million) in slavery today. Other terms that describe the recruitment of laborers, and that may have similarities to slavery are Blackbirding, Impressment and Shanghaiing.

On some fishing boats, there are slaves. The boats fish in international waters. Media has said that officials in some countries have accepted bribes, so that officials can use power to keep law enforcement from stopping slaves from working on fishing boats.

In 1809, American slaves were sold for around the equivalent of US$40,000 in today's money. A slave can be bought for $90–$100 (as of 2017). Bales explains, "This is an economic crime ... People do not enslave people to be mean to them; they do it to make a profit."

Child slavery has commonly been used when making cash crops and mining. According to the United States Department of State, more than 109,000 children were working on cocoa farms alone in Côte d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast) in 'the worst forms of child labour' in 2002.

In Mauritania, it is thought that up to 600,000 men, women and children, or 20% of the population, are slaves, and that many of them are used as bonded labour. Slavery in Mauritania was made illegal in 2007.

In Niger, there is also much slavery. A Nigerien study has found that more than 800,000 people are slaves, almost 8% of the population.

In summer 2007, 570 people were found to be slaves for brick makers in China. They included 69 children. The Chinese government made a force of 35,000 police check northern Chinese brick kilns for slaves, and sent lots of kiln supervisors and officials to prison and sentenced one kiln foreman to death for killing a worker who was a slave.

In November 2006, the International Labour Organization said that it would prosecute members of the junta that rules Myanmar (also called Burma) at the International Court of Justice for "Crimes against Humanity". This is because the military makes some citizens do forced labour. The International Labour Organisation says that it thinks that about 800,000 people are forced to work this way.

As of 2025, there are claims that groups of online scammers (in Myanmar), includes slaves; The BGF's "involvement in Chinese-run online scams, illegal casinos, and online gambling operations in Myawaddy [was shown] in May" 2024, according to media.

Some people have been in favor of slavery, others were opposed to it. Before and during the American Civil War, some thinkers thought that slavery was good for people, They said that some people were natural slaves. These people needed supervision, and would not do well if they were free.

Starting in the 18th century, there were ideas of stopping or banning slavery. Many of these were done in territories that were part of the British Empire, or in its sphere of influence. The movement of wanting to stop slavery is called abolitionism. People such as William Wilberforce, John Newton, and Olaudah Equiano were well-known in the movement. About 1815, the Congress of Vienna had a statement that slavery is bad.

In 1833, the British Empire stopped slavery. Laws in Britain stopped the atlantic slave trade. The American Civil War ended slavery in the United States in 1865. There was the Emancipation Proclamation. In 1865, when the North won, all slaves were made free. Still more countries abolished slavery afterwards. Pedro II of Brazil abolished it in 1888. Forced labor however continued, either against the law or by debt peonage or other methods which the laws of the various countries did not count as slavery. France abolished slavery in 1794 during the Revolution. In 1802, it was restored under Napoleon; Slavery has not been allowed in France since April 27, 1848.

Many philosophies and religions say that a soul is a supernatural essence of a living human being that lives after death. It is usually said to be immortal. It cannot be discovered by science, because it cannot be tested in any controlled way. Many different opinions exist as to what happens to personal experience after death.

Reincarnation is a belief that after the body dies, the soul will be born again in another body. It is important to Hinduism. Buddhists understand the idea of an eternal soul, and the idea of simple annihilation as delusion; they say that there is no unchanging, permanent self, soul or essence in phenomena.  Buddhists believe in transmigration, or rebirth in samsara or other planes of existence, based on how they understand kamma (Pāli; karma in Sanskrit), and nibbana (nirvana in Sanskrit) for Enlightened ones. In Jainism the soul is sometimes called jiva.

Resurrection is the Christian belief that a soul returns in the same body. In most Christian denomination this was realized in Jesus Christ but is also the promise for all souls; see heaven, hell, and Final Judgement.

Most atheists say that there is no such thing as a soul, and that the body is the only part of a person.

In popular culture, soul usually means deep feeling and commitment. It is in this sense that the word appears in the term soul music. However that music was also influenced by gospel music which was religious.

One popular idea about souls that is easy to express, is that a person is a soul, and has a body. The soul is the "I" in "I exist" that feels and lives life. What people call the mind could be part of the soul: one soul started this article, other souls have edited it, and another soul is reading it. This view, however, implies that the human body is a possession, and seems to devalue bodies that do not have souls as defined or understood by the speaker (some people say that animals, heretics, and people of another religion do not have souls). Like most uses of the verb to be, there is an ideology in these simple words.

Christianity teaches that all humans have an immortal soul. This means that it is a part of them which does not die when their physical body dies, but lives on with them to heaven or to hell. Christians believe that the soul is the 'breath of life' which God gave to Adam.

In Japan the soul is believed to weigh 21 grams. This belief may have been influenced by the observations of Dr. McDougall in the early 1900s.

One distinction often made is between soul, which is distinct from other souls, and spirit, which may be combined with that of other beings. The idea of the Holy Spirit in Christianity, for example, is a universal and shared spirit many souls are part of, and which is expressed on Earth in that faith by "the Church" meaning "the body of Christ" meaning "all bodies that follow Jesus." This could be more inclusive than the is/has view of souls and bodies.

The South Pole is the most southern point on the Earth. It is in Antarctica and is the center of the Southern Hemisphere. From the South pole, everywhere is North.

Unlike the North Pole, which is covered by sea and flat sea-ice, the South Pole is on a mountainous continent called Antarctica. Antarctica has not always been at the South Pole. Continental drift has occurred.

The geographic North and South poles are the poles the Earth spins around. These poles stay in the same place, and are usually the ones we mean if we just say North or South Pole. People can tell that they are at these poles by looking at the stars (at the poles, a star just circles around at the same height, never dipping to the horizon). The Sun rises once a year and gives the South Pole half a year of summer but it is always cold. When the Sun sets half a year later it makes half a year of winter which is even colder. The South Pole is always cold because the Sun never rises high in the sky.

The south magnetic pole is something different. It is defined by the Earth's magnetic field, as roughly where a magnetic compass needle points. People can tell they are near these poles by looking at a compass.

The South Pole is hard to reach. Unlike the North pole, which is covered by the sea and flat sea-ice, the South Pole is on a mountainous continent. This continent is called Antarctica. It is covered by thick ice (more than a mile thick in the centre). The south Pole is very high up, and is very windy. It is far from places where people live, and ships going there often have to find their way through thick sea ice. Once ashore, land-travelling explorers have to travel more than a thousand miles to get to the pole. They must cross a floating ice shelf, then up onto the ice-covered land, up steep mountain glaciers covered in broken, twisted ice slowly sliding to the sea, and across a high level land ("plateau") covered in ice and swept by strong freezing winds.

Two expeditions early in the 20th century, led by Robert Falcon Scott (1901–1904) and then Ernest Shackleton, failed to reach the South Pole, but returned safely. Shackleton turned back quite close to the pole, but it was late in the season and supplies were low. He knew that he would be risking the lives of his men, so he turned back.

The first men to reach the South Pole were a group from Norway led by Roald Amundsen. They arrived at the Pole on December 14, 1911 and left the Norwegian flag. Amundsen and his men returned home safely. Amundsen's story is one of excellent planning, good leadership, and willingness to learn from others: this made extreme endurance unnecessary, and perhaps made the successful expedition less of a story, and therefore perhaps less famous, than the next one.

The most famous South Pole expedition is perhaps the one that failed badly. This was the British expedition (not just UK, it included people from the British Empire, who at that time were considered British citizens) led by Robert Falcon Scott (19101913). Scott and four other men, dragging their equipment on sledges, had hoped to be first to the Pole. When they arrived, they saw a Norwegian flag. A letter left for Scott showed that Amundsen and his men had beaten them by a month, by using dogs to pull their sledges.

On their journey back from the Pole, Scott's team found that food "dumps" were short of supplies, particularly kerosene. Kerosene was very important: not just for cooking but for melting ice. Once it ran out, they would have no water to drink. One man collapsed and died while walking. Oates knew his frostbitten feet could not carry him back to base, and that he might delay his companions and risk their lives. He committed suicide by walking out of their tent into the cold. Scott and his remaining two companions died of starvation, thirst, and cold – trapped in the tent by bad weather until their supplies ran out. Next spring, the three bodies in the tent were found by a team from the main part of the expedition – who had spent the winter in the expeditions's hut by the sea. Scott's letters to his wife, written in the tent when he knew he was going to die, have just (Jan 2007) been made public.

Apart from Ernest Shackleton's expedition to cross the Antarctic (another heroic failure, but Shackleton saved all his men, after a very courageous sea crossing in an open boat, and a crossing of an unknown mountain range while starving and freezing), this was the end of the "heroic" age of exploration. Motors, planes, radios, and GPS made sure that future expeditions were never truly "unsupported".

Today there is an American science base at the South Pole. It is the Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station, set up in 1956.

The South Pole has a desert climate. It almost never gets any precipitation. Air humidity is about zero. However, high winds can cause the blowing of snowfall, and the accumulation of snow amounts to about  per year. The former dome seen in pictures of the Amundsen-Scott station is partially buried due to snow storms, and the entrance to the dome had to be regularly bulldozed to uncover it. More recent buildings are raised on stilts so that the snow does not build up against the sides.

South America is the continent to the south of North America. These two continents are separated by the Panama Canal. There are seven continents which make up the globe, South America being the 4th largest. South America includes 12 countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

South America is attached to Central America at the  of Panama. Geographically all of Panama – including the part east of the Panama Canal is usually included in North America alone, among the countries of Central America.

South America features an incredibly diverse landscape, dominated by the extensive Andes mountains along the west coast and vast eastern highlands. It holds extreme environments, including the driest desert (Atacama), the highest navigable lake (Titicaca), and the world's largest river system.It is also home to the amazing Amazon forest.

South America’s history isn't a dry list of dates; it is the collective memory of people who have constantly reinvented themselves. It’s the pride of a modern weaver in the Andes using techniques passed down through a hundred generations, and the echoes of heavy footsteps in colonial plazas where freedom was finally won. It carries the weight of ancestors who survived the arrival of outsiders and the resilience of those who were brought across the ocean in chains, only to weave their music and soul into the very fabric of the continent. Every town square tells a story of survival, from the quiet dignity of indigenous traditions that refused to disappear to the modern fire of students and workers marching for a better future. It is a story of scars, yes, but also of an incredible, stubborn joy that celebrates how far they have come together.

South America’s geography isn't just a map of extremes; it is the physical heartbeat that shapes how people live every day. Imagine waking up in a village tucked into the jagged folds of the Andes, where the thin, crisp air dictates the slow pace of life and the hearty crops people can grow. To the east, life follows the pulse of the Amazon, where the river serves as the primary highway and the dense green canopy provides both a home and a livelihood. From the vibrant coastal cities where the Atlantic breeze carries the smell of salt and street food, to the quiet, windswept ranches of Patagonia where survival depends on grit and thick wool, the land is more than just scenery. It is a demanding but beautiful partner that influences the music, the food, and the resilient spirit of everyone who calls it home.

The soil in Argentina's Pampas is among the best in the world. Brazil's soil is very good for growing coffee. A great number of minerals have been found. Few, however, have been mined. Among those that were mined are iron, manganese, gold, and gemstones. The tropical forests are rich in valuable trees, like mahogany, ebony, and rubber.  Oil is also a resource in some places.

South America is home to a large variety of animal life. These include animals such as jaguars, macaws, monkeys, anacondas, llamas, piranhas, toucans, rheas, tapirs, cougars, condors and chinchillas.

The amazon rain forest is a moist grassy land where many wild animals live and contains the amazon river which is the 2nd longest river in the world and has the largest volume of water. The world's longest river is the Nile in Africa. The forest is known as a rain forest as it rains very often but due to the dense surroundings not every droplet reaches the bottom. The Amazon is shared by eight countries (Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, Guyana and Suriname) and stretches for 6.7 million kilometers2. In the amazon rain forest, hundreds of thousands of trees have been cut down for wood and paper, meaning that the forest is endangered. Unlike the Boreial forest in Canada the trees are not getting replanted.

The Southern Ocean, also called the Antarctic Ocean, is the ocean around the continent of Antarctica. The fourth-largest sea by area, at 20,327,000 km², it has a coastline 17,968 km long and is surrounded by the waters of the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans.

Since the 1770s, geographers have discussed its limits, but the latitude sixty degrees south is now often accepted. It includes several seas like Cosmonauts, Somov, Commonwealth, and Mowson.

A star is a very large ball of bright, , hot matter in space. That matter is called plasma. Stars are held together by gravity. They emit light because they are very hot. The Sun is an example of a star. It is at the center of the solar system.

The amount of material in a star (its mass) is so huge that a nuclear reaction called nuclear fusion goes on inside it. This reaction changes hydrogen to helium and gives off heat. The light and heat created by nuclear fusion makes stars very hot. It also makes bigger chemical elements. In the Sun (but not all stars) the change which takes place is the production of helium, with small amounts of heavier elements.

Stars have a lot of hydrogen. Fusion makes a lot of energy. The energy produced by stars moves (radiates) away from them. Much of the energy leaves as light, and the rest leaves as other kinds of electromagnetic radiation.

The star nearest to Earth is the Sun. The energy from the Sun supports almost all life on Earth by providing light for plants. Plants turn the light into energy in a process called photosynthesis. The energy from the Sun also causes weather and humidity on Earth.

We can see other stars in the night sky when the Sun goes down. Like the Sun, they are made mostly of hydrogen and a little bit of helium plus other elements. Astronomers  compare those other stars to the Sun. Their mass is measured in solar masses (Mʘ). A solar mass is the mass of the Sun. A small star may be about 0.2 Mʘ, a medium one may be about the Sun's mass (1 Mʘ), and a large star may be about 10 Mʘ.

The Earth and other planets move around (orbit) the Sun. The Sun and all things that orbit it are called the Solar System. Many other stars have planets orbiting them, and those planets are called exoplanets. Our Sun would look like a star in the sky to someone on an exoplanet, but you would not see the Earth from one because it would be too far away.

Proxima Centauri is the closest star to the Sun. It is 39.9 trillion kilometres, equal to 4.2 light years, away. This means that light from Proxima Centauri takes 4.2 years to reach Earth.

Astronomers think there is a very large number of stars in the universe. The observable universe contains more than 2 trillion (1012) galaxies and, overall, as many as an estimated  stars (more stars than all the grains of sand on planet Earth). That is, 1,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 stars, which is many times more than the few hundred billion stars in our galaxy, the Milky Way.

Most stars are very old. They are usually thought to be between 1 billion and 10 billion years old. The oldest stars are 13.7 billion years old. That is as old as the universe. Some young stars are only a few million years old.

Stars are different sizes. The smallest stars are neutron stars, which are actually dead stars. They are no bigger than a human city. A neutron star has a large amount of mass in a very small space. A neutron star has a mass of at least 1.4 Mʘ.

Hypergiant stars are the largest stars in the universe. They have a diameter up to 1,600 times bigger than the Sun's. If the Sun was a hypergiant star, it would reach out to as far as Jupiter.

The star Betelgeuse is a red supergiant star about 640 times the Sun's diameter. Although these stars are very large, they also have low density.

Some stars look brighter than other stars. This difference is measured in terms of apparent magnitude. There are two reasons why stars have different apparent magnitude. If a star is very close to us, it will appear much brighter. This is just like a candle. A candle that is close to us appears brighter. The other reason a star can appear brighter is that it is hotter than another cooler star.

Stars give off light but also give off a solar wind and neutrinos. These are very small particles of matter.

Stars are made of mass and mass makes gravity. Gravity makes planets orbit stars. This is why the Earth orbits the Sun. The gravity of two stars can make them go around each other. Stars that orbit each other are called binary stars. Scientists think there are many binary stars. There are even groups of three or more stars that orbit each other. Proxima Centauri is a small star that orbits other stars.

Stars are not spread evenly across all of space. Instead, they are grouped into galaxies. A galaxy contains hundreds of billions of stars.

Stars have been important to people all over the world for all of history. Stars have also been part of religious practices. Long ago, people believed that stars could never die.

Astronomers organized stars into groups called constellations. They used the constellations to help them see the motion of the planets and to guess the position of the Sun. The motion of the Sun and other stars was used to make calendars. The calendars were used by farmers to decide when to plant crops and when to harvest them.

Stars are made in nebulae. These are areas that have more gas than normal space. The gas in a nebula is pulled together by gravity. The Orion nebula is an example of a place where gas is coming together to form stars.

Stars spend most of their lives combining (fusing) hydrogen with hydrogen to make energy. When hydrogen is fused it makes helium and it makes a lot of energy. To fuse hydrogen into helium it must be very hot and the pressure must be very high. Fusion happens at the center of stars, called "the core".

The smallest stars are called red dwarfs. Red dwarfs fuse their hydrogen slowly and live for more than 100 billion years, so they live longer than any other star. At the end of their lives, they become  and dimmer. Red dwarfs do not explode.

When very heavy stars die, they explode. This explosion is called a supernova. When a supernova happens in a nebula, the explosion pushes the gas in the nebula together. This makes the gas in the nebula very dense (thick). Gravity and exploding stars both help to bring the gas together to make new stars in nebulas.

Most stars use up the hydrogen at their core. When they do, their core becomes smaller and hotter. It becomes so hot that it pushes away the outer part of the star. The outer part expands and it makes a red giant star. Astrophysicists think that in about 5 billion years, the Sun will be a red giant. Our Sun will be so large it will "eat" the Earth. After our Sun stops using hydrogen to make energy, it will use helium in its very hot core. It will be hotter than when it was fusing hydrogen. Heavy stars will also make elements heavier than helium. As a star makes heavier and heavier elements, it makes less and less energy. Iron is a heavy element made in heavy stars.

Our star is an average star. Average stars will push away their outer gases. The gas it pushes away makes a cloud called a planetary nebula. The core part of the star will remain. It will be a ball as big as the Earth and called a white dwarf. It will fade into a black dwarf over a very long time.

Later in large stars (~ 10 Mʘ), heavier elements are made by fusion. Finally the star makes a supernova explosion. Most things happen in the universe so slowly we do not notice. But supernova explosions happen in only 100 seconds. When a supernova explodes its flash is as bright as a 100 billion stars. The dying star is so bright it can be seen during the day. Supernova means "new star" because people used to think it was the beginning of a new star. Today we know that a supernova is the death of an old star. The gas of the star is pushed away by the explosion. It forms a giant cloud of gas called a planetary nebula. The crab nebula is a good example. All that remains is a neutron star. If the star was very heavy (~ 25 Mʘ), the star will make a black hole. Gravity in a black hole is extremely strong. It is so strong that even light cannot escape from a black hole.

The heaviest elements are made in the explosion of a supernova. After billions of years of floating in space, the gas and dust come together to make new stars and new planets.  Much of the gas and dust in space comes from supernovae. Our Sun, the Earth, and all living things are made from star dust.

Astronomers have known for centuries that stars have different colors. When looking at an electromagnetic spectrum, ultraviolet waves are the shortest, and infrared are the longest.   The visible spectrum has wavelengths between these two extremes.

Modern instruments can measure very precisely the color of a star.  This allows astronomers to determine that star's temperature, because a hotter star's black-body radiation has shorter wavelengths.  The hottest stars are blue and azure, then white, then yellow, and the coolest are red. Below is a list of the coolest stars.

Knowing the color and absolute magnitude, astronomers can place the star on the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram, and estimate its habitable zone and other facts about it.

For example, our Sun is yellow-white, and the Earth is the perfect distance away for life. If our Sun was a hotter, blue star, however, Earth would have to be much farther away or else it would be too hot to have water and sustain life.

There are four common states of matter (or phases) in the universe: solid, liquid, gas, and plasma.

The state of matter affects a substance's properties. Examples of those properties include density, viscosity (how well it flows), malleability (how easy it is to bend), and conductivity. Changes between states of matter are often .

In a solid, the positions of atoms are fixed relative to each other over a long time. That is due to the cohesion or "friction" between molecules. This cohesion is provided by metallic, covalent or ionic bonds. Only solids can be pushed on by a force without changing shape, which means that they can be resistant to deformation. Solids also tend to be strong enough to hold their own shape in a container. Solids are generally denser than liquids. Solid becoming a gas is called sublimation.

In a liquid, molecules are attracted to each other strongly enough to keep them in contact, but not strongly enough to hold a particular structure. The molecules can continually move with respect to each other. This means that liquids can flow smoothly, but not as smoothly as gases. Liquids will tend to take the shape of a container that they are in. Liquids are generally less dense than solids, but denser than gas.

In a gas, the chemical bonds are not strong enough to hold atoms or molecules together, and from this a gas is a collection of independent, unbonded molecules which interact mainly by collision. Gases tend to take the shape of their container, and are less dense than both solids and liquids. Gases have weaker forces of attraction than solids and liquids. Gas becoming a solid directly is called deposition.

Gases can sometimes turn directly into solids without passing through a fluid stage. That is called desublimation. You see it in the hoary frost which forms on window-panes in cold climates. It is the reverse of sublimation.

A plasma is a gas that has so much energy that electrons of an atom can not stay in orbit around one atomic nucleus. The atomic ions and free electrons mix around like a hot soup.

Because the positive and negative charged particles are not stuck together, plasma is a good conductor of electricity. For example, air is not good at conducting electricity. However, in a bolt of lightning, the atoms in air get so much energy that they no longer can hold on to their electrons, and become a plasma for a brief time. Then an electric current is able to flow through the plasma, making the lightning.

Plasma is the most common state of matter in the universe. Both stars and the interstellar medium are mostly made of plasma.

Phases of matter can be changed by a number of things. The most common ones are temperature and pressure. Substances usually become a gas at warm temperatures and/or low pressures, become a solid at cool temperatures, and become a

plasma at extremely hot temperatures. Substances often become liquid in between solid and gas, but when the pressure is very low (such as the vacuum of outer space) many substances skip the liquid phase, going directly from solid to gas or vice versa. Scientists have created graphs called phase change diagrams to show the relationship between pressure, temperature, and phase of many substances.

When a solid becomes a liquid, it is called melting. When a liquid becomes a solid, it is called freezing. When a solid becomes a gas, it is called sublimation. When a gas becomes a solid, it is called desublimation. When a liquid becomes a gas, it is called evaporation. When a gas becomes a liquid, it is called condensation.

The freezing point and the melting point are said to be the same, because any increase in temperature from that point will cause the substance to melt, while any drop in temperature will cause it to freeze. Likewise, the vaporization and condensation points (or the sublimation and desublimation points) always match. In most substances, as the pressure increases, the vaporization/condensation point also increases, or vice versa. For example, the boiling point of water decreases as you go up a mountain, because the air pressure is lower. The relationship for freezing and melting can go in different directions depending on the substance.

Many other states of matter can exist under special conditions, including strange matter, supersolids, and possibly string-net liquids. Scientist work on experiments at very high or very low temperatures to learn more about phases of matter.

Bose-Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates are phases of matter that apply to particles called bosons and fermions, respectively. (More than one boson can exist in the same state at the same time. Only one fermion can exist in the same state at the same time). Bose-Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates occur at incredibly low temperatures. All of the particles in these condensates begin to act like one big quantum state, so they have almost no friction or electrical resistance.

When the core of a star runs out of light elements (like hydrogen or helium) to sustain fusion, the core will collapse into a very dense state called degenerate matter. Everything is packed very tightly and can barely move. If the star isn't too heavy, it becomes a white dwarf. In a heavier star, the pressure is so intense that even the protons and electrons are crushed, and it becomes a neutron star.

The protons and neutrons that make up atoms are made of even smaller things called quarks (which are "glued" together by things called "gluons"). At incredibly high temperatures over 2 trillion Kelvin, quarks and gluons turn into another state of matter. Humans can make a little bit of quark-gluon plasma in the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, but it doesn't last long before cooling down.

When a substance has enough temperature and pressure at the same time, called the critical point, you can't tell the  difference between very dense gas and very energetic liquid. This is a supercritical fluid, and it behaves like both liquid and gas.

Superfluids, on the other hand, only happen at very low temperatures, and only for a few special substances like liquid helium. Superfluids can do things that regular liquids cannot, like flowing up the side of a bowl and getting out.

South Africa (officially called the Republic of South Africa) is a country in the southern region of Africa. About fifty-seven million people live there. South Africa is next to Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Eswatini, but encloses Lesotho.

The largest city of South Africa is Johannesburg. The country has three capitals for different purposes. They are Cape Town, Pretoria and Bloemfontein. This is because the government is based in Pretoria, the parliament is in Cape Town and the Supreme Court is in Bloemfontein.

There are 11 national languages. They are Afrikaans, English, Ndebele, Xhosa, Zulu, Swati, Setswana, Sesotho, Sesotho sa Leboa, Venda and Tsonga. They are also known as National Lexicography Units (NLUs). Because of all the languages, the country has an  name in each language.

One of South Africa's most well known people is Nelson Mandela. He was its president from 1994 until 1999. He died in 2013 at the age of 95. The current president is Cyril Ramaphosa.

Lions, cheetahs, zebras, giraffes, and many species of antelope live in South Africa.

In terms of its resources, South Africa is one of the richest countries in Africa.

Speakers of Bantu languages had settled south of the Limpopo River by the 4th or 5th century CE. They invaded and displaced the local Khoisan (Khoikhoi and San) people. Bantu peoples slowly moved south. The group that was the farthest south was the Xhosa people. Their language used some traits from the Khoisan people. The Xhosa reached the Great Fish River, in today's Eastern Cape Province. As they migrated, these larger Iron Age groups displaced or assimilated earlier groups. In Mpumalanga Province, several stone circles have been found, along with a stone arrangement that has been named Adam's Calendar. The ruins are thought to be created by the Bakone, a Northern Sotho people.

The first European people to come to South Africa were Portuguese explorers. In 1487, Bartolomeu Dias found what he called the "Cape of Storms". The king of Portugal changed it to "Cape of Good Hope". He called it this because the cape gave the Portuguese a new chance to find a sea route to India.

In 1652, Jan van Riebeeck colonised the Cape. He started the camp for the Dutch East India Company. This was so that they could give fresh food to ships on their way to the south of Asia. There were very few indigenous people living in the Cape. Because of this, slaves were brought from Indonesia, Madagascar and India to work at the colony. In 1795, Great Britain took the Cape from the Dutch East India Company, to stop France from taking it. The British gave it back in 1803 but then annexed the Cape in 1807 when the Dutch East India Company went bankrupt.

Diamonds were found in South Africa in 1867. Gold was found in 1884. This made a great number of people to come to South Africa from Europe. They were hoping to make money.

The First Boer War happened in 1880-1881. The war was between the British and the Boers Republics. At that time, the British had the Cape. The Boer Republics were established when Dutch settlers moved north in the Great Trek. The British lost the war and came back 8 years later in 1899. They won this Second Boer War in 1902. The British had brought many more soldiers the second time. The Boers had no chance of winning. On 31 May 1910 the Union of South Africa was made from the Cape and Natal colonies. It was also made from Orange Free State and the Transvaal. These were two Boer Republics.

South Africa became much more independent when the Statute of Westminster was passed in 1931. The statute said that the Parliament of the United Kingdom could not pass laws in the country. In 1948, a system of racial segregation known as apartheid started. It gave white people in South Africa more rights than black people, coloureds and Indians.

In 1961, South Africa became completely independent when the voters passed a referendum to become a republic. Only white people were allowed to vote in the referendum. This republic ended apartheid in 1994.

South Africa is at the south end of Africa. It has a long coastline that reaches more than  and along two oceans (the South Atlantic and the Indian). At , South Africa is the 25th-largest country in the world and is almost the size of Colombia. Njesuthi in the Drakensberg at  is the highest part in South Africa.

The majority of South Africa is the Central Plateau, bounded by the Great Escarpment. Its scrubland, the Karoo, is drier towards the northwest along the Namib desert. The eastern coastline however, is well-watered, which makes a climate similar to the tropics.

To the north of Johannesburg, the  drops beyond the escarpment of the Highveld. It then turns into the lower lying Bushveld, an area of mixed dry forest and a lot of wildlife. East of the Highveld, beyond the eastern escarpment, the Lowveld reaches towards the Indian Ocean. It has mostly high temperatures, and is also the location of subtropical agriculture.

South Africa has a mostly temperate climate. It is surrounded by the Atlantic and Indian Oceans on three sides, and is located in the climatically milder southern hemisphere. Average  is higher towards the north (towards the equator) and further inland. Because of this  topography and oceanic influence, different parts of South Africa have different climates.

There is a desert in the southern Namib in the farthest northwest and subtropical climate in the east along the Mozambique border and the Indian Ocean. From the east, the land quickly rises over mountains towards the back plateau known as the Highveld. Even though South Africa is thought as semi-arid, there is a difference in climate as well as topography.

The southwest has a climate similar to that of the Mediterranean with mild, moderately wet winters and hot, dry summers. This area also makes much of the wine in South Africa. This  is also mostly known for its wind, which blows almost all year. The wind can sometimes be severe when passing around the Cape of Good Hope mostly gets bad for sailors, making many shipwrecks. Further east on the south coast, rainfall falls more evenly throughout the year, making a green landscape. This area is popularly known as the Garden Route.

The Orange Free State is mostly flat, because it lies in the center of the high plateau. North of the Vaal River, the Highveld becomes better watered and does not get subtropical heat. Johannesburg, in the center of the Highveld, is at 1,740 m (5,709 ft) and gets a yearly rainfall of 740 mm (29.9 in). Winters in this region are cold, although snow is rare.

South Africa is ranked sixth out of the world’s 17 megadiverse countries, with more than 20,000 different kinds of plants, or about 10% of all the known species of plants on Earth, making it very rich in plant biodiversity.

The most common biome in South Africa is the grassland, mostly on the Highveld. This is where grasses, low shrubs, and acacia trees, mostly camel-thorn and whitethorn are more common than other plants. Plants become less common towards the northwest. This is because of low rainfall. There are many species of water-storing plants like aloes and euphorbias in the very hot and dry Namaqualand area. The grass and thorn savanna turns slowly into a bush savanna towards the north-east of the country, with more thick growth. There are many numbers of baobab trees in this area, near the northern end of Kruger National Park.

South Africa's economy is divided. It is divided between First World and Third World standards. The developed part of the economy is similar to that of most nations with wealth (for example, New Zealand or Australia). The rest of the economy is closer to that of poor nations, such as the Democratic Republic of the Congo or the Republic of Congo. The main companies in South Africa are mining (mostly for gold and diamonds), car making, and service industries, such as insurance.

Unemployment is very high. Income inequality is about the same as Brazil. During 1995–2003, the number of older jobs went down. Informal jobs went up. Overall unemployment got worse. The  South African household income went down a lot between 1995 and 2000. As for racial inequality, Statistics South Africa said that in 1995 the average white household earned four times as much as the average black household. In 2000 the average white family was earning six times more than the average black household. The action policies have seen a rise in black economic wealth. There is a developing black middle class. Other problems are crime, corruption, and HIV/AIDS. South Africa suffers from mostly heavy overall  compared to developed countries.  labor rules have added to the unemployment weakness.

South Africa is a nation of about 50 million people of diverse s, cultures, languages and religions. The last census was held in 2001 and the next will be in 2011. Statistics South Africa had five racial categories by which people could classify themselves, the last of which, "unspecified/other" drew "not needed" responses, and these results were not counted. The 2009 middle-year estimated figures for the other categories were Black at 79.3%, White at 9.1%, Coloured at 9.0%, and South Asian at 2.6%.

Even though the population of South Africa has grown in the past decade (mostly because of immigration), the country had an yearly population growth rate of −0.501% in 2008 (CIA est.), counting immigration. The CIA thinks that in 2009 South Africa's population started to grow again, at a rate of 0.281%. South Africa is home to an estimated 5 million illegal immigrants, counting about 3 million Zimbabweans. A series of anti-immigrant riots happened in South Africa beginning on 11 May 2008.

South Africa is divided into 9 provinces. The provinces are in turn divided into 52 districts: 8 metropolitan and 44 district municipalities. The district municipalities are further divided into 226 local municipalities.

It may be suggested that there is no single South African culture because of its ethnic . Today, the diversity in foods from many cultures is enjoyed by all and marketed to tourists who wish to taste South African food. Food is not the only thing, music and dance is there too.

South African food is mostly meat-based and has  the South African social gathering known as a braai or barbecue. South Africa has also developed into a big wine maker. It has some of the best vineyards lying in valleys around Stellenbosch, Franschoek, Paarl and Barrydale.

South Africa is the only country of Africa with a significant ethnic European population and influence

most South African blacks still have poor lives. It is among these people, however, that cultural traditions live most strongly. This is because blacks have become urbanised and Westernised, much parts of traditional culture have fallen. Urban blacks normally speak English or Afrikaans in addition to their native tongue. There are smaller but still important groups of speakers of Khoisan languages who are not in the 11 official languages, but are one of the eight other officially recognized languages.

Members of middle class, who are mostly white but whose ranks are growing numbers of black, coloured and Indian people, have lifestyles similar in many ways to that of people found in Western Europe, North America and Australasia. Members of the middle class often study and work from foreign countries for greater exposure to the markets of the world.

According to the 2001 national census, Christians accounted for 79.7% of the population. This has Zion Christian (11.1%), Pentecostal (Charismatic) (8.2%), Roman Catholic (7.1%), Methodist (6.8%), Dutch Reformed (6.7%), Anglican (3.8%); members of other Christian churches accounted for another 36% of the population. Muslims accounted for 1.5% of the population, Hinduism about 1.3%, and Judaism 0.2%. 15.1% had no religious affiliation, 2.3% were other and 1.4% were unspecified.

South Africa's most popular sports are football, rugby union and cricket. Other sports that are popular are swimming, athletics, golf, boxing, tennis and netball. Soccer is the most liked among youth. There are other sports like basketball, surfing and skateboarding that are becoming more liked.

Famous boxers from South Africa are Baby Jake Jacob Matlala, Vuyani Bungu, Welcome Ncita, Dingaan Thobela, Gerrie Coetzee and Brian Mitchell. There are footballers who have played for major  clubs. Some of them are Lucas Radebe and Philemon Masinga (both were of Leeds United), Quinton Fortune (Atletico Madrid and Manchester United), Benni McCarthy (Ajax Amsterdam, F.C. Porto and Blackburn Rovers), Aaron Mokoena (Ajax Amsterdam, Blackburn Rovers and Portsmouth), Delron Buckley (Borussia Dortmund) and Steven Pienaar (Ajax Amsterdam and Everton). South Africa made Formula One motor racing's 1979 world champion Jody Scheckter. Famous current cricket players are Herschelle Gibbs, Graeme Smith, Jacques Kallis, JP Duminy and more. Most of them also participate in the Indian Premier League.

South Africa has also made many world class rugby union players. Some of them are Francois Pienaar, Joost van der Westhuizen, Danie Craven, Frik du Preez, Naas Botha, and Bryan Habana. South Africa hosted and won the 1995 Rugby World Cup at their first try. They won the 2007 Rugby World Cup in France. South Africa was only allowed to  from 1995 since the end of Apartheid. It followed the 1995 Rugby World Cup by hosting the 1996 African Cup of Nations. It had the male national team, 'Bafana Bafana,' going on to win the tournament. It also hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup. and the 2007 World Twenty20 Championship. Both of them were a great success.

In 2010, South Africa became the first African nation to host the FIFA World Cup. The national team has competed in three World Cups. It bid for the right to stage the 2004 Olympic Games, but finished third to Athens. South Africa is also well known for their cricket team. They are right now the world's number one in test match cricket.

The main schools span the first seven years of schooling. Under apartheid, schools and colleges for blacks were subject to judgment. They often did not get enough funding because of their physical appearance and culture along with other unfair treatment. Instruction can take place in Afrikaans and English as well. Public payment on education was at 5.4% of the 2002-05 GDP.

Solid is one of the four common states of matter. The molecules in solids are closely bound together, so they can only vibrate. This means solids have a definite shape that only changes when a force is applied. This is different to liquids and gases which move randomly, a process called flow.

When a solid becomes a liquid, this is called melting. Liquids become solid by freezing. Some solids, like dry ice, can turn into gas without turning liquid first. This is called sublimation.

The forces between the atoms in a solid can take many forms. For example, a crystal of sodium chloride (common salt) is made up of ionic sodium and chlorine, which are held together by ionic bonds. In diamond or silicon, the atoms share electrons and make covalent bonds. In metals, electrons are shared in metallic bonding. Some solids, like most organic compounds, are held together with "van der Waals forces" coming from the polarization of the electronic charge cloud on each molecule. The dissimilarities between the types of solid come from the differences between their bonding.

Most metals are strong, dense, and good conductors of electricity and heat. The mass of the elements in the periodic table, those to the left of a diagonal line drawn from boron to polonium, are metals. Mixtures of two or more elements in which the big component is a metal are known as alloys.

People have been using metals for many purposes since prehistoric times.

The strength and relialbility of metals has led to their widespread use in making of buildings and other things, as well as in most vehicles, many tools, pipes, road signs and railroad tracks. Iron and aluminium are the two most commonly used metals. They are also the most common metals in the Earth's crust. Iron is most commonly used in the form of an alloy, steel, which has up to 2.1% carbon, making it much harder than pure iron.

Since metals are good conductors of electricity, they are  in electrical tools and for carrying an electric current over long distances with little energy loss. Because of this, electrical power grids rely on metal cables to get electricity. Home electrical systems, for example, are wired with copper for its good conducting uses. The high thermal conductivity of most metals also makes them useful for stovetop cooking utensils.

Minerals are natural solids formed through many geological processes and having a crystal structure with uniform physical things throughout..

The speed of light, in any medium, which is usually denoted by , is a physical constant important in many areas of physics. It is denoted by "c0" especially in vacuum medium, although the symbol 'c' can be used to refer to that in any medium. It is exactly  by definition. A photon (particle of light) travels at this speed in a vacuum.

According to special relativity,  is the maximum speed at which all energy, matter, and physical information in the universe can travel. It is the speed of all massless particles such as photons, and associated fields—including electromagnetic radiation such as light—in a vacuum.

It is predicted by the current theory to be the speed of gravity (that is, gravitational waves). Such particles and waves travel at  regardless of the motion of the source or the inertial frame of reference of the observer. In the theory of relativity,  interrelates space and time, and appears in the famous equation of mass–energy equivalence .

The special theory of relativity is based on the prediction, so far upheld by observations, that the measured speed of light in a vacuum is the same whether or not the source of the light and the person doing the measuring are moving relative to each other. This is sometimes expressed as "the speed of light is independent of the reference frame."

This behavior is different from our common ideas about motion as shown by this example:

George is standing on the ground next to some train tracks (railroad). There is a train rushing by at . George throws a baseball at  in the direction the train is moving. Tom, a passenger on the train, has a device (like a radar gun) to measure throwing speeds. Because he is on the train, Tom is already moving at  in the direction of the throw, so Tom measures the speed of the ball as only .

In other words, the speed of the baseball, as measured by Tom on the train, depends on the speed of the train.

In the example above, the train was moving at 1/3 the speed of the ball, and the speed of the ball as measured on the train was 2/3 of the throwing speed as measured on the ground.

Now, repeat the experiment with light instead of a baseball; that is, George has a flashlight instead of throwing a baseball. George and Tom both have devices that are the same to measure the speed of light (instead of the radar gun in the baseball example).

George is standing on the ground next to some train tracks. There is a train rushing by at 1/3 the speed of light. George flashes a light beam in the direction the train is moving. George measures the speed of light as . Tom, a passenger on the train, measures the speed of the light beam. What speed does Tom measure?

Intuitively, one may think that the speed of the light from the flashlight as measured on the train should be 2/3 the speed measured on the ground, just like the speed of the baseball was 2/3. But in fact, the speed measured on the train is the full value, , not .

A consequence of this fact, that the speed of light is the same for all (inertial) observers, is that no matter how much energy is used, nothing with mass can be accelerated to reach or go faster than the speed of light. Other key consequences of the constancy of the speed of light, that the lengths of two identical objects, and the rate at which two identical clocks tick, also depend on the reference frame of the observer. These ideas were discovered in the early 1900s by Albert Einstein in his theory of Special Relativity which completely changed our understanding of space and time.

Maxwell's equations predicted the speed of light and confirmed Michael Faraday's idea that light was an electromagnetic wave (a way that energy moves). From these equations, we find that the speed of light is related to the inverse of the square root of the permittivity of free space, ε0, and the permeability of free space, μ0:

The index of refraction of a clear material is the ratio between the speed of light in a vacuum and the speed of light in that material.

Ole Christensen Rømer used an astronomical measurement to make the first quantitative estimate of the speed of light. When measured from Earth, the periods of moons orbiting a distant planet are shorter when the Earth is approaching the planet than when the Earth is receding from it. The distance travelled by light from the planet (or its moon) to Earth is shorter when the Earth is at the point in its orbit that is closest to its planet than when the Earth is at the farthest point in its orbit, the difference in distance being the diameter of the Earth's orbit around the Sun. The observed change in the moon's orbital period is actually the difference in the time it takes light to traverse the shorter or longer distance. Rømer observed this effect for Jupiter's innermost moon Io, and he deduced that light takes 22 minutes to cross the diameter of the Earth's orbit.

Another method is to use the aberration of light, discovered and explained by James Bradley in the 18th century. This effect results from the vector addition of the velocity of light arriving from a distant source (such as a star) and the velocity of its observer (see diagram on the right). A moving observer thus sees the light coming from a slightly different direction and consequently sees the source at a position shifted from its original position. Since the direction of the Earth's velocity changes continuously as the Earth orbits the Sun, this effect causes the apparent position of stars to move around. From the angular difference in the position of stars, it is possible to express the speed of light in terms of the Earth's velocity around the Sun. This, with the known length of a year, can be easily converted to the time needed to travel from the Sun to the Earth. In 1729, Bradley used this method to derive that light travelled 10,210 times faster than the Earth in its orbit (the modern figure is 10,066 times faster) or, equivalently, that it would take light 8 minutes 12 seconds to travel from the Sun to the Earth.

Nowadays, the "light time for unit distance"—the inverse of c (1/c), expressed in seconds per astronomical unit—is measured by comparing the time for radio signals to reach different spacecraft in the Solar System. The position of spacecraft is calculated from the gravitational effects of the Sun and various planets. By combining many such measurements, a best fit value for the light time per unit distance is obtained. , the best estimate, as approved by the International Astronomical Union (IAU), is:

The relative uncertainty in these measurements is 0.02 parts per billion (2), as equivalent to the uncertainty in Earth-based measurements of length by interferometry. Since the metre is defined to be the length travelled by light in a certain time interval, the measurement of the light time for unit distance can also be interpreted as measuring the length of an AU in metres. The metre is considered to be a unit of proper length, whereas the AU is often used as a unit of observed length in a given frame of reference.

The finite speed of light is a major constraint on long-distance space travel. Supposing a journey to the other side of the Milky Way, the total time for a message and its reply would be about 200,000 years. Even more seriously, no spacecraft could travel faster than light, so all galactic-scale transport would be effectively one-way, and would take much longer than any modern civilisation has existed.

The speed of light can also be of concern over very short distances. In supercomputers, the speed of light imposes a limit on how quickly data can be sent between processors. If a processor operates at 1 gigahertz, a signal can only travel a maximum of about  in a single cycle. Processors must therefore be placed close to each other to minimize communication latencies; this can cause difficulty with cooling. If clock frequencies continue to increase, the speed of light will eventually become a limiting factor for the internal design of single chips.

The Stone Age was a prehistoric time when people made tools from stone such as flint. It began when people created the first stone tools about 3.3 million years ago. It lasted for about 3.4 million years, and ended between 4,000 BC and 2,000 BC. About 99% of human history happened during the Stone Age.

Stone Age people also made tools out of wood, antler, and bone. However, these materials do not last as long as stone. For this reason, most of the Stone Age tools archaeologists have found are made of stone.

Food eaten in the Stone Age included berries (e.g. blackberries), fish, animals (e.g. mammoth), and animal organs.

Archaeologists divide the Stone Age into three sections: Paleolithic ("old stone"), Mesolithic ("middle stone"), and Neolithic ("new stone"). During the Neolithic period, people invented farming and pottery, and started to care for animals like cows and pigs.

Sometime between 3000 BC and 2000 BC, people discovered the art of making metals. This probably happened in the Middle East. People used copper first, then learned how to make bronze. When people started using these metals instead of stone, the Stone Age ended and the Bronze Age began.

Some groups of people in Papua New Guinea continued to use Stone Age technology into the 20th century. They used stone-tipped weapons to kill animals for food and clothing. They made shelters using animal skin.

Silver (symbol Ag) is a chemical element. In chemistry, silver is element 47, a transition metal. It has an atomic weight of 107.86 a.m.u. Its symbol is Ag, from the Latin word for silver, argentum.

Silver is a soft metal. It is also a precious metal. When it is used in money or in jewellery, it is often alloyed with gold or some other metal to make it harder. It is bluish-white. Among metals, it is the most reflective and the best conductor of electricity and heat. It is also very malleable and , which means it can be pulled into wire or hammered into thin sheets.

Silver is less reactive than most other metals, because of its full 4d shell. Its electron configuration is similar to copper and gold. It does not dissolve in most acids, but nitric acid dissolves it to make silver nitrate. It does react with strong oxidizing agents like potassium dichromate or potassium permanganate. It does not corrode easily. It only corrodes when there is hydrogen sulfide in the air. Then, it forms a black coating known as .

Silver exists in three main oxidation states: +1, +2 and +3. The +1 is much more common than +2 and +3. A few compounds exist in the +2 and +3 oxidation states, but they are very strong oxidizing agents. Silver compounds can be brown, black, yellow, gray, or colorless. Silver compounds are disinfectants.

Silver(I) compounds are oxidizing agents. They are more common. Most of them are very expensive.

Silver can be found as a native metal. Most silver is found with copper, lead, or gold in rocks. The rocks are found mostly in Canada, Mexico, Peru, and the United States. Peru produces the most silver, mostly in mines that are operated for copper and zinc.

Silver is also in chemical compounds.  Acanthite is a silver ore that is a silver compound.

Silver is extracted from its ores in several ways.  It is normally extracted as a byproduct of electrolysis producing copper.

Silver has been used for many thousands of years by  all over the world, for jewellery, as money, and many other things. It is called a white metal even though it looks grey. The word silver is also used to talk about this color or shade of grey. Silver is also used for . Silver is used as a catalyst.

Silver can be alloyed with gold, copper, zinc, cadmium, tin, nickel, lead, bismuth, germanium, and mercury. The most common silver alloy is called sterling silver, which is 92.5% silver and 7.5% copper. Sometimes a small amount of germanium is added to prevent tarnish. An alloy of silver and mercury (an amalgam) is used to fill teeth in dentistry. Silver is added to some solder alloys in small amounts (5% or less), where it acts to make the solder more durable, more conductive, and less vulnerable to tin pest. The common lead-free SAC305 solder used in electronics contains 3% silver. Leaded solder can also contain silver, but this is less common.

Silver compounds are disinfectants. It can kill bacteria and have other useful properties. It is used in the silver oxide battery. They are also used in photographic film. They can also be used to reduce odors in clothes. Some silver compounds are used in creams that help burns heal.

Silver has been used for thousands of years. It was normally considered second to gold in value. Many people including Romans and Chinese used silver as money. The symbol Ag is from the Latin name for silver, argentum. Silver was also used to prevent infections and decay.

Silver is not a large  to humans. Silver compounds are toxic. They make the skin turn blue. Some can be carcinogens. Colloidal silver, a common , is not toxic in normal amounts, but it does not do much. Silver is very toxic to fish, so silver-containing waste (for example, photographic chemicals or silver oxide batteries) must not be released into the environment and should be properly recycled. Silver should not be stored near ammonia, acetylene, or strong acids, as these can react with silver to make unstable silver salts.

Socialism is an economic system in which industries are owned by workers rather than by private businesses. It is different from capitalism, where private actors, like business owners and shareholders, own the means of production. The state can also act as a capitalist by owning the means of production and by directing the economy. Socialists believe that capitalists owning the means of production is a form of exploitation because it lets them own a majority of the labor that workers produce, even though the owners haven't done any work. Socialists propose that workers themselves get to own and manage their labor. Socialism is similar to communism, though both have their own different sets of socioeconomic standards held by the people and government.

Socialists believe that sharing ownership of the means of production equally among society would increase people's quality of life. Socialists want to give people free access to basic life necessities like food, housing, and healthcare. Some socialists also believe employment should be guaranteed as a human right. Socialists want to prevent problems that they believe come from unchecked capitalism, like poor treatment of workers and inequality. There are varying views among socialists as to how exactly the issues should be prevented. There are varying views among socialists as to how different issues should be approached. Most socialists would argue that capitalism, in its purest form, can inflict great harm.

There are lots of kinds of socialism. One big thing that splits socialists is how to make socialism happen. Reformists think people can get socialism by voting in elections and changing the government bit by bit. Revolutionaries believe that private owners are too powerful and will use their power to stop any reforms, so the only way to get socialism is to take their ownership by force.

Because there are many different types of socialism, economists and historians disagree on how well it works. Critics say it gives governments too much power and hurts the economy. Supporters argue it creates a fairer, more equal society.

The followers of a Welshman, Robert Owen, began calling themselves socialists in 1841. Owen is seen as a founder of the Co-operative Movement in Britain. He said that workers should own the companies they worked for. The workers would then share the profits among themselves. He set up a new model factory in New Lanark, Scotland.

Karl Marx is the most well-known creator of the theory of socialism, and of communism. He wrote a book about capitalism, socialism, and communism, called "A critique of the social economy". Friedrich Engels co-wrote the book, and paid for much of Marx's work and research.

Many socialist political parties were formed during the 19th century and early part of the 20th century. During the decolonization movement in the 20th century, many armies fighting for independence planned to establish socialist countries.

There are many kinds of socialism. In all types, at least in principle, the state or workers own the means of production. Means of production is originally a  communist term which describes the tools that are needed to make goods. In a capitalist economy, these tools are normally owned by one person, and can range from a machine in a factory to an entire corporation. The one person hires workers for a wage, and keeps any profits made. The profit is not split up amongst the workers. This can create inequality as the owner of the mean of production may be able to become very wealthy.

The major differences between the different varieties are the role of the free market (market planning), how the means of production are controlled, the role of management of workers, and the government's role in the economy.

One kind of socialism is "collectivization." In this system, money and goods are shared more equally among the people. In theory, this system results in the gap between classes getting smaller. The state helps the nation's poorest people. The richest are subjected to higher taxes and economic restrictions.

Socialists with more radical views believe that socialism will evolve into what they see as a more advanced system: communism, with no state, money, hierarchy or social classes whatsoever. In Marxist theory, socialism is a temporary social state between capitalism and communism but some socialists have no intention of transitioning to communism as in socialist theory, transitioning to communism isn't an end goal as this transition is exclusive to Marxist theory.

Many label these economic theories into one as "communism" when they mean the Marxist and Leninist ideas and beliefs of Russia's Bolshevik party. Marx believed that capitalism followed the economic and political system of feudalism. He also believed that capitalism would unfairly treat many people. He thought that those people would eventually revolt and switch to socialism. He thought that socialism could be another bridge on a path to communism. However, many people incorrectly use the term "Communist" to refer to a socialist state as a pejorative insult. Others call this 'State Socialism,' to distinguish it from the communist goal that does not need a state or any form of government. To non-communists, the word 'socialism' is now used mostly for attempts to come close to this goal in a capitalist state.

Democratic socialism is the belief that socialism can be achieved through reform of what Marxists call Bourgeois Democracy―as opposed to achieving socialism by a revolution. The goals of these reforms are aimed to achieve a more just society, so that ordinary people can participate in the many decisions that affect their lives, which should require voting.

Social democracy is a type of socialism that attempts to mix parts of socialism with capitalism. In this system, despite there still being private property, the government generates tax revenue. Tax comes from the wealthiest in the society and corporations. It goes to the poor, or even everyone in the society in the form of social programs. These programs range from single-payer healthcare, to other welfare programs such as expanding SNAP benefits. The intentions of social democracy and socialism can be similar or shared. Social democracy keeps the capitalist system intact, and tries to reform it. Achieving socialism would mean completely getting rid of the capitalist system. Social democracy is often confused with democratic socialism due to the similar names and having the same short-term goals. The biggest difference is social democrats want to stop reforming capitalism when they think their reforms are good enough, but democratic socialists will not stop until capitalism is gone. Some examples of social democracies are the Scandinavian countries.

In social democracies, some services and industries are given subsidy money to help them run  partly controlled by the government. Education, health care, housing, utility companies and public transportation are some industries that might be owned/supported by the government in a social democracy. For the most part, people working in these industries are paid by the government, with money paid by the people as taxes. A strong Welfare system is key to social democracy.

Utopian socialism is the first form of modern socialism. Unlike other forms of socialism, utopian socialism doesn't include belief in the necessity of class struggle.

Anarcho-socialism, also called anarchist socialism, libertarian socialism or free socialism is the idea of a socialist society where the state does not exist. Anarcho-socialists believe that both the state and the bourgeois class (the class that owns the means of production in capitalism) oppresses the workers and a stateless mutual aid society should be established through a revolution. Mutual aid is the belief that people in a community (for example city districts or towns and villages) should help each other when necessary.

Anarcho-socialism is very similar to anarcho-communism, and many anarcho-socialists are anarcho-communists. Other anarcho-socialists include mutualists (of Pierre-Joseph Proudhon's philosophy)

Many people and countries see socialism differently. The Socialist International is an organization dedicated to the cause of promoting socialist ideals, and has ties with many socialist parties, especially Social Democratic parties.

Many economists, historians, and politicians do not agree with the ideas of socialism. They argue that socialism has several major problems in practice and in theory.

Economists from the Austrian School argue that a central government cannot safely plan a large economy. In a free market, prices change naturally based on supply and demand. Without a free market, it can be difficult to know how much things should cost or how many items a factory should make. This can cause shortages of food, medicine, and other daily needs. Others argue that socialism hurts the reason people work hard, which is known as an incentive. If businessmen cannot keep the profits from their work, they may stop trying to innovate or create new businesses.

Some critics, especially right-wing libertarians, argue that socialism reduces individual freedom. They believe that a healthy society should not have too much government control. People should be free to make their own choices as individuals. In the 20th-century,  many countries tried to build socialist economies but failed. Some of them became totalitarian states that hurt their own citizens.

South Korea is a country in the southern part of the Korean peninsula, in East Asia.

The capital city of South Korea is Seoul. The official name of South Korea is the Republic of Korea in English, 대한민국 (Daehan Minguk) in Korean writing (Hangeul), and 大韓民國 in Chinese characters (Hanja). About half of the country's people live in its capital city, Seoul, or near the city in the metropolitan area. Korea's Seoul metropolitan area is one of the most populous metropolitan areas in the world. In fact, some sources say it is the second most populous after Tokyo, Japan. Recently, South Korean culture has become famous around the world. This is partially because of bands like BTS, TWICE, and BLACKPINK, Korean dramas, as well as its economic miracle.

South Korea's history began with Dangunwanggeom's Gojoseon. Gojoseon was conquered by Han China. After Gojoseon collapsed, there were a lot of countries such as Buyeo, Okjeo, Dongyae, and Samhan. However, Baekje, Goguryeo, and Silla were the strongest. So their period began, and it is called the Three Kingdoms Period. Goguryeo and Baekje were conquered by Silla and Dang China's allied forces, and Silla unified the three kingdoms. There was another country, Balhae. Balhae was founded by Dae Jo-Young.

Later Silla and Balhae's period is called the South and North Countries Period. A rebellion in Later Silla caused the birth of a new nation: Goryeo, which was founded by Wanggeon. Mongolia's invaded Goryeo. Near the end of the Goryeo period, there was a great general Lee Seong-Gye. The king of Goryeo directed him to occupy Yodong, but he opposed it. However, Lee Seong-Gye went to Yodong to occupy it, but he returned to Goryeo and he revolted. His revolt succeeded, and he founded the country Joseon. Joseon's first king, Taejo, moved the capital to Hanyang, now called Seoul. Joseon's fourth king, Sejong, made the Korean alphabet, Hangeul. Joseon's twenty-second king, Jeongjo, built the Hwaseong Fortress in Suwon.

Joseon's twenty-sixth king, Gojong, changed the country's name to Daehanjeguk. When Daehanjaeguk's power weakened, Japan occupied it for 35 years until Japan's defeat in World War II in 1945. In 1950, there was a large and deadly war, the Korean War, which killed millions of people. As a result, Korea was split into two countries, North and South.

On 3 December 2024, President Yoon Suk Yeol declared martial law on a television. He accused the Democratic Party, which controls the National Assembly of supporting North Korea and trying to destroy the country. The martial law stopped all political activities and suspended press freedom. The Democratic Party and some members of Yoon's People Power Party disagreed with the declaration, causing protests. Later, on 4 December 2024, after security tried to stop the vote, most lawmakers in the National Assembly voted 190-0 to end martial law. Yoon was impeached on 7 December 2024, however it did not pass. He was impeached again on 14 December, with this one being successful.

In 2045, South Korea is set to become the world's most aged population, passing Japan. Senior citizens will reach 46.5 percent of the population in 2067, outnumbering the working age population.

South Korea helps Ukraine in 2039, When you're going to Travel to Ukraine with the Russo-Ukrainian War.

South Korea is in East Asia, bordering North Korea, and is surrounded by water on three sides, as it makes up the southern part of the Korean peninsula. South Korea is separated from North Korea by the 38th parallel. It is separated from Japan by the Sea of Japan (known as the East Sea by the South Koreans). The capital city, Seoul, is quite close to the North Korean border. The largest island is Jeju Island and the highest mountain is Hallasan, on Jeju.

South Korea is mainly mountainous, and there are many islands off the south coast. 70% of the country is covered by hills and mountains.

There are around 52 million residents in South Korea. The largest cities are Seoul (9.6 million people), Busan (3.3 million people), Incheon (2.9 million people), and Daegu (2.4 million people). The population density is about 507 people per square kilometre (1310 people per square mile).

South Korea has one of the lowest birth rates in the world. The fertility rate, or number of children born per woman, was 0.92 in 2019. This is the lowest in the world. To keep the population the same, the fertility rate must be about 2, so the two children can replace their two parents. The low fertility rate will cause the population to start falling.

South Korea is a democracy, meaning that people can vote for their government. However, this is recent. South Korea was an authoritarian dictatorship for most of its history. The President of South Korea is elected to a five-year term, and cannot stand in a Presidential Election for a second time. In March 2025, the court system made its decision that Yoon Suk-yeol, was to be pushed out of power (as president).

South Korea is known for a lot of technology. This includes the car makers Hyundai and Kia. The well-known global brands Samsung and LG, which make mobile phones, semi-conductors, and electric devices, are also South Korean.

South Korea has been affected by both continental culture and marine culture because it is located on a peninsula. Ancient South Korean culture has developed with the culture of Siberia, the northern part of Central Asia, the southern part of Southeast Asia, and neighboring countries like China.

South Korea's customary and official language is Korean. Many linguists say that it is linked with Altaic languages. Hangul, the alphabet that is used to write Korean, was published by King Sejong the Great of Joseon in 1446. It is the only alphabet in the world whose creator, invention day, and invention principle are known.

A customary South Korean regular meal is made up of rice, Korean soup, kimchi and other various dishes. Generally, Korean dishes are seasoned with sesame oil, soy bean paste, soy sauce, salt, ginger and chilli pepper paste. The most famous traditional food of Korea, kimchi, is eaten with nearly every meal. There are lots of popular South Korean typical foods such as bibimbap, tteokbokki, and bulgogi.

As of 2008, 19.7% of people are Protestant, 6.6% are Catholic, 23.2% are Buddhist, 49.3% have no religion, and 1.3% either are a part of other religions or have unknown beliefs.

The most representative traditional music of Korea is Arirang and every region has its folk song. Many South Korean singers are well known in world as K-pop is steadily developing. Famous K-pop artists include BTS, BLACKPINK, EXO, TWICE & NCT. Hip hop artists such as Zico, Jvcki Wai, San E & Giriboy are also popular.

77% of South Korean men are circumcised; this tradition was taken from the US military.

South Korea has 1 special city (Teukbyeolsi; 특별시; 特別市), 1 special self-governing city (Teukbyeol-Jachisi; 특별자치시; 特別自治市) 6 metropolitan cities (Gwangyeoksi; 광역시; 廣域市), and 9 provinces (do; 도; 道). The names below are given in English, Revised Romanization, Hangeul, and Hanja.

Sir Isaac Newton  (25 December 1643 – 31 March 1727) was an English physicist, mathematician and astronomer. He is well known for his work on the laws of motion, optics, gravity, and calculus also, he presents his theory of universal gravitation and  three laws of motion.

Newton built the first practical reflecting telescope in 1668. He also developed a theory of light based on the observation that a prism decomposes white light into the colors of the rainbow. Newton also shares credit with Gottfried Leibniz for the development of calculus.

Newton's ideas on light, motion, and gravity dominated physics for the next three centuries, until modified by Albert Einstein's theory of relativity.

After being knighted in 1705 because he was Master of the Royal Mint, he was "Sir" Isaac Newton.

Isaac Newton was born (according to the Julian calendar, in use in England at the time) on Christmas Day, 25 December 1642 (N.S. 4 January 1643) "an hour or two after midnight", at Woolsthorpe Manor in Woolsthorpe-by-Colsterworth, a hamlet in the county of Lincolnshire, England. His father, also named Isaac Newton, died three months before his birth. When Newton was three, his mother, Hannah Ayscough, remarried with Reverend Barnabas Smith. Young Newton remained with his maternal grandmother, Margery Ayscough.

From 1655 to 1659, Newton was educated at The King's School, Grantham. When he was seventeen, he was removed from school. His mother tried to make him a farmer, but he did not like that. Henry Stokes, master at The King's School, requested his mother to send him back to school.

In June 1661, he was sent to the University of Cambridge to study. In 1666 the University closed temporarily due to the Great Plague of London and he went home to Woolsthorpe to study.

In 1666 Isaac Newton experimented with light, and found that different colors had different refractions. He began lecturing on this topic in 1670.

Newton explained the workings of the universe through mathematics. He described laws of motion and gravitation. These laws are math formulas that explain how objects move when a force acts on them.

1687, Newton published his most famous book called the Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica 1687 while he was a mathematics professor at Trinity College, Cambridge. In the Principia, Newton explained three basic laws that govern the way objects move. He then described his idea, or theory, about gravity. Gravity is the force that causes things to fall down. If a pencil fell off a desk, it will land on the floor, not the ceiling. In his book Newton also used his laws to show that the planets revolve around the suns in orbits that are oval, not round. Newton also discovered diffraction. This led him to enter the field of physics, where he prospered.

One proposed "zeroth law" is the fact that at any instant, a body reacts to the forces applied to it at that instant. Likewise, the idea that forces add like vectors (or in other words obey the superposition principle ), and the idea that forces change the energy of a body, have each been proposed as a "fourth law".

When people think of Isaac Newton, many think of him sitting under an apple tree watching an apple fall. Some people believe the apple fell onto his head. Newton understood that what makes things like apples fall to the ground is a specific kind of force — the force we call gravity. Newton thought that gravity was the force of attraction between two objects, such as an apple and the earth. He also thought that an object with more matter exerted the same force on smaller objects as they exerted on it. That meant that the large mass of the earth pulled objects toward it. That is why the apple fell down instead of up, and why people do not float in the air.

Isaac Newton went on thinking about gravity. Before Newton, people thought that only objects near to the earth would fall down. But Newton thought that gravity should not just be limited to the earth and the objects on it. What if gravity went to the moon and beyond?

Newton invented a formula for calculating the force of attraction between two bodies. He used it to calculate the force needed to keep the moon moving around the earth. Then he compared it with the force that made the apple fall downward. After allowing for the fact that the moon is much farther from the earth, and has a much greater mass, he discovered that the forces were the same. The moon is held in an orbit around the earth by the pull of earth’s gravity.

The formula invented by Newton is called the Law of gravitation.

Sir Isaac Newton’s calculations changed the way people understood the universe. No one had been able to explain why the planets stayed in their orbits. What held them up? Less than 50 years before Isaac Newton was born it was thought that the planets were held in place by an invisible shield. Isaac proved that they were held in place by the sun’s gravity. He also showed that the force of gravity was affected by distance and by mass. He was not the first to understand that the orbit of a planet was not circular, but more elongated, like an oval. What he did was to explain how this and other parts of celestial mechanics worked.

Isaac Newton was the first to discover the laws of gravitation and the laws of motion. He also established a new field in mathematics known as calculus, though the German Gottfried Leibniz had developed the ideas at the same time. His work has greatly contributed in the areas of science and mathematics making him one of the most influential scientists in human history and one of the greatest mathematician of all times.

The great physicist, Albert Einstein, thought that Newton's idea of gravity was not completely accurate. He corrected many of the things that Newton did.

He is buried in Westminster Abbey. He set the stage for many famous physicists to come. such as Albert Einstein, James Chadwick, and Stephen Hawking.

Socrates (399 BC-470 BC) was one of the most famous Greek philosophers. He showed how argument, debate, and discussion could help people to understand difficult issues. Most of the issues he dealt with only seemed to be political. They were actually moral questions about how life should be lived. Socrates had such great influence that philosophers before him are called the Presocratic philosophers.

Socrates made enemies, three of whom brought charges against him. Socrates was tried for his life in 399 BC, found guilty, and put to death by drinking common hemlock (a herbal poison). The story of his trial and death is described by Plato in a book called the Apologia.

Most of what we know about Socrates comes from the works of Plato, who was his student. Socrates lived in the Greek city of Athens. His method of teaching was to have a dialogue with individual students. They would propose some point of view, and Socrates would question them, asking what they meant. He would pretend "I don't know anything; I'm just trying to understand what it is you are saying", or words that basically meant that. This is now called the Socratic method of teaching.

Socrates is sometimes called the "father of Western philosophy". This is because in the discussions he uncovered some of the most basic questions in philosophy, questions which are still discussed today. Some of the people he taught came to be important and successful, like Plato, Xenophon, and Alcibiades.

Socrates never wrote anything. All of what there is about Socrates is from what other people wrote about him. Our main source of what we know about Socrates is from the writings of his student, Plato. Some of Plato's dialogues, such as the Crito and the Phaedo, are loosely based on fact. They are not written records, but artistic re-creation of Socrates in action.

Xenophon also wrote about Socrates. Aristophanes, a person who wrote brilliant satirical comedies, wrote about him in play called The Clouds. Socrates was an easy target for satire. He walked barefoot, and with a swagger. Sometimes he stood in a trance for hours.p8 In The Clouds Socrates is a crazy person who tries to scam people out of their money. Plato wrote that Socrates taught for free.

We do not know if Plato's description of Socrates is accurate or not. That is called the 'Socratic problem'. While a lot of what Plato wrote about Socrates is accepted by historians, some believe that Plato (who saw Socrates as a hero) portrayed Socrates as a greater man than he actually was. Some think that Plato was using the character of Socrates as a tool to express his own opinions rather than to accurately write about Socrates. This is what makes Socrates such a mysterious historical figure. Plato's dialogues are works of art, finely written. The general view is that they are based on reality, but no doubt adjusted for the purpose of writing.

Socrates' father was a sculptor, and his mother was a midwife who helped women give birth to children. He may have been a stonemason like his father, and Plato wrote that he served in the Athenian army as a hoplite (heavy infantry). We know he was influenced by an older philosopher, Archelaus, and that he talked with anyone who had interesting ideas in Athens, but beyond that nothing is known.

Socrates was about 50 when he married a much younger woman, Xanthippe. They had three children together. Socrates made  about his wife, but no one knew if he was telling the truth.

It is said that one of Socrates' friends went to ask the oracle at Delphi if there was anyone wiser than Socrates in Athens. The oracle said that there was no wiser person. The oracle was well known for saying things that were ambiguous or unclear. They did not say that Socrates was the wisest, just that there was no person wiser.

After being puzzled by this, Socrates finally decided that his wisdom lay in knowing that he was ignorant. His attempts to show the citizens that some of their ideas were nonsense might help explain his unpopularity. In Plato's works, Socrates says he knows nothing, but can draw out other people's ideas just as his mother helped other women to give birth.

In 399 BC, when Socrates was an old man, three citizens—Meletus, Anytus and Lycon—brought charges against Socrates. A trial was held. In ancient Athens the  was quite different from the present day. There was a jury of 500 men drawn from the citizens. Both the accusers and the defendant had to make speeches in person to the jury. Guilt or innocence was by majority vote. There was no preset penalty if the verdict was 'guilty'. Both the accuser and the defendant would make speeches proposing what the penalty should be. Again, a vote was taken.p17

There were two charges against him. The general theme was that Socrates was a menace to society. The first charge was of heresy, disbelief in the Gods. It was probably meant to cause prejudice amongst the jurymen. Actually, Socrates observed all the correct procedures of the religion of his times. The charge had been used successfully against another philosopher, Anaxagoras.p17

The second charge was piety. What was meant by this? Apparently, this was not about his personal relationship with his pupils. It was about the way he was thought to influence their political views. His circle had included a number of right-wing aristocrats whose ideas were now rejected by most citizens. The brilliant Alcibiades, once a great leader of Athens, was now seen as a traitor.p17

Crito, a friend of Socrates, illegally paid the prison guards to allow Socrates to escape. Socrates, however, decided not to escape. When Socrates was put on trial, he gave a long speech to defend himself against the claims made by the Athenian government.

We have Plato's version of how Socrates defended himself in the Apologia. It starts:

When Socrates was asked to propose his punishment, Socrates said that the government should give him free dinners for the rest of his life for all the good that he did for society. The court held a vote between giving Socrates a fine to pay or putting him to death. The verdict was that Socrates was to be put to death.

There are several dialogues by Plato which deal directly with the trial of Socrates and the period up to his death. They are, in order of the events:

Socrates helped people to see what was wrong with their ideas. Sometimes they liked this, sometimes they were not happy or grateful. He said that he, Socrates, was not wise, but that he "knew that he knew nothing." Since other people think they know something, but no one really knows anything, Socrates claimed he knew more than anyone else. He said that people who do bad things do so because they do not know any better.

People think that Socrates was a good man because he did no harm, except he asked questions about everything. However, during his life many people thought he was a bad person, because he asked those questions and because he made young people unhappy about their lives.

Someone once wrote that Socrates said that "A life that was not  was not worth living". This means that someone must think about their own life and its purpose. Some people believe that most humans are happier if they do not think too much about their life.

Socrates also taught that many people can look at something and not truly see it. He asked questions about the meaning of life and goodness. These are still very important questions. Much of philosophy (love of wisdom) is about these things.

Socrates is seen by some people as a martyr, since he willingly died to support the idea that knowledge and wisdom are very important to our lives.

Socrates is known as one of the most important philosophers in history. He is often described as the father of Western philosophy. He did not start Western philosophy, but he had a big influence on it. Before Socrates, philosophy was mainly about mathematics and answering questions about our natural world. Socrates expanded on that and added questions about ethics, politics, and epistemology to philosophy.

Singapore, officially the Republic of Singapore, is a sovereign country. It is nicknamed as 'The Lion City', 'The Garden City' or 'The Little Red Dot'. It is an island state at the southern end of the Malay Peninsula in Southeast Asia, between the Straits of Malacca and the South China Sea. Singapore is about one degree of latitude () north of the equator. About 6.11 million  live in Singapore. About 3.31 million are citizens. Most of them are ethnically Chinese, Malay, or Indian, as well as a smaller number of other Asians and Europeans.

Present-day Singapore was founded in 1819 by Stamford Raffles as a trading post of the British Empire. During the Second World War, Singapore was taken over by Japan in 1942, but returned to British control after Japan surrendered in 1945. Singapore started to govern itself in 1959, and in 1963 became part of the new federation of Malaysia, together with Malaya, North Borneo, and Sarawak. Political and social differences led to Singapore being removed from the federation two years later, then becoming an independent country on its own.

Most Singaporeans are bilingual. The symbolic national language of Singapore is Malay. Other official languages of Singapore are English, Mandarin and Tamil. English is the language of choice because most people in Singapore know and uses it. It is the first language taught in schools and the language used by the government and in court. Students are also usually taught the language of their ethnicity. This means that the Chinese will learn Mandarin, Malays will learn Malay, and so on. Students can also choose to learn a third language in secondary school.

Singapore is also known as a "Garden City" or a "City in a Garden". This is because there are plants everywhere, making it look like a garden. Singapore has one of the highest standards of living in the world, with very good education, healthcare, housing, and very low corruption. It is also known for having many strict rules and punishments, including fines. This is why it is also sometimes jokingly called a "fine" city. The government says this has helped Singapore be a very safe country. Singapore is one of the founding members of ASEAN.

Singapore's name comes from 'Singa Pura', which means Lion City in Sanskrit. Many people around the world understand "Lion City" to refer to Singapore. There is some debate about who founded Singapore. According to the Malay Annals, a Sumatran prince called Sang Nila Utama landed on Temasek (Singapore's old name) and saw a Lion which is called 'Singa' in Malay. Thus he gave the island a new name, 'Singapura'. However, Sang Nila Utama was likely mistaken, as lions never existed in Singapore. It is believed that the "lion" was actually a Malayan Tiger, which also exists in neighbouring Malaysia. While now extinct in Singapore it used to be present back then.

There were also many pieces of old items, such as Chinese coins, that showed that Temasek was an important Asian trading port even before the British rule.

Few people lived in Singapore at the beginning of the 19th century. British governor Stamford Raffles arrived in Singapore on 28 January 1819 and wanted to set up a British trading town. At the time, the island was then ruled by Tengku Abdul Rahman, the Sultan of Johor, who the Dutch and the Bugis from Sulawesi had controlled. However, the Sultanate was weakened by infighting: the Temenggong (Chief Minister) of Tengku Abdul Rahman, as well as his officials, supported the Sultan's elder brother Tengku Long, who was living in exile in Riau.

With the Temenggong's help, Raffles managed to secretly bring Tengku Long back into Singapore. Raffles offered to recognize Tengku Long as the true Sultan of Johor, under the title of Sultan Hussein, as well as giving him $5000 per year and another $3000 to the Temenggong; in return, Sultan Hussein would give the British the right to establish a trading post on Singapore. An official treaty was signed on 6 February 1819.

In 1824, another treaty with the Sultan led to the entire island becoming under the British. In 1826, Singapore became part of the Straits Settlements. Singapore became the regional capital in 1836. Before Raffles arrived, there were only about a thousand people living on the island, mostly Malays along with a handful of Chinese. By 1860, the population had grown to over 80,000, more than half being Chinese. The country was given colony status in 1867. Later, in the 1890s, when the rubber industry became established in Malaya and Singapore, the island became a global center for sorting rubber and exporting them.

Singapore was not really affected by the First World War (1914–18), as the conflict did not spread to Southeast Asia. The only significant event during the war was the 1915 Singapore Mutiny by Muslim soldiers from British India, who were stationed in Singapore. After hearing news that they were to be sent to fight the Ottoman Empire in Europe, a Muslim state, the soldiers killed their officers and several British civilians before the mutiny was stopped by non-Muslim troops arriving from Johore and Burma.

After World War I, the British built the large Singapore Naval Base as part of the defensive Singapore strategy. First announced in 1921, the construction of the base went at a slow pace until the Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931. Costing $60 million and not fully completed in 1938, it was the largest dry dock in the world, the third-largest floating dock, and had enough fuel tanks to support the entire British Navy for six months. The base was defended by heavy naval guns stationed at Fort Siloso, Fort Canning and Labrador Park, as well as a Royal Air Force airfield at Tengah Air Base. Winston Churchill called Singapore the "Gibraltar of the East", and military discussions often referred to the base as just "East of Suez".

However, the main fleet was in Europe, and the British did not have enough money to build a second fleet to protect their Asian colonies. The plan was for the Home Fleet to sail quickly to Singapore in the event of an emergency. As a result, after World War II broke out in 1939, the fleet was busy defending Britain from Germany, leaving Singapore open for a Japanese invasion.

Due to the weak defenses of the country, the Japanese attacked Singapore and easily took control of the colony on 15 February 1942. Up to 60,000 British soldiers surrendered on that day. Churchill called it "the worst disaster and largest capitulation in British history". There were a lot of losses by both the British and the rest of the Empire, with a total of nearly 85,000 people captured. About 5,000 were killed or injured, many from Australia and India.

The people of Singapore went through hard times during the Japanese rule, until the surrender of the Japanese in September of 1945. Many people were tortured or killed by the Japanese as they did not follow the rules properly or because they were suspected of going against the Japanese. The Japanese also targeted the Chinese the most; between 5,000 and 25,000 Chinese were killed, now known as the Sook Ching massacre. The most notable anti-Japanese force was Force 136, headed by Lim Bo Seng. Its purpose was to encourage and supply resistance movements in the enemy-occupied territory and occasionally mount sabotage operations.

The hard times during World War II made the people think that the British were not as strong as before. Therefore, many people supported independence once the British had returned.

A few years after the war, in 1963, Singapore joined with Malaya, Sabah and Sarawak to form the new nation of Malaysia. Malaysia is a country with many races. In Malaya, only the Malays have special benefits. For example, the Malays could get university education more easily than other races.

As most people in Singapore are Chinese, Singapore wanted equality for all the people of Malaysia. Singapore also wanted a common market to be set up so that goods to Malaysia would not be taxed. However, this was not done and caused arguments between the state government of Singapore and the federal government of Malaysia.

Singapore separated from Malaysia and became independent on its own on 9 August 1965.

After Independence, the president of Singapore was Yusof Ishak and its prime minister was Lee Kuan Yew.

At first, many people thought Singapore's independence would not last. In 1967, Singapore helped to start the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and in 1970 it joined the Non-Aligned Movement. Lee Kuan Yew was in charge of the country as Prime Minister of Singapore and saw it become very developed.

In 1990, Goh Chok Tong replaced Lee Kuan Yew as prime minister, while Lee Kuan Yew became Senior Minister. When Goh Chok Tong was Prime Minister, Singapore went through the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the 2003 SARS outbreak and terrorist threats by Jemaah Islamiyah. In 2004, Lee Hsien Loong, the son of Lee Kuan Yew, took over as Prime Minister. Goh Chok Tong became the Senior Minister, and Lee Kuan Yew became the Minister Mentor of Singapore. Lee Kuan Yew died in 2015.

Singapore is a parliamentary republic with a Westminster system of unicameral parliamentary government representing constituencies. Its constitution states representative democracy as its political system. Singapore is ranked regularly as one of the least corrupt countries in the world, according to Transparency International.

The Cabinet has executive power, and is led by the Prime Minister, and the President. The president is elected through popular vote, and has some veto powers for a few big decisions such as the use of the national reserves and the appointment of judges, but otherwise occupies a post with little power.

The Parliament serves as the legislative branch of government. Members of Parliament (MPs) are made up of elected, non-constituency and nominated members. Elected MPs are voted into parliament on a "first-past-the-post" (plurality) system and represent either single-member or group-representation constituencies. Elections are free, and the People's Action Party has won control of Parliament with large majorities in every election since self-governance in 1959. In the most recent parliamentary elections in 2020, the largest opposition, led by the Workers' Party, increased its representation in the House to 10 elected MPs out of 93.

The legal system of Singapore is based on English common law, however with large and important local differences. Trial by jury was removed in 1970 leaving judicial judgement done completely and only by judgeship. Singapore has laws that include corporal punishment in the form of caning for rape, rioting, vandalism, and some immigration crimes. There is a mandatory death penalty for murder, and for certain drug-trafficking and firearms offences. In a 2008 survey, international business executives believed Singapore had the best judicial system in Asia.

Buddhism is the most common religion in Singapore. Other common religions include: Christianity, Islam, Taoism, and Hinduism.

Students in Singapore go through six years of compulsory primary school. During the six years, students' learning is focused on English, their mother tongue, mathematics and science. At the end of the six years, all students take the Primary School Leaving Examination (PSLE).

Depending on their results in the PSLE, students are streamed into "Special", "Express", "Normal (Academic)", and "Normal (Technical)" groups. The amount of time a student spends studying in Secondary school (4–5 years) depends on their group.

Students are taught in English, and their mother tongue, which can be Chinese, Malay or Tamil. Secondary school students may also choose to study a third language such as:

Students can take a third language as it increases their chances of getting an overseas scholarship and can improve their examination grades, especially in the GCE Ordinary Level ("O" Levels), which are Secondary students take after their five or four years of education. However, only some students can qualify to take a third language.

After their "O" Levels, students can choose to go to a polytechnic, junior college, centralised institutes or Institutes of Technical Education (ITE). Polytechnics is a place where students can study for 3 years for a diploma. Junior college is a place where students study for 2 years to receive an "A" Level. Centralised institutes is a place where students study for 3 years to receive an "A" Level. Students can also go to Institutes of Technical Education, where students study for two years to receive a "National ITE Certificate" (NITEC). This certificate is only recognized in Singapore. Students who go to ITE usually continue their education at a polytechnic.

With either a diploma, or an "A" Level certificate, students can apply to go to universities in Singapore or overseas.

The Singapore government has chosen four official languages: English, Malay, Chinese (Mandarin), and Tamil. English is the primary language. Singapore English is the main language in Singapore.

English is the first language of the nation, but it is not the most common. English is the second most commonly spoken language among Singaporeans. The most commonly spoken language among Singaporeans in their homes is Chinese (51%), followed by English (32%), Malay (13%) and Tamil (7%). This means that 32% of Singaporeans are native English speakers. Most of the rest of the people speak it as a second language. Thus, English has the largest total number of speakers including native and second language speakers. Mandarin Chinese is the second most common.

Almost 40% of people in Singapore are foreign. Most foreigners come from Asia. The country where most foreigners come from is Malaysia, its closest neighbour. In 2009, there may have been 350,000 Malaysians working in Singapore. Many Chinese-speaking foreigners and Chinese-speaking Singaporeans work in services. Thus, Chinese is the main language of many workers such as hawkers, retail assistants, hairdressers, etc. in Singapore today.

Singaporean English mainly comes from British English. The forms of English spoken in Singapore range from Standard English to a pidgin called Singlish. The Singapore government and many Singaporeans are against using Singlish. There is a "Speak Good English" campaign each year. Public schools and in the media also have rules against Singlish. There are many Singapore accents in English because of the many languages and identities of people in the city. Languages can even change over the generations and children may speak different languages and have different accents from their mother. For example, in a Singaporean Chinese family, the grandmother might speak Hokkien as her first language. Differently, the mother might speak Mandarin as her first language and Hokkien/English as her second languages, while the grandson might speak English as his first language and Mandarin as his second language.

Before independence in 1965, Hokkien, a Chinese dialect, was the common language among the Chinese laborers. Malay and English were used to communicate between the different ethnic groups. After independence in 1965, English became the first language of the nation and replaced Hokkien and Malay as the one shared language. Today, most younger Singaporeans have English as their first language or are fluent in English.

Malay is a national language of Singapore because of the history of the city. However, less than 20% of Singaporeans can read and write in Malay. Malay is still used at home by most Malay Singaporeans. The Malay used in Singapore (Bahasa Melayu) is closer to the language in Malaysia than the language in Indonesia. However, there are differences between the Malay in Singapore and in Malaysia. The national anthem "Majulah Singapura" is sung in Malay.

Many people speak Chinese – Mandarin and other Chinese dialects – in Singapore. Just over 50% of Singaporeans speak it at home, so it is the most common language in homes. Singaporean Mandarin is based on simplified Chinese and it is similar to the system used in mainland China. The forms of Mandarin spoken in Singapore range from Standard Mandarin to a pidgin known as Singdarin. Besides Mandarin, many southern Chinese dialects are also spoken in Singapore.

Hokkien used to be a lingua franca among the Singaporean Chinese so many older Singaporeans still understand Hokkien. The most common Chinese dialects spoken by Singaporeans are the Hokkien, Hainan, Teochew and Cantonese. However, Chinese dialects other than Mandarin are not allowed in the media, so these dialects are quickly dying out. Most younger Singaporeans do not speak them anymore.

Tamil, a South Indian language, is spoken by about half of Indians in Singapore. That is about 5% of all Singaporeans. However, North Indian languages such as Hindi and Punjabi are also spoken by a small group of Singaporean Indians in Singapore.

Singapore has many kinds of people and immigrants from many places. Therefore, Singaporean culture has often been described as a mix of cultures – European, Malay, Chinese, Indian and Peranakan. Also, foreigners are 42% of the population in Singapore and they are part of changing Singaporean culture.

Dining is an important part of life in Singapore. Singaporean food is an example of the many different cultures in the country. It is also an example of mixing among cultures. British, Chinese, Indian, Malay, Tamil, and Indonesian styles of cooking all mix together. It is especially known for its seafood. Typical Singaporean food includes: Satay, Nasi lemak, Chilli crab, Kaya toast, Laksa, and Hainanese chicken rice.

MediaCorp, the state-owned media corporation, operates all seven local broadcast television channels in Singapore. It also runs 13 radio stations of the 18 radio stations in Singapore. Radio and television stations are all owned by government controlled companies. However, one radio transmitter in Singapore is not controlled by the government. That is the Far Eastern Relay Station of the BBC World Service.

Print media of Singapore includes 16 newspapers and several magazines. Daily newspapers are published in English, Chinese, Malay, and Tamil.

The national flower of Singapore is Vanda Miss Joaquim. It is a type of orchid and it is a hybrid orchid. This makes Singapore the only nation in the world to have a hybrid as a national flower. It was chosen because it was part of the effort to create national pride and identity.

Singapore has a strong and free economy that supports a large middle class. The city-state is a global shipping and logistics hub and many multinational firms have their offices in Singapore. The national airline, Singapore Airlines, has a large global network which brings tourists and business travellers alike, to the city. The airline has often been ranked as the world's best airline.

Singapore also has a port located at the south of Singapore, called Keppel Harbour. It is one of the busiest ports around the world with many ships coming in to trade in a single day. Singapore also has another port on Jurong Island.

Singapore's currency is the Singapore dollar. The short name for the Singapore dollar is SGD. Brunei dollar can be used in Singapore, because they have the same value.

Singapore is made up of 63 islands, including the main island, which is known as Singapore Island to most people. It is also known as Pulau Ujong. There are two-man-made connections to Johor, Malaysia: the Johor–Singapore Causeway in the north, and the Tuas Second Link in the west. Jurong Island, Pulau Tekong, Pulau Ubin and Sentosa are the largest of Singapore's smaller islands. The highest natural point is Bukit Timah Hill at .

About 23% of Singapore's land area are forest and nature reserves. Urbanisation has removed most primary rainforest, with Bukit Timah Nature Reserve the only significant remaining forest. Even though there is very little primary rainforest left, there are more than 300 parks and four nature reserves in Singapore. There are also many trees planted all over Singapore and almost fifty per cent of the country is covered by trees and plants. Because of this, Singapore is also commonly known as the "Garden City".

Singapore, being a small country, has been reclaiming land from the sea around the island. The first time Singapore started to reclaim land was in the 1960s. The total land area of Singapore at that time was 581.5 km2 and it has increased to 730 km2 in the 2010s, which is an increase of about 20% in total land area. It may grow by another  by 2030. Some land reclamation projects involve joining smaller islands to make larger islands with more uses, like Jurong Island. Singapore uses the landfill method to reclaim the sea at the south of the country, but polders have been recently used too. The country's rapid reclamation projects has made disputes with its neighbouring countries, Malaysia and Indonesia.

Singapore is hot and wet all year round. It has a tropical rainforest climate (Af in the Köppen climate classification), which means there are no seasons (spring, summer, autumn and winter) in Singapore. There is the most rain at the end of the year, and the temperature is usually around .

Although Singapore does not experience the four seasons, the period from May to June is usually warmer, while the period from November to January is cooler because of the more frequent rains and monsoonal winds in Singapore during the year-end.

Singapore has diplomatic relations with 175 other Sovereign states. Singapore's foreign policy is to maintain a secure environment in Southeast Asia as well as the countries near Southeast Asia. A basic rule is the political and economic stability in Southeast Asia.

Singapore is part of the ASEAN (Association of the South East Asian nations) network, which is an organisation that unites all Southeast Asian countries. Member countries of ASEAN work with and help other countries in ASEAN. Singapore is one of the countries that founded ASEAN, and is the most developed country among them all.

Singapore is also part of the Commonwealth of Nations, which is for countries that used to be under the British's rule.

There are also school holidays, lasting one week in March and September, about one month in June, and about one and a half months in November and December.

Even though it is a small country, Singapore holds many world records with its buildings and people. Some are:

Singapore has one of the best infrastructure qualities in the world. Buses, trains, and taxis are easily found.

Most of Singapore is well-connected by a railway system known as the Mass Rapid Transit, or MRT in short. There are also taxi companies like Comfort Cabs, Silver Cab, SMRT Taxis, CityCab and Premier Taxi. There is one telephone number to call a taxi, of which the closest taxi from any company will respond. Apps such as Grab and Gojek as an alternative to taxi companies are also available.

The Mass Rapid Transit of Singapore is the most commonly used form of transportation in Singapore.

The Singaporean land transport system is controlled by the LTA (Land Transport Authority) of Singapore.

The Singapore Changi Airport is the main airport of Singapore. It is in the east of Singapore, with a total of four terminals with airlines flying to many different parts of the world. It has also received many awards for being the best airport in the world.

The airport is in Changi. It is on a 13 square kilometres (5.0 sq mi) site which was reclaimed from the sea.

Simón Bolívar (1783 - 1830) was a Venezuelan military and political leader. He was born in Caracas, Venezuela. He liberated many colonies from the Spanish Empire in South America. Those colonies included Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia. For a few years he was president of Gran Colombia, a country that no longer exists. And the country Bolivia is named after Simón Bolívar.

Independence of these South American countries inspired the independence of Central America and Mexico in 1811

Simón Bolívar was born in Caracas into a very rich family that owned plantations, ranches, mines, and many slaves who they forced to work in their businesses. His full name was Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Palacios Ponte-Andrade y Blanco. He was sent to school in Spain like many children of rich families were at the time. While he was in Madrid, Bolívar married María Teresa Rodríguez del Toro y Alaiza in 1802. He also learned about the ideas of the Enlightenment.

White people felt ignored because Spaniards were sent by their governor, and resented wealthy mixed heritage people who could “buy” whiteness.  The creoles started calling themselves Americans and not Spaniards to demonstrate that they wanted independence. In 1808, Napoleon conquered Spain, and made his brother, Joseph Bonaparte the new king.  The colonies in Latin America rebelled because they said they were loyal to the old king, Charles IV of Spain and not Napoleon.

On September 6th 1815 Simón Bolívar wrote a letter from Jamaica. He explained the causes and reasons why all of South America or parts of it should be independent (free from Spain's ruling).  Simón Bolívar was tired of how Venezuela and other countries were treated like slaves and how they were not free. He said “We have been harassed by a conduct which has not only deprived us of our rights but has kept us in a sort of permanent infancy with regard to public affairs.” He kept saying in the Jamaica letter why it's important to be free. “We are still in a position lower than slavery, and therefore it is more difficult for us to rise to the enjoyment of freedom.”  This means they could not even enjoy freedom.  "Because successes have been partial and spasmodic, we must not lose faith. We are young in the ways of almost all the arts and sciences, although, in a certain manner, we are old in the ways of civilized society."

On May 26, 1819 Bolívar gathered with a group of guerrillas that wanted to defeat the Spanish army. They got supplies and they crossed hundreds of miles of plains, swamps, rivers, etc. Many of the men died of hunger, diseases, and other causes on the way there. Crossing plains on August 7, they encountered the royalists and won the battle in Boyacá on August 10. Bolívar then occupied Boyacá, Colombia. Bolívar won the fight of Carabobo in June 1821, and then another in Caracas. A few days later and Venezuela was free of the Spanish royalists, then Bolívar went South and conquered Quito. On July 27, 1822 Simón Bolívar and José de San Martín met in the Guayaquil Conference.  They were preparing to march across the Andes to Peru to defeat the Spanish royalists in August 1824.  San Martin resigned his powers in Peru and went back to Argentina.  Later he went to Europe.  Bolívar launched his campaign and soon he won a small but important battle at Junín.  The royalists retreated and eventually lost.

Bolívar said that his people were in a position "lower than slavery", but many of them  owned slaves themselves. Alexandre Pétion, the president of Haiti, said that he would help Bolívar fight if he abolished slavery as part of independence. Bolívar agreed, but only because he was afraid the slaves would revolt against the slaveowners, like they did in Haiti, and he only freed slaves who agreed to fight in his army. Even though Pétion helped him, Bolívar never freed all the slaves, and slavery was not abolished until the 1850s in Colombia, Venezuela, and Ecuador.

He is still remembered and celebrated for helping many of the Latin American countries achieve independence.  People called him "El Liberator" because of this. Some people hated him because they thought he was a traitor, and he was going to be a dictator.

The Statue of Liberty (officially named Liberty Enlightening the World and sometimes referred to as Lady Liberty) is a monument symbolising the United States. The statue is placed on Liberty Island, near New York City Harbor. The statue commemorates 100 years since the signing of the United States Declaration of Independence. It was given to the United States by the people of France as a gift in 1886, to represent the friendship between the two countries established during the American Revolution. It represents a woman wearing a robe, a crown and sandals,  a broken chain. She has a torch in her raised right hand and in her left hand she holds a tablet bearing the date of the Declaration of Independence  (1776). The statue is on Liberty Island in New York Harbor, and it welcomes visitors, immigrants, and returning Americans travelling by ship.

Libertas, also known as Eleutheria, the Goddess of Liberty, and was given a temple on the Aventine Hill in  238 BC.

Frédéric Bartholdi sculpted the statue and he obtained a U.S. patent for the structure. Maurice Koechlin, who was chief engineer of Gustave Eiffel's engineering company and designer of the Eiffel Tower, designed the internal structure. The  was designed by the architect Richard Morris Hunt. Eugène Viollet-le-Duc chose copper in the construction of the statue, and for the adoption of the repoussé construction technique, where a  metal is hammered on the reverse side.

The statue is made of a covering of pure copper, left to weather to a natural blue-green patina. It has a framework of steel (originally puddled iron). The exception is the flame of the torch, which is coated in gold leaf (originally made of copper and later altered to hold glass panes). It is on a rectangular stonework . Within the foundation is an old star fort in the shape of an irregular eleven-pointed star. The statue is  tall, but with the pedestal and foundation, it is  tall.

The Statue of Liberty is one of the most recognizable symbols in the world. For many years it was one of the first glances of the United States for millions of immigrants and visitors after ocean voyages from around the world.

The statue is the central part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument, administered by the National Park Service. The National Monument also includes Ellis Island.

There are several metal plaques on or near the Statue of Liberty. A plaque on the copper just under the figure's feet declares that it is a colossal statue representing Liberty, designed by Bartholdi and built by the Paris firm of Gaget, Gauthier et Cie (Cie is the French abbreviation analogous to Co.). Another plaque declares the statue to be a gift from the people of the Republic of France that honors "the Alliance of the two Nations in achieving the Independence of the United States of America and attests their abiding friendship." The New York committee made a plaque that commemorates the fundraising done to build the pedestal. The Freemasons put another plaque on the cornerstone.

In 1903, a bronze tablet that bears the text of "The New Colossus" and commemorates Emma Lazarus was presented by friends of the poet. Until the 1986 renovation, it was mounted inside the pedestal; today it resides in the Statue of Liberty Museum in the base. It is accompanied by a tablet given by the Emma Lazarus Commemorative Committee in 1977, celebrating the poet's life.

A group of five statues is at the western end of the island.  They honor people involved in building the Statue of Liberty. The statues stand for two Americans—Pulitzer and Lazarus—and three Frenchmen—Bartholdi, Laboulaye, and Eiffel. The five statues were designed by Maryland sculptor Phillip Ratner.

In 1984, the Statue of Liberty was designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The UNESCO "Statement of Significance" describes the statue as a "masterpiece of the human spirit" that "endures as a highly potent symbol—inspiring contemplation, debate and protest—of ideals such as liberty, peace, human rights, abolition of slavery, democracy and opportunity."

Stanley Kubrick (26 July 1928 - 7 March 1999) was an American movie director. Kubrick is thought to have been one of the great directors of the 20th century.

He was born in New York City but lived most of his life in England. His movies are respected for their great amount of detail and symbolism. Some of his movies were controversial when they were first shown. For example, the sex and violence in his movie A Clockwork Orange was very disturbing to many people who saw it when it was released in 1973. The reaction to the movie in the United Kingdom became so great that Stanley Kubrick stopped showing the movie there for over 25 years. Other famous movies that Kubrick made include Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned To Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb, 2001: A Space Odyssey and The Shining. Stanley Kubrick died from a heart attack on March 7, 1999.

Kubrick was born in Manhattan, New York City, New York and lived there during his youth. Stanley was a poor student in school but his father, who was a doctor, taught Stanley how to play chess and gave him a camera. Kubrick finished high school in 1946 and could not get into a college. This was because of his poor grades in school and because colleges were full with many American soldier's who returned from World War II that same year. During this time, Kubrick played games of chess with people for money. He was a good chess player and won many games. He used the money he won from playing chess to buy food and photography equipment. Kubrick got a job at a magazine in New York City that was called Look Magazine. Kubrick also enjoyed watching movies and thought that he could make better movies than the movies that were being made at the time. He first made two small documentaries. One of them was about a boxer and was called Day of the Fight. The other documentary was about a religious man and was called Flying Padre. He then made two full-length movies (called feature films) that made other people interested in his work. The first feature film was called Fear and Desire and the other was called Killer's Kiss. His third feature film, called The Killing, was a success. The success of The Killing allowed Stanley to work on a bigger movie, called Paths of Glory, that was about World War I and was made with the famous actor Kirk Douglas. At this time Kubrick became well known in the movie industry and had started to create his own style.

After Stanley Kubrick completed Paths of Glory he tried working on a big Hollywood movie called Spartacus in 1960, about a gladiator who fights Rome. The movie made a lot of money and was a success but Kubrick did not enjoy working on it. He did not enjoy working on it because of problems he had with the other people working on the movie who controlled it. Kubrick desired to have a lot of control in making his movies, and after making Spartacus he only worked on movies that he had full control over.

In the 1962 Kubrick moved to United Kingdom to make his next movie, Lolita. He liked the United Kingdom very much and decided to live there for the rest of his life. The movie Lolita was the first movie that Kubrick made that created a lot of . The movie was based upon a book by the Russian author Vladimir Nabokov that was also very controversial at the time. The movie shows the relationship between a very young woman and an older man. This is a forbidden topic in the United States and most of the world.

For the movie Lolita, Kubrick hired the talented and famous actor Peter Sellers. Kubrick respected Peter's acting and asked him to act as 3 different characters in Kubrick's next movie, Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb, which was released in 1963. Dr. Strangelove was a comedy but it was about very serious topics. These are called black comedies. The movie was about the Cold War and was very controversial but also very successful. The movie had a large cultural influence and created some images that became very famous in the years to follow. The most famous image from the movie was of an American pilot sitting on a nuclear bomb as it fell to earth from an airplane.

Kubrick's success with Dr Strangelove convinced the movie studios that he was talented and that he could be trusted to make good, popular movies. Kubrick entered into a positive relationship with the movie studio, Warner Brothers. Warner Brothers gave him almost full artistic control on all of the movies he was to make in the future. A director being given so much control is rare. Such directors are called "auteurs".

Kubrick took five years to develop and plan his next movie. It was a science fiction movie called 2001: A Space Odyssey and it was released in 1968. Kubrick based the movie on a short story called the "The Sentinel" that was written by the science fiction author Arthur C. Clarke. Kubrick worked with Arthur C. Clarke to make the movie. The movie used many new ideas and techniques and had special effects that no other movie at the time had. The great special effects used in the movie won Kubrick his first and only Oscar award. 2001 was made during the end of the 1960's and was very popular with members of the Hippie Counterculture. This was because of the movies strange and dream-like visuals. When the movie was released it was both loved and hated by many movie critics. Many of the movie critics who did not like the movie when they saw it in 1968 have changed their opinions. Some of them have written a second, positive review of the movie many years later.

His next movie was one of his most famous and also his most controversial. The movie was titled A Clockwork Orange and was released in 1971. The movie was darker than 2001 and was originally released with an "X" motion picture rating in the US. The movie was based on a novel of the same title by the author Anthony Burgess. The novel and movie are about a criminal who is given a new and experimental 'cure' for his violent nature. The story asks questions about how society defines morality. The movie had an amount of sex and violence that was not often seen in big Hollywood movies at the time. The controversy of the movie increased when other people copied some of the acts that were committed by the characters in the movie. Kubrick and his family received violent threats from people, called death threats. These threats were serious enough that Kubrick took the movie out of theaters in Britain. The movie was not shown again in Britain until the year 2000, after Kubrick's death.

Kubrick's next movie was to going to be about Napoleon but he canceled it after another similar movie was released before his own. Kubrick worked very hard researching and learning about Napoleon and about the world at that time. Kubrick chose to make another movie set in that time that was titled Barry Lyndon. The movie was based a book by William Makepeace Thackeray and was about an 18th century gambler named Barry Lyndon. The movie was not as well liked as his previous movies but, like 2001: A Space Odyssey, it convinced people over time.

After Barry Lyndon, Kubrick made movies at a much slower rate than before. He only made three more movies in the next twenty-five years. He was still very popular and respected. Each of the movies he released became an event that many people waited for and celebrated.

The Shining was Kubrick's next movie. It was based on the book of the same name by the American author, Stephen King and was released in 1980. It was a horror movie and starred Jack Nicholson and Shelley Duvall. The movie was one of Kubrick's most mainstream movies and was very popular. It was different from the other horror movies at the time and the catch phrase, "Here's Johnny!" (which was also used on the TV's The Tonight Show hosted by Johnny Carson at the time) was made very popular after Jack Nicholson's character said it during an important scene in the movie. The author of the book Stephen King hated the movie and did not like that Kubrick changed many things from the book. King made his own version, a TV mini-series in 1997, which was much more like the book.

Full Metal Jacket was Kubrick's next movie and was released in 1987. It was one of several movies that were made in the 1980s that were about the Vietnam War. The movie was most famous for its drill instructor character, played by R. Lee Ermey, who was very cruel to his soldiers. After the movie was released, the United States Armed Forces changed some of its rules about how their drill instructors should behave.

Eyes Wide Shut was Kubrick's last movie and was released in 1999. He completed editing the movie just before his death in March. The movie starred Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman, who were married to each other in real-life at the time. It was based on the novel Traumnovelle by the Austrian writer Arthur Schnitzler. The movie took over 16 consecutive months (a world record) to complete and was released in July of 1999. According to R. Lee Ermey, of Full Metal Jacket Fame, Kubrick revealed to him that he was rather disappointed with his work. Kubrick supposedly went further, saying that both Kidman and Cruise "had their way with" him. Apparently a reference to a clashing of large-Hollywood personas to Kubrick's more reserved demeanor.

Just a few days after completing the editing of Eyes Wide Shut, Kubrick died from a heart attack in Harpenden, Hertfordshire.

In the year 2001, the American movie director Steven Spielberg filmed A.I.: Artificial Intelligence. A.I was a movie that Stanley Kubrick had worked on before Eyes Wide Shut, but did not movie. Steven Spielberg based his movie on Kubrick's plans. The movie received a poor response from audiences and did not make as much money as expected. The movie was thought to be more Spielberg's movie than Kubrick's movie.

All of Stanley Kubrick's later movies, except for The Shining, were nominated for Oscars or Golden Globes. 2001: A Space Odyssey had many technical awards, including a BAFTA award for cinematographer and an Academy Award for best visual effects. As director of special effects on the movie, Kubrick got the award. This was Kubrick's only personal Oscar win among 13 nominations. Nominations for his movies were mostly in the areas of cinematography, art design, screenwriting, and music. Only four of his movies were nominated by either an Oscar or Golden Globe for their acting performances: Spartacus, Lolita, Dr. Strangelove, and A Clockwork Orange.

Kubrick received two awards from major film festivals: "Best Director" from the Locarno International Film Festival in 1959 for Killer's Kiss, and "Bastone Bianco Award" at the Venice Film Festival in 1999 for Eyes Wide Shut. The Venice Film Festival awarded him the "Career Golden Lion" in 1997. He received the D.W. Griffith Lifetime Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America, and another life-achievement award from the Director's Guild of Great Britain, and the Career Golden Lion from the Venice Film Festival. In 2000 he received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award. After he died, the Sitges - Catalonian International Film Festival awarded him the "Honorary Grand Prize" for life achievement in 2008. He also received the Hugo Award three times for his work in science fiction.

Steel is iron mixed with carbon and sometimes other metals. It is harder and stronger than iron. Iron with more than 1.7% percent carbon by weight is named cast iron. Steel is different from wrought iron, which has little or no carbon.

Steel has a long history. People in India and Sri Lanka were making small amounts of steel more than 2,500 years ago. It was very expensive and was often used to make swords and knives. In the Middle Ages, steel could be made only in small amounts since the processes took a long time.

In the time since, there have been many changes to the way steel is made. In about the year 1610 steel started to be made in England, and the way it was made got better and cheaper over the next 100 years. Cheap steel helped start the Industrial Revolution in England and in Europe. The first industrial Converter (metallurgy) for making cheap steel was the Bessemer converter, followed by Siemens-Martin open-hearth process.

Today the most common way of making steel is the basic-oxygen process.  The converter is a large turnip-shaped vessel.  Liquid raw iron called "pig iron" is poured in and some scrap metal is added in to balance the heat. Oxygen is then blown into the iron. The oxygen burns off the extra carbon and other impurities.  Then enough carbon is added to make the carbon contents as wanted. The liquid steel is then poured. It can be either cast into molds or rolled into sheets, slabs, beams and other so-called "long products", such as railway tracks. Some special steels are made in electric arc furnaces.

Steel is most often made by machines in huge buildings called steel mills.  It is a very cheap metal and is used to make many things.  Steel is used in making buildings and bridges, and all kinds of machines. Almost all ships and cars are today made from steel. When a steel object is old, or it is broken beyond repair, it is called scrap. It can be melted down and re-shaped into a new object. Steel is recyclable material; that is, the same steel can be used and re-used.

Steel is a metal alloy which includes iron and often some carbon.

Every material is made up of atoms which are very small parts. Some atoms hold together quite well, which is what makes some solid materials hard. Something made of pure iron is softer than steel because the atoms can slip over one another. If other atoms like carbon are added, they are different from iron atoms and stop the iron atoms from sliding apart so easily. This makes the metal stronger and harder.

Changing the amount of carbon (or other atoms) added to steel will change those things that are interesting and useful about the metal. These are called the properties of the steel. Some properties are:

Steel with more carbon is harder and stronger than pure iron, but it also breaks more easily ().

There are thousands of steel types, each made of different amounts of different chemical elements.

All steels have some elements that have a bad effect, such as phosphorus (P) and sulphur (S). Steel makers take out as much P and S as possible.

Plain carbon steels are made only of iron, carbon, and undesired elements.  They fall into three general groups. Plain carbon steel with 0.05 to 0.2% carbon does not harden by heat treating.  Welding it is simple, so it is used for shipbuilding, boilers, pipes, fence wire and other purposes where low cost is important.  Plain  steels are used for springs, gears, and engine parts.  Plain carbon steel with 0.45 to 0.8% carbon is used for very hard items such as shears and machine tools.

Alloy steels are plain carbon steel with metals such as Boron (B), manganese (Mn), chromium (Cr), nickel (Ni), molybdenum (Mo), tungsten (W), and cobalt (Co) added.  These give other properties than plain carbon steel.  Alloy steels are made for specialized purposes. For example, chromium can be added to make stainless steel, which does not rust easily, or boron can be added to make very hard steel that is also not brittle.

There are a huge number of things that people make from steel. It is one of the most common and useful metals.

A lot of items made from iron in the past are now made of steel. Some of them are:

Steel grades are grades used to classify (one or more) steels by their composition and physical properties. Steel grades have been developed by some standards organizations.

China has a standard. Other countries' that have a standard, include: Czechia

Steven Allan Spielberg (born December 18, 1946) is an American movie director, movie producer and screenwriter. Spielberg is widely regarded as one of the greatest movie directors of all time and is the most commercially successful director in movie history. He is one of 22 people to have won an Emmy, Grammy, Oscar and Tony award.

He was born at The Jewish Hospital-Mercy Health  in Cincinnati, Ohio. He is from a Ukrainian Orthodox Jewish family. His parents were pianist Leah Adler (1920 2017) and engineer Arnold Spielberg (1917 2020). He started his movie career learning to direct in 1968. He was raised in Haddon Township, New Jersey. Spielberg studied at Saratoga High School. He went to California State University, Long Beach.

Spielberg started his career learning how to direct in 1963. His first movies include Jaws, Jurassic Park, Indiana Jones, and E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial. His later movies include Saving Private Ryan and Munich.

Spielberg helped establish the PG-13 rating for the Motion Picture Association of America.

Spielberg won two Academy Awards for best director. These two awards were for Schindler's List and Saving Private Ryan. In 1986, he won the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, a Lifetime Achievement Award. He has been nominated and has won several other awards. In 2023, Spielberg was nominated for another Academy Award for his movie The Fabelmans.

In Oscar acceptance speeches given since 1966, Spielberg holds the record for being thanked the most at 43 mentions, more than God and beating Harvey Weinstein who was thanked 34 times.

Spielberg married Amy Irving in 1985. They divorced in 1989. He married Kate Capshaw in 1991.

Special relativity (or the special theory of relativity) is a theory (Well supported idea) in physics that was developed and explained by Albert Einstein in 1905. It applies to all physical phenomena, so long as gravitation is not significant. Special relativity applies to "flat spacetime", which is space without gravity.

Einstein knew that some weaknesses had been discovered in older models. For example, older models said light moved in a luminiferous aether. Various tiny effects were expected if this theory were true. Gradually it seemed these predictions were not going to work out.

Eventually, in 1905, Einstein drew the conclusion that the concepts of space and time needed a fundamental rethink. His idea was special relativity, which brought together a new principle (Law), the constancy of the speed of light (the speed of light is always the same), and the previously established principle of relativity (physics is the same for everyone)

Galileo had already established the principle of relativity, which said that physical events must look the same to all observers, and no observer has the "right" way to look at the things studied by physics. For example, the Earth is moving very fast around the Sun, but we do not notice it because we are moving with the Earth at the same speed; therefore, from our point of view, the Earth is at rest. However, Galileo's math could not explain some things, such as the speed of light. According to him, the measured speed of light in an empty vacuum should be different for different speeds of the observer in comparison with its source. However, the Michelson-Morley experiment showed that this is not true, at least in a vacuum. Einstein's theory of special relativity explained this among other things.

Imagine that you are moving towards something that is also moving to you. If you measure that thing's speed, it will look like like it's moving faster than if you were not moving towards them. Now imagine the opposite, you are moving away from something that is moving toward you.  If you measure its speed again, it will look like it's moving more slowly. This is the idea of "relative speed"—the speed of the object compared to you.

Before Albert Einstein, scientists were trying to measure the "relative speed" of light. They were doing this by measuring the speed of star light reaching the Earth. They expected that if the Earth was moving toward a star, the light from that star should seem faster than if the Earth was moving away from that star. However, they noticed that no matter who performed the experiments, where the experiments were performed, or what star light was used, the measured speed of light in a vacuum was always the same.

Einstein said this happens because there is something unexpected about length and duration, or how long something lasts. He thought that as Earth moves through space, all measurable durations change a little bit. A clock used to measure a duration will be wrong by exactly the amount so that the speed of light remains the same. Imagining a "light clock" allows us to better understand this remarkable fact for the case of a single light wave.

Einstein also said that as Earth moves through space, all measurable lengths change (but just by a little). A thing measuring both length and time will give a length and time so that the speed of light remains the same.

The most difficult thing to understand is that events that appear to be simultaneous (Happening at the same time) in one frame may not be simultaneous in another. This has many effects that are not easy to understand. Since the length of an object is the distance from head to tail in one particular moment, it means that if two observers disagree about what events are simultaneous then this will change (sometimes by a lot) what they think the measurements of the length of objects are. Furthermore, if a line of clocks look the synchronised/the same to an observer who is standing still and then appear to become out of sync to that same observer after they accelerate to a certain velocity, this means that during that acceleration, the clocks ran at different speeds. Some may even turn run backwards. This kind of thinking leads to general relativity.

Other scientists before Einstein had written about light seeming to go the same speed no matter how it was observed. What made Einstein's theory so note worthy is that it considers the measurement of the speed of light to be constant by definition, in other words it is a basic law of how the Universe works. This has big implications because speed-related measurements, length and duration, must change in order to accommodate this.

Einstein's theory here was inspired by some Mathematical works called the "Lorentz transformations". These are equations (a way scientists calculate something). This particular equation tell us how we can calculate the way time and space changes (in the context of special relativity), for example: when two people are moving at constant velocities relative to each other, without acceleration.

To describe these transformations (The way it changes), we use the Cartesian coordinate system to show where and when the events take place. Every observer can describe an event using four "coordinates": (x, y, z, t). The letters x, y, z tell us where the thing is, and t is for the time.

The spatial position (where something is) is described as "from" an origin point, a thing happening at (3, 3, 3) is 3 units away (in each direction) from the "origin" point which is  (0, 0, 0). The time marker t likewise tells us when something happened, usually scientists use minutes or seconds so 3 could be 3 minutes from the "origin" or start.

The time of an event is when that thing occurred or happened. Not when someone first noticed or observed it. If someone observed an event and wanted to calculate when it actually happened, we subtract the time it took for the signal (such as light) to travel from the event to the observer from the observed time. In other words, record when the thing was noticed and then subtract how long it takes for the thing to travel from the point to the observer.

This equation (how scientists calculate something) is correct  because distance, divided by speed gives the time it takes to go that distance at that speed (e.g. 30 miles divided by 10 mph: give us 3 hours, because if you go at 10 mph for 3 hours, you go 30 miles). So we have:

This equation is useful because we can use it to measure time. If we know the distance (how far something is) and how fast it travels (Velocity) we can work out exactly what time it occurred. Consider this example:

An event in spacetime is described by the coordinates (t,x,y,z) in reference frame S, and by (t′,x′,y′,z′) in another frame S′, which is moving at a constant velocity v relative to S, specifically along the x-axis.

Solving the above four transformation equations for the unprimed coordinates yields the inverse Lorentz transformation:

By applying the Lorentz transformation but backwards (use -v in place of v(, we find that the unprimed frame (S) appears to move at velocity v′ = −v when observed from the primed frame (S′). This reciprocity confirms the symmetry of relative motion between inertial frames.

Importantly, the x-axis is not uniquely special. The Lorentz transformation can be generalized to motion along any direction in space. The key distinction lies in components:

For full generalization, the Lorentz transformation extends to arbitrary directions via vector decomposition into parallel and perpendicular components relative to the motion vector.

A physical quantity that remains unchanged under Lorentz transformations is called a Lorentz scalar. Examples include the spacetime interval and the rest mass of a particle.

Writing the Lorentz transformation and its inverse in terms of coordinate differences, where one event has coordinates  and , another event has coordinates and , and the differences are defined as

If we take differentials instead of taking differences, we get

In special relativity, the momentum  and the total energy  of an object as a function of its mass  are

A very common mistake (also in some books) is to rewrite this using a "relativistic mass" (in the direction of motion) of .

The reason why this is not right is that light, for example, has no mass, but has energy. If we use the incorrect equation here, the photon (particle of light) has a mass, which is incorrect according to experiments.

In special relativity, an object's mass, total energy and momentum are related by the equation

For an object at rest,  so the above equation simplifies to . Hence, a massive object at rest still has energy. We call this rest energy and denote it by :

The need for special relativity arose from Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism, which were published in 1865. It was later found that they call for electromagnetic waves (such as light) to move at a constant speed (i.e., the speed of light).



However, In 1895, Lorentz and Fitzgerald said that the null result of the previously mentioned Michelson-Morley experiment could be explained by the "ether wind contracting the experiment in the direction of motion of the ether". We now know that this effect is called the Lorentz contraction, and (without ether) is a consequence of special relativity.

In 1899, Lorentz first published his "Lorentz equations".  Although this was not in fact the first time they had been published, it was the first time that they were used to suggest why Michelson-Morley's experiment had a null result, since the Lorentz contraction is a result of them.

In 1900, the French scientist Poincaré gave a famous speech in which he debated the possibility that some "new physics" was needed to explain the Michelson-Morley experiment, in other words that something unknown needed to be discovered to explain the results of Morley's experiment

In 1904, Lorentz showed that electrical and magnetic fields can be modified (made into) one another through the previously mentioned Lorentz transformations.

In 1905, Einstein published his article introducing his special relativity idea, it was called "On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies", in the German scientific journal Annalen der Physik.  In the article, he wrote about simple relativity and it's fundamental ideas, and in the process made the Lorentz transformations from them, he also (completely unaware that Lorentz had already discovered this the year earlier) showed how the Lorentz Transformations affect electric and magnetic fields.

Later in 1905, Einstein published another article presenting E = mc2.

In 1908, Max Planck agreed with Einstein's theory and named it "relativity".  In that same year, Hermann Minkowski gave a famous speech on Space and Time in which he showed that relativity is self-consistent and further developed the theory.  These events forced the physics community to take relativity seriously.  Relativity came to be more and more accepted after that.

In 1912, Einstein and Lorentz were nominated (suggested) for the Nobel prize in physics due to their excellent work on relativity.  Unfortunately, relativity was very controversial at the time, and for a long time after, many people did not like Einstein's theory. This meant he did not win the prize for it (although he would later win it, for unrelated work in 1921).

Snakes, otherwise known as serpentes, are reptiles. They are part of the order Squamata. They are carnivores, with long narrow bodies and no legs. There are at least 20 families, about 500 genera and 3,400 species of snake.

The earliest known snake fossils are from the Middle Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous periods. Scientists think snakes evolved from lizard-like ancestors around 100 million years ago.  A wide range of snakes appeared during the Paleocene period (c 66 to 56 million years ago).

Bone fossils show how snakes have adapted to their surroundings, enabling them to become successful predators in various ecosystems. Over time, the snake skull has evolved and become more flexible, which makes it possible to swallow prey whole. Snakes also lost their legs over time and developed elongated bodies, which helped them move more efficiently.

The Squamata, ancestors of snakes and lizards, are a monophyletic group - descended from a single ancestor. It is a sister group to the Tuatara.

Judged by their fossil record, squamates existed in the Mesozoic era, but they had a minor place in the land ecology. Three of the six lines are recorded first in the Upper Jurassic, the others in the Cretaceous. Probably all, certainly the lizards, arose earlier in the Jurassic. The Mosasaurs of the Upper Cretaceous were by far the most successful of all the lizards, becoming the top predator in their ecosystem.

Although snakes and lizards look very different, neither is a proper clade. Snakes did descend from early lizards, not once, but many different times.

There is a monophyletic clade within the Squamata. It is the Toxicofera. It includes all venomous snakes and lizards, and many related non-venomous species. The evidence for this is in recent molecular analyses.

Scientists have a fossil of a primitive snake from the Lower Cretaceous epoch. It lived about 113 million years ago. It had rather small front and rear legs. Several other fossil snakes have been found with small rear legs, but this is the first one with all four legs.

The snake, Tetrapodophis amplectus, lived on land and was adapted to burrowing. The researcher said there were "a lot of very advanced snake features, including its hooked teeth, flexible jaw and spine – and even snake-like scales. And there's the gut contents – it's swallowed another vertebrate. It was preying on other animals, which is a snake feature". The snake came from the Crato Formation in Brazil, and lay in a private collection for many years. It was re-discovered in a museum at Solnhofen, Bavaria.

Most snake species live in the tropics. Few live beyond the Tropic of Cancer or Tropic of Capricorn. Only one species, the common viper (Vipera berus), lives beyond the Arctic Circle.

Most snakes live on the ground, and in the trees. Others live in the water, and a few live under the soil. Like other reptiles, snakes are ectotherms. They control their body temperature by moving in and out of the direct sunshine. That is why they are rare in cold places.

Most snakes are nonvenomous. Those that have venom use it mainly to kill and subdue prey rather than for self-defense. Some have venom potent enough to cause painful injury or death to humans. Nonvenomous snakes either swallow prey alive or kill by squeezing.

Snakes range in size from the tiny, 10.4 cm (4 inch)-long thread snake to the reticulated python of  in length. The extinct snake Titanoboa was  long.

Many species have skulls with more joints than the skulls of their lizard ancestors. This allows the snakes to swallow prey much larger than their heads. The bones of the head and jaws can move apart to let large prey move into their body. The throat, stomach and intestines can also expand. In this way, a thin-looking snake can swallow and digest a larger animal.

Their long, slender body has some special features. They have overlapping scales which protect them, and help them move and climb trees. The scales have colours which may be camouflage or warning colours.

In their narrow bodies, snakes' paired organs (such as kidneys) appear one in front of the other instead of side by side. Most have only one working lung. Some species have kept a pelvic girdle with a pair of vestigial claws on either side of the cloaca. They have no eyelids or external ears. They can hiss, but otherwise make no vocal sounds.

Snakes need to shed their skin regularly while they grow. This is called moulting.

Snakes shed their skin by rubbing their head against something rough and hard, like a piece of wood or a rock. This causes the skin, which is already stretched, to  open. The snake keeps on rubbing its skin on various rough objects until the skin peels off from its head. This lets it crawl out, turning the skin inside out.

All snakes are carnivorous; they eat other animals. Some are venomous; they inject venom along grooves in their teeth. Other snakes are constrictors. Constrictors are not venomous, so they squeeze their prey to death. All snakes swallow their food whole, and they cannot chew.

Because snakes are cold-blooded, they do not have to eat as regularly as mammals. People who own pet snakes feed them as infrequently as once per month. Some snakes can go as long as six months without a good meal.

Snakes have a very flexible lower jaw; its two halves are not rigidly attached. Neither are many other joints in their skulls. This enables snakes to open their mouths wide enough to swallow their prey whole, even if the prey is larger in diameter than the snake itself.

Snakes can move even without arms and legs. They have developed several different ways of moving to deal with particular environments. Each type of snake movement is distinct from the others.

Lateral undulation is a snake's only way of moving in water, though snakes commonly use it on land. In this mode, the body of the snake alternately bends to the left and right, resulting in a series of rearward-moving "waves".

While this movement appears rapid, snakes have rarely been seen moving faster than two body-lengths per second, often much less. A snake moving this way burns as many calories per metre as a running lizard does.

Terrestrial lateral undulation is the most common mode of moving for most snake species. In this mode, the posteriorly moving waves push against contact points in the environment, such as rocks, twigs, and irregularities in the soil. The movement is just the same over sand and in water. The movement makes a force against the ground, sand, or water. This gives forward thrust.

The speed of the movement depends upon the density of push-points in the environment. The wave speed is the same as the snake's speed, and as a result, every point on the snake's body follows the path of the point ahead of it. Snakes move through dense vegetation, small openings, sand, and water all quite well.

Snakes move forward in water by moving their bodies in a wave-like motion. The waves become larger as they move down the snake's body, and the wave travels backwards faster than the snake moves forwards. They achieve thrust by pushing their body against the water.

Studies show that the pattern of muscle activation is somewhat different in lateral undulation on land compared to in water.  All snakes can laterally undulate forward (with backward-moving waves), but only sea snakes have been observed reversing the motion (moving backwards with forward-moving waves).

This is most often used by colubroid snakes (colubrids, elapids, and vipers). They use it in environments where there is nothing firm to push against, like a slick mud flat or a sand dune.

Sidewinding is a modified form of lateral undulation in which all of the body segments oriented in one direction remain in contact with the ground, while the other segments are lifted up. This results in a peculiar "rolling" motion. This mode of moving overcomes the slippery nature of sand or mud by pushing off with only static portions on the body, thereby minimizing slipping.

The static nature of the contact points can be shown from the tracks of a sidewinding snake, which show each belly scale imprint, without any smearing. This mode of moving has very low caloric cost, less than  of the cost for a lizard or normal snake to move the same distance.

When push-points are absent, but the space is too narrow for sidewinding (like in tunnels), snakes rely on concertina moving. In this mode, the snake braces the back part of its body against the tunnel wall while the front of the snake extends and straightens. The front portion then flexes and forms an anchor point, and the back part is straightened and pulled forwards.

This mode of moving is slow and very demanding, needing up to seven times the energy of laterally undulating over the same distance. This high cost is due to the repeated stops and starts of portions of the body as well as the need to use the muscles to brace against the tunnel walls.

The slowest mode of snake moving is rectilinear moving, which is also the only one where the snake does not need to bend its body laterally, though it may do so when turning. In this mode, the belly scales are lifted and pulled forward before being placed down and the body pulled over them. Waves of movement and stasis pass posteriorly, resulting in a series of ripples in the skin. The ribs of the snake do not move in this mode of moving.

Large pythons, boas, and vipers use this method when stalking prey across open ground, because it makes the snake's movements more subtle and harder for prey to detect.

The movement of snakes in trees has only recently been studied. While on tree branches, snakes use several modes of moving depending on species and bark texture. In general, snakes will use a modified form of concertina moving on smooth branches, but will laterally undulate if contact points are available. Snakes move faster on small branches and when contact points are present. This differs from limbed animals, which do better on large branches with little 'clutter'.

Gliding snakes (Chrysopelea) in southeast Asia launch themselves from branch tips, spreading their ribs and laterally undulating as they glide between trees. These snakes can perform a controlled glide for hundreds of feet depending upon launch altitude and can even turn in midair.

A skeleton is the hard structure that protects the internal organs of a living thing. Skeletons can be inside the body or outside the body. In mammals, which include humans, the skeleton is made of bones. All the bones, when they are joined together, make the "skeletal system" of a body. The skeletal system or "skeleton" is under the skin, the muscle and the tissue of the body. The skeleton supports the skin, muscle and tissue, and all the organs that are inside the body. The skeleton protects important internal organs like the brain, heart and lungs. If humans did not have a skeleton then the body would be flat, as the skeleton gives the body its frame.

The important parts of a human body are the head (skull), the spine, the chest, the abdomen, the arms and hands, and the legs and feet.

The spine supports the head, the chest and the structure that carries the arms. It is made of small bones called vertebrae. The spine, all together, is called the spinal column. It is not straight, but has curves that help to support the body, and help the person to move and bend. One bone is a "vertebra". More than one are "vertebrae".

The "vertebrae" have different names, depending on the part of the body they are joined to.

This part of the body is made of the sacrum and the two pelvic bones which are joined to it on either side. The pelvic bones are carried by the leg bones, and they support the "spinal column". Each pelvic bone has a strong structure for the leg bone to fit into, so that a person can stand, walk, run and jump. Each pelvic bone spreads into a large flat plate which supports the person's internal organs. The pelvis of a woman spreads into a wider shape than of a man, so that when the woman is pregnant, the baby is supported by the pelvis, until it is ready to be born. At the bottom of the pelvis is a large opening, big enough for a baby to pass through.

The chest is called the thorax, and the vertebrae that are part of it are the thoracic vertebrae. The thorax is made up of long flat curved bones called ribs. At the back, the ribs are joined to the vertebrae. At the front, most of the ribs are joined to the sternum, which is often called the "breast bone". All together, the "thorax" protects the heart, lungs and stomach.

At the top of the "thorax" is the shoulder girdle. This is made of two thin horizontal bones at the front, joined to the "sternum". These two bones are called the clavicles or "collar bones". At the back of the "thorax" are two flat triangular-shaped bones called the scapulae, or "shoulder blades". The clavicles and scapulae come together on each side to make "shoulders". The bones of the arms fit into sockets (cup-like holes) in the "scapulae".

Arms and legs both have a thicker bone at the top and two thinner bones at the bottom. They both have a rotating joint at the top, and a hinge joint in the middle. The hands and feet have lots of bones and are joined to the arms and legs by small bones with sliding parts.

A skeleton, or just a skull, has often been used as a symbol for death and poison.

Skeletons, particularly living skeletons, have often been used in horror stories and comedies.

Sigmund Freud (Moravia, 6 May 1856 – London, 23 September 1939) was an Austrian neurologist (a person who treats the nervous system). He invented the treatment of mental illness and neurosis by means of psychoanalysis.

Freud is important in psychology because he studied the unconscious mind. The unconscious part of the mind cannot be easily controlled or noticed by a person.

In 1860, he and his family moved to Vienna. He did well in school and became a doctor. Freud married Martha Bernays in 1886. They had six children.

Freud lived in Austria in the 1930s. After the Anschluss, Germany and Austria were combined. Because he was Jewish, he received a visit from the Gestapo. Freud and his family did not feel safe anymore. Freud left Vienna and went to England in June 1938.

Freud developed a theory of the human mind (its organisation and operations). He also had a theory that human behaviour both conditions and results from how the mind is organised.

This led him to favor certain clinical techniques for trying to help cure mental illness. He theorised that personality is developed by a person's childhood experiences.

Freud began his study of medicine at the University of Vienna at the age of 17. He got his M.D. degree in 1881 at the age of 25 and entered private practice in neurology for financial reasons.

Freud hoped that his research would provide a solid scientific basis for his therapeutic technique. The goal of Freudian therapy, or psychoanalysis, was to bring repressed thoughts and feelings into consciousness in order to free the patient from suffering distorted emotions.

Classically, the bringing of unconscious thoughts and feelings to consciousness is brought about by encouraging a patient to talk in free association and to talk about dreams.

In November 1880 Breuer was called in to treat a highly intelligent 21-year-old woman (Bertha Pappenheim) for a persistent cough which he diagnosed as hysterical. He found that while nursing her dying father she had developed a number of transitory symptoms, including visual disorders and paralysis and contractures of limbs, which he also diagnosed as hysterical.

Breuer began to see his patient almost every day as the symptoms increased and became more persistent. He found that when, with his encouragement, she told fantasy stories her condition improved, and most of her symptoms had disappeared by April 1881. However, following the death of her father in that month her condition deteriorated again. Breuer recorded that some of the symptoms eventually remitted spontaneously, and that full recovery was achieved by inducing her to recall events that had precipitated the occurrence of a specific symptom. This recovery is disputed.

Freud famously proposed that unconscious memories of infantile sexual abuse were at the root of the psychoneuroses. However, patients were generally unconvinced that Freud's clinical procedure indicated actual sexual abuse. He reported that even after a supposed "reproduction" of sexual scenes the patients assured him emphatically of their disbelief.

As a medical researcher, Freud was an early user and proponent of cocaine as a stimulant as well as analgesic. He wrote several articles on the antidepressant qualities of the drug and he was influenced by friend and confidant Wilhelm Fliess, who recommended cocaine for the treatment of "nasal reflex neurosis".

Freud felt that cocaine would work as a cure for many conditions and wrote a well-received paper, "On Coca", explaining its virtues. He prescribed it to his friend Ernst von Fleischl-Marxow to help him overcome a morphine addiction acquired while treating a disease of the nervous system. Freud also recommended cocaine to many of his close family and friends.

Reports of addiction and overdose began to come from many parts of the world. Freud's medical reputation became somewhat tarnished because of this early ambition. Furthermore, Freud's friend Fleischl-Marxow developed an acute case of 'cocaine psychosis' as a result of Freud's prescriptions, and died a few years later. Freud felt great regret over these events.

Freud made arguments about the importance of the unconscious mind in understanding conscious thought and behavior.

However the unconscious was not discovered by Freud. Historian of psychology Mark Altschule concluded, "It is difficult—or perhaps impossible—to find a nineteenth-century psychologist or psychiatrist who did not recognize unconscious thought as not only real but of the highest importance". Freud's advance was not to uncover the unconscious but to devise a method for systematically studying it.

Freud called dreams the "royal road to the knowledge of the unconscious in mental life". This meant that dreams illustrate the "logic" of the unconscious mind. Freud developed his first topology of the psyche in The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) in which he proposed that the unconscious exists and described a method for gaining access to it. The preconscious was described as a layer between conscious and unconscious thought; its contents could be accessed with a little effort.

One key factor in the operation of the unconscious is 'repression'. Freud believed that many people repress painful memories deep into their unconscious mind.

Freud hoped his model was universally valid and so turned to ancient mythology and ethnography for comparative material. Freud named his new theory the Oedipus complex after the famous Greek tragedy Oedipus Rex by Sophocles. "I found in myself a constant love for my mother, and jealousy of my father. I now consider this to be a universal event in childhood." Freud said. Freud sought to anchor this pattern of development in the dynamics of the mind. Each stage is a progression into adult sexual maturity, characterized by a strong ego and the ability to delay gratification (cf. Three essays on the theory of Sexuality).

He used the Oedipus conflict to point out how much he believed that people desire incest and must repress that desire. The Oedipus conflict was described as a state of psychosexual development and awareness.

Freud originally thought child sexual abuse was a general explanation for the origin of neuroses, but he abandoned this so-called "seduction theory". He noted finding many cases in which apparent memories of childhood sexual abuse were based more on imagination than on real events.

During the late 1890s Freud, who never abandoned his belief in the sexual cause of neuroses, began to emphasize fantasies built around the Oedipus complex as the primary cause of hysteria and other neurotic symptoms. Despite this change in his explanatory model, Freud always recognized that some neurotics had in fact been sexually abused by their fathers. He explicitly discussed several patients whom he knew to have been abused.

Freud also believed that the libido developed in individuals by changing its object, a process called sublimation. He argued that humans are born "polymorphously perverse", meaning that any number of objects could be a source of pleasure. He further argued that, as humans develop, they become fixated on different and specific objects through their stages of development – first in the oral stage (exemplified by an infant's pleasure in nursing), then in the anal stage (exemplified by a toddler's pleasure in evacuating his or her bowels), then in the phallic stage.

Freud argued that children then passed through a stage in which they fixated on the mother as a sexual object (known as the Oedipus Complex) but that the child eventually overcame and repressed this desire because of its taboo nature. The repressive or dormant latency stage of psychosexual development comes before the sexually mature genital stage of psychosexual development.

In his later work, Freud proposed that the human psyche could be divided into three parts: Id, ego, and super-ego. Freud discussed this model in the 1920 essay Beyond the Pleasure Principle, and fully elaborated upon it in The Ego and the Id (1923). The Id is the impulsive, childlike portion of the psyche that operates on the "pleasure principle" and only takes into account what it wants and disregards all consequences.

The term Ego entered the English language in the late 18th century. Ego is Latin for 'I'. It attempts to balance the desires of the Id with reality. It tries to act ways that will bring benefit in the long term, rather than bring grief.

The term Id ('the It' or 'the Thing') represents the primitive urges to possess, conquer, dominate and achieve pleasure. It can be seen very clearly in young children, who have not yet learnt to mask their feelings.

The Super-ego is the moral component of the psyche, which makes a clear distinction between right and wrong, and makes no allowance for special circumstances.

The rational Ego attempts to get a balance between the impractical hedonism of the Id and the equally impractical moralism of the Super-ego; it is the part of the psyche that is usually reflected most directly in a person's actions.

When overburdened or threatened by its tasks, the Ego may employ defense mechanisms including denial, repression, and displacement. The theory of ego defense mechanisms has received empirical validation, and the nature of repression, in particular, became one of the more fiercely debated areas of psychology in the 1990s.

Freud believed that humans were driven by two conflicting central desires: the life drive which is called "Eros" (survival, propagation, hunger, thirst, and sex) and the death drive (Thanatos).

Freud recognized the death drive only in his later years and developed his theory of it in Beyond the Pleasure Principle.

Freud acknowledged the tendency for the unconscious to repeat unpleasurable experiences in order to desensitize, or deaden, the body. This compulsion to repeat unpleasurable experiences explains why traumatic nightmares occur in dreams, as nightmares seem to contradict Freud's earlier conception of dreams purely as a site of pleasure, fantasy, and desire.

On the one hand, the life drives promote survival by avoiding extreme unpleasure and any threat to life. On the other hand, the death drive functions simultaneously toward extreme pleasure, which leads to death. Freud addressed the conceptual dualities of pleasure and unpleasure, as well as sex/life and death, in his discussions on masochism and sadomasochism. The tension between life drive and death drive represented a revolution in his manner of thinking.

There are four main charges against the orthodox view of Freud. They are:

Anthony Clare, psychiatrist and broadcaster, described Freud as a "ruthless and devious ", and that "many of the foundations stones of psychoanalysis are phoney".

A species is a kind of organism. It is a basic unit of biological classification, and a formal rank in taxonomy. Originally, the word was used informally in a rather vague way, but now there are at least 26 different ways it is used.

All animals or plants that are the same kind belong to the same species. Wolves (Canis lupus) are one species. Humans (Homo sapiens) are another species. Broadly, the idea is that, for example, cats breed with cats and produce more cats. This is the basis for deciding to have a species called Felis catus. However, to give a simple definition of 'species' is difficult, and many people have tried.

Species is a word for a particular kind of living thing, for example, a jackdaw. Jackdaws and ravens are similar, so they are together in a larger group (taxon) called a genus, in this case Corvus. Then there is a family (such as the crow family, which includes crows and ravens as well as jays and magpies). Families are put together into orders such as the songbirds, which includes many families of birds. The next group is the class; all birds are in the same class. After that is the phylum, such as vertebrates, which is all animals with backbones. Last of all is the kingdom, like the animal kingdom. These are ways to classify living things.

There is a mnemonic to help people remember the order of the divisions which are listed again below: "King Phillip Came Over For Great Spaghetti".

Take as an example the bird called a Common Loon or Great Northern Diver:

There is a long history of disagreement over whether species are objective things, or whether they are man-made labels. Those who think species are objectively different point to things which 'good' species do. They look similar, and they breed true, that is, mate with their own kind, and have offspring which are obviously in the same species.

Against this are the many exceptions. There are species which shade gradually into other species, and which interbreed in overlapping populations (see ring species). On the other hand, there are species which look absolutely identical, but which do not breed together (sibling species).

It is quite clear that 'species' as used by palaeontologists and 'species' as used by other biologists cannot be the same. A palaeontologist can only use visible features of a fossil, which are only a small part of the traits of a living species. Not only that, but many species which are virtually identical can only be distinguished by their DNA. This relatively recent discovery of sibling species is very important, and their numbers are growing rapidly. We underestimated the effect of convergent evolution.

The greatest change in the species concept was made by Charles Darwin, for evolution meant that hard-and-fast lines could not be drawn between species. Another shift came when Ernst Mayr proposed the biological species concept, which emphasized the interbreeding population as the heart of the species concept. This meant that, in his view, species were objective, that is not just the subjective opinion of a taxonomist. His explanation of the process of speciation was geographical isolation between populations which had once been interbreeding. Today, emphasis has moved back closer to Darwin's ideas.

According to the most recent estimate, there are about 8.7 million species on Earth. This counts only eukaryote organisms. It leaves out bacteria, archaea and viruses.

Fewer than a quarter of the species have not been identified, named and catalogued. At the present rate, it might take over 1000 years to complete this job. Some will become extinct before this count is complete.

Spiders (class Arachnida, order Araneae) are air-breathing arthropods. They have eight legs, and mouthparts (chelicerae) with fangs that inject venom. Most make silk. The spiders are seventh in number of species of all animal orders. About 53,000 spider species, and 136 families have been recorded by taxonomists. Over twenty different classifications have been proposed since 1900.p3

Spiders live on every continent except for Antarctica, and in nearly every habitat with the exceptions of air and sea.

Almost all spiders are predators, and most eat insects. They catch their prey in several ways. Some build a spider web, and some use a thread of silk that they throw at the insect. Some kinds of spiders hide in holes in the ground, then run out and grab an insect that walks by. Others will make web 'nets' to throw at passing insects. Or they go out and simply attack their prey. Some can jump quite well and hunt by sneaking close to an insect and then jumping on it.

Spiders have a two-part body, the front part (cephalothorax) and the abdomen. Unlike insects, spiders do not have antennae. The more advanced spiders have a centralized nervous system, with their ganglia fused into one mass in the cephalothorax. Unlike most arthropods, spiders have no extensor muscles in their limbs, and extend them by hydraulic pressure.

The smallest of full-grown spiders can be less than 4 mm. (0.1 inch). The largest of spiders can have a body length of 10 cm. (4 inches) or more. The largest can weigh 150 grams (5.3 oz). The largest of spiders are the tarantulas and the huntsman spiders. Some huntsman spiders in South East Asia can have a leg span of around 250–300 mm (9.8–11.8 in).

Most spiders have four pairs of eyes on the top-front area of the body, arranged in patterns that vary from one family to another. The main eyes at the front are capable of forming images. Jumping spiders have visual acuity which is ten times better than that of dragonflies, which have by far the best vision among insects. The spiders do this by a telephoto-like series of lenses, a four-layered retina. They can swivel their eyes and put together images from different stages in the scan. The downside is that the scanning and integrating processes are relatively slow.

Spiders and other arthropods have modified their cuticles into elaborate arrays of sensors. Various sensors, mostly bristles, respond to touch, from strong contact to very weak air currents. Chemical sensors provide equivalents of taste and smell. Spiders also have in the joints of their limbs sensors that detect forces and vibrations. In web-building spiders all these mechanical and chemical sensors are more important than the eyes. The eyes are more important to spiders that hunt actively. Like most arthropods, spiders lack balance sensors, and rely on their eyes to tell them which way is up.

The fangs are hollow, like the needles used to give injections. Spiders use their fangs to inject toxins that kill the insects they will eat. Some kinds of spider venom attack the nervous systems of their prey, and other kinds of venom attack body tissues.

Spiders are predators, and eat insects and other arthropods (including other spiders). Most use venom from their fangs to kill their prey. It is rare for spiders to capture prey that are much larger than they are. It is also difficult for most spiders to capture prey that are very much smaller than they are. There are some spiders that form colonies. Spiders eat not only spiders of other species, but spiders of their own species.

The black widow spider got its name because the females sometimes eat the males that mate with them. This may also happen in other species. Each species of spider has its own way of communicating with other spiders they meet. Because of the danger of being eaten, in some species the males have special hooks on their front legs with which they hold the female while they mate. Others bring the female something to eat. There are a few species in which the male spiders construct their own little webs that are connected to the webs of the females. In these species, the male is so much smaller than the female that it would be difficult for her to actually capture the male.

Most spiders have such poor vision that they will not even notice a dead insect. Jumping spiders are one exception to this rule. They have such good vision that they can find recently dead flies or other insects to eat.

Spiders are basically predators, but some have other food sources. The jumping spider Bagheera kiplingi gets over 90% of its food from fairly solid plant material produced by acacias as part of a beneficial relationship with a species of ant.

Young spiders of several families feed on plant nectar. Studies have shown that they do this for long periods. They also clean themselves regularly while feeding. These spiders also prefer sugar solutions to plain water, which shows that they are looking for nutrients. Many spiders are nocturnal, they are most active during the night. The extent of nectar consumption by spiders may therefore have been under-estimated. Nectar contains amino acids, lipids, vitamins and minerals in addition to sugars. Studies have shown that other spider species live longer when nectar is available. Feeding on nectar also avoids the risks of struggles with prey, and the costs of producing venom and digestive enzymes. Since nectar is a flowering plant production, its consumption by spiders came quite late in their evolution.

Various species are known to feed on dead arthropods (scavenging), web silk, and their own shed exoskeletons. Pollen caught in webs may also be eaten, and studies have shown that young spiders have a better chance of survival if they have the opportunity to eat pollen. In captivity, several spider species are also known to feed on bananas, marmalade, milk, egg yolk and sausages.

The best-known method spiders use to capture prey is a sticky web. The placing of the web allows different spiders to trap different insects in the same area. Flat, horizontal webs allow them to trap insects that fly up from vegetation underneath, for example. Flat vertical nets allow them to trap insects in flight. The spiders that build webs usually do not see very well, but they are very sensitive to vibrations.

Females of the water spider Argyroneta aquatica build underwater "diving bell" webs which they fill with air and use while eating their prey, molting, mating, and raising offspring. They live almost entirely within the bells, darting out to catch prey animals that touch the bell or the threads that anchor it. A few spiders use the surfaces of lakes and ponds as "webs", detecting trapped insects by the vibrations that these cause while struggling.

Net-casting spiders weave only small webs but then manipulate them to trap prey. They stretch their webs and then release them when prey strike them. Those of the family Deinopidae weave even smaller webs, hold them outstretched between their first two pairs of legs, and lunge and push the webs as much as twice their own body length to trap prey, and this move may increase the webs' area by a factor of up to ten. Experiments have shown that Deinopis spinosus has two different techniques for trapping prey: backwards strikes to catch flying insects, whose vibrations it detects; and forward strikes to catch ground-walking prey that it sees. These two techniques have also been observed in other deinopids. Walking insects form most of the prey of most deinopids, but one population of Deinopis subrufus appears to live mainly on tipulid flies that they catch with the backwards strike.

Mature female bolas spiders of the genus Mastophora build "webs" that consist of only a single "trapeze line", which they patrol. They also construct a bolas made of a single thread, tipped with a large ball of very wet sticky silk. They emit chemicals that resemble the pheromones of moths, and then swing the bolas at the moths. They catch about the same weight of insects per night as web-weaving spiders of similar size. The spiders eat the bolas if they have not made a kill in about 30 minutes, rest for a while, and then make new bolas. Juveniles and adult males are much smaller and do not make bolas. Instead they release different pheromones that attract moth flies, and catch them with their front pairs of legs.

The primitive Liphistiidae, the "trapdoor spiders" (family Ctenizidae) and many tarantulas are ambush predators. They lurk in burrows, often closed by trapdoors and surrounded by networks of silk threads that alert these spiders to the presence of prey. Other ambush predators do without such aids, including many crab spiders. A few species that prey on bees, which see ultraviolet, can adjust their ultraviolet reflectance to match the flowers in which they are lurking. Wolf spiders, jumping spiders, fishing spiders and some crab spiders capture prey by chasing it, and rely mainly on vision to get their prey.

Not all spiders use silk to net their prey. Instead, these spiders may capture insects by grabbing them and then biting them. Among these kinds of spiders the two best known are the wolf spiders and the jumping spiders.

A wolf spider will usually wait until an insect comes near to it, and then rush at the insect, grab it using its front legs, and then bite the insect so that its venom can do its work.

Female wolf spiders lay their eggs on a pad of silk and then draw the edges together to create a round ball that they carry along with them wherever they go. They hold their egg balls to their tail ends by using their silk. When the eggs hatch, the little spiders will crawl onto the mother's back, and she will carry them along with her for days or weeks.

Wolf spiders are very good mothers and will strongly protect both their egg balls and their infants. When the time comes, the little spiders will leave the mother and each will go its own way.

Jumping spiders have very good eyes and can see well. They sneak as close to an insect as they can, and then they jump onto the insect and immediately bite it. Since they often hunt in trees, bushes, and on the sides of walls, if the jumping spider misses it may fall off. But they have a way to save themselves from harm. Before they jump they fasten their silk to the place where they have been standing, and as they jump they let out a silk safety line. So if they fall they will catch themselves when they reach the end of their silk safety line. Sometimes a jumping spider will catch an insect and then fall while still holding onto the insect. But the spider is still safe.

Jumping spiders make little silken "tents" for themselves to sleep in. When they lay eggs they keep them inside such a shelter. They do not take their eggs with them when they go out to hunt.

For all male spiders it is dangerous to seek a mate. The female spider may not realize that the male is a spider of her kind, so she may try to eat it. The jumping spiders not only have visual patterns that identify them to each other, but the male jumping spider will do a special dance when it approaches a female of the same species. That way, the female can recognize that it is a male of her species. She will generally forget about eating for long enough to mate with the visiting male spider.

Jumping spiders have such good eyes that they will usually watch any human who tries to watch them. Some species are very shy and will run away if the human gets too close. But some species, such as Phidippus audax (the audacious or brave jumping spider) and Platycryptus undatus, can become calm if the human comes close to them slowly. Sometimes they will jump onto one of your fingers and then jump from finger to finger and from hand to hand. They seem to want to explore.

Some jumping spiders of the genus Portia hunt other spiders in ways that seem intelligent, outflanking their victims or luring them from their webs. Laboratory studies show that Portias instinctive tactics are only starting points for a trial-and-error approach from which these spiders learn very quickly how to overcome new prey species. However, they seem to be relatively slow thinkers, which is not surprising as their brains are vastly smaller than those of mammalian predators.

Ant-mimicking spiders face several challenges: they generally develop slimmer abdomens and false "waists" to mimic the three distinct regions (tagmata) of an ant's body; they wave the first pair of legs in form to their heads to mimic antennae, which spiders lack, and to conceal the fact that they have eight legs rather than six. They have large color patches round one pair of eyes to disguise the fact that they generally have eight simple eyes, while ants have two compound eyes; they cover their bodies with reflective hairs to resemble the shiny bodies of ants. In some spider species males and females mimic different ant species, as female spiders are usually much larger than males.

Ant-mimicking spiders also modify their behavior to resemble that of the target species of ant, for example many adopt a zig-zag pattern of movement, ant-mimicking jumping spiders avoid jumping, and spiders of the genus Synemosyna walk on the outer edges of leaves in the same way as Pseudomyrmex. Ant-mimicry in many spiders and other arthropods may be for protection from predators that hunt by sight, including birds, lizards and spiders. However several ant-mimicking spiders prey either on ants or on the ants "livestock" such as aphids. When at rest the ant-mimicking crab spider Amyciaea does not closely resemble Oecophylla, but while hunting it imitates the behavior of a dying ant to attract worker ants. After a kill some ant-mimicking spiders hold their victims between themselves and large groups of ants to avoid being attacked.

Spiders reproduce sexually and fertilization is internal but indirect. In other words, the sperm is not inserted into the female's body by the male's genitals but by an intermediate stage. Unlike many land-living arthropods, male spiders do not produce ready-made spermatophores (packages of sperm). Instead, they spin small sperm webs on to which they ejaculate and then transfer the sperm to structures on the tips of their pedipalps. When a male detects signs of a female nearby he checks whether she is of the same species and whether she is ready to mate; for example in species that produce webs or 'safety ropes', the male can identify the species and sex of these objects by smell.

Spiders generally use elaborate courtship rituals to prevent the large females from eating the small males before fertilization, except where the male is so much smaller that he is not worth eating. In some species males mate with newly molted females, which are too weak to be dangerous to the males.

In web-weaving species precise patterns of vibrations in the web are a major part of the rituals, while patterns of touches on the female's body are important in many spiders that hunt actively, and may 'hypnotize' the female. Gestures and dances by the male are important for jumping spiders, which have excellent eyesight. If courtship is successful, the male injects his sperm from the pedipalps into the female's genital opening on the underside of her abdomen. Female reproductive tracts vary. Some are simple tubes, but others have chambers where females store sperm, and release it when they are ready.

Males do get eaten in some species. Males of the genus Tidarren cut off one of their palps, and enter adult life with one palp only. The palps are 20% of male's body mass in this species, and detaching one of the two improves mobility. In the Yemeni species Tidarren argo, the remaining palp is then torn off by the female. The separated palp remains attached to the female's opening for about four hours. In the meantime, the female feeds on the palpless male. In over 60% of cases the female of the Australian redback spider kills and eats the male after it inserts its second palp into the female's genital opening; in fact the males co-operate by trying to impale themselves on the females' fangs. Observation shows that most male redbacks never get an opportunity to mate, and the 'lucky' ones increase the likely number of offspring by ensuring that the females are well-fed. However males of most species survive a few matings, limited mainly by their short life spans. Some even live for a while in their mates' webs.p176/212

Females lay up to 3,000 eggs in one or more silk egg sacs, which maintain a fairly constant humidity level. In some species the females die afterwards, but females of other species protect the sacs by attaching them to their webs, hiding them in nests, carrying them in the chelicerae or attaching them to the spinnerets and dragging them along.

Baby spiders pass all their larval stages inside the egg and hatch as spiderlings, very small and sexually immature but similar in shape to adults. Some spiders care for their young, for example a wolf spider's brood cling to rough bristles on the mother's back, and females of some species respond to the "begging" behaviour of their young by giving them their prey, provided it is no longer struggling, or even regurgitate food.

Like other arthropods, spiders have to moult to grow as their cuticle ("skin") cannot stretch. Most spiders live for only one to two years, although some tarantulas can live in captivity for over 20 years.p232

Of the 40,000 spiders, less than 12 are known to be dangerous to humans. Most of the time, being bitten by a spider is painful. Most spiders use venom to paralyse their prey; they kill it through eating, or through a bite. A few spiders have venoms that can be dangerous to weakened people and those allergic to it. Since 1927, 13 people have died, after a bite from a Atrax robustus spider from Australia.

The spider that kills the most people, the black widow and other spiders in the genus Latrodectus are around 1 cm. in body length. The Atrax and Phoneutria spiders, which are also capable of killing people, both average around 2.5 cm. or one inch, and even the Widow spiders are large enough to be easily noticed.

Even relatively small spiders like Phidippus audax can give a painful bite if you hurt them, but spiders are very helpful to human beings because they control insects that eat our crops.

Being afraid of spiders is a very common phobia (fear). The widow spiders (black widows and other members of their genus) never willingly leave their webs, so usually people get bitten when they touch the spider by mistake.

Sikhism (ਸਿੱਖ ਧਰਮ) is a monotheistic-dharmic religion and philosophy that originated in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent around the beginning of the 16th century. It is one of the newest major religions, ranking as the fifth-largest worldwide, with about 25–30 million followers known as the Sikhs.

The teachings of Guru Nanak, the founder of Sikhism, and the nine gurus who followed him formed the foundation of Sikhism. The tenth guru, Guru Gobind Singh, declared the Sikh scripture Guru Granth Sahib as the eternal guide for Sikhs, concluding the line of human gurus. Guru Nanak emphasized living a practical life with values like purity, truthfulness, self-control and fidelity, prioritizing these over abstract truths. Guru Hargobind, the sixth guru, introduced the idea of balancing the worldly and spiritual aspects of life.

The Sikh scripture begins with the Mul Mantar, a fundamental prayer about Ek Onkar ('One God'). Sikhism's key beliefs, found in the Guru Granth Sahib, include faith and meditation in the name of the one creator, recognizing the unity and equality of all humans, selfless service, seeking justice for everyone's well-being, and maintaining honesty while leading a family life. Sikhism rejects the idea that any specific religion holds a monopoly on absolute truth. It encourages practices like meditation (simran) and remembering the teachings through music (kirtan) or internal reflection (naam japna) to feel God's presence. Sikhs are taught to overcome the "Five Thieves" – lust, rage, greed, attachment, and ego.

Guru Granth Sahib is not just a holy book for Sikhs, it is respected and treated as a living being as it is officially The Eternal Guru (Teachers). Shri Guru Granth Sahib is not written by one human but by saints from all across societies and religions. It is a universal teacher for all religions giving the message of one God and respect to all humans of every religion.

Sikhism teaches that God lasts forever and cannot be seen. Therefore, God has no gender. It is taught that God created the universe  and keeps it running. God is considered to be infinite, Alpha and Omega, no beginning and no end. Sikhs worship God, and meditate on God’s name through intense (passionate) repetition. They believe everything is a part of God and God is a part of everything. Good, bad, neutral are not applicable to God and are meant only for human beings, as Sikh philosophy indicates that human beings are born innately good. Since God created the world he could destroy it whenever he wants.

Followers are all trying to reach liberation from reincarnation, meaning they are trying to break the process of rebirth and become one with God. The thing that is keeping people from reaching union is bad karma. Bad karma is taught to be caused by pride, anger, greed, attachment and lust. Sikhs try to stay away from these things. Sikhs also believe that a piece of God resides within everything in the world. Once an individual discovers the God within and stops searching else then can he reach salvation.

A Sikh temple is called a Gurdwara (meaning "the house of Guru"). It is the place of worship in the Sikh religion. Birth, death, baptism and marriage ceremonies are held in the temple. There are four doors for all religions. When a person enters the temple, their head must be covered. There are no chairs in the temple so people sit on the floor. The temple also serves as a kitchen. The kitchen is where festive food is donated, prepared and cooked by volunteers. All the food that has been made there is shared with all the community who visit the temple on that day. The meal is vegetarian and is called the Langar.

Three holiest sites in Sikhism are the Gurudwara Janam Asthan, Gurudwara Kartarpur Sahib in Pakistan and the Golden Temple in India. In a Gurdwara, no special place or seat may be reserved or set aside for any dignitary, as all are considered equals. The service consists of singing of the liturgy, as well as the exposition of Sikh history, tradition, and theology.  In traditional Indian society, people of high and low caste were rigidly segregated. To combat this social problem, the Sikh community kitchen, or langar, requires everyone to sit side by side and eat together, thereby teaching the concept of equality by shattering all barriers of caste and class. Every major city in the United States and Canada has Sikh gurdwaras and they are open to all Sikh people go to Gurdwara to worship God.

Vaisakhi is an important festival celebrated by Sikhs. Vaisakhi is also known as Basaki. It is the harvest festival in the Punjab region. Vaisakhi is celebrated on the first day of the Basak month, in the Nanakshahi calendar.

The term ‘guru’ comes from the Sanskrit: gurū, which means teacher, guide, or mentor. The traditions and philosophy of Sikhism were made by ten gurus from 1469 to 1708. Each guru added to and reinforced the message taught by the previous one. This resulted in the creation of the Sikh religion. Meanwhile, the eternal Guru is the Sri Guru Granth Sahib, which is a not just a book but contains the writings of each Guru. In addition to the above, Sikhs also believe in fifteen bhagats or saints, including ones from other creeds, whose words and deeds have been adopted into Sikhism by the great ten Gurus. Most notable of these bhagats is the Punjabi Sufi saint, Hazrat Baba Farid.

Sikhs believe in equality therefore they have food banks to go and get food for free. These are known as the ‘Langars’.

It is said that Sikhs have to give 10% of their earnings to charity. Sikhs believe in equality therefore the are all equal in money. Nobody is poor and nobody is rich. There is a Sikh alphabet. Sikhism, religion and philosophy founded in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent in the late 15th century. The Sikhs call their faith Gurmat (Punjabi: “the Way of the Guru”). According to Sikh tradition, Sikhism was established by Guru Nanak (1469–1539) and subsequently led by a succession of nine other Gurus.

Khalsa is the military community of Sikhism. A Sikh must follow the 5 Ks:

Nitnem is a collection of Sikh  hymns Gurbani to be read minimally 3 different times of the day. These are mandatory and to be read by every Amritdhari Sikh as expressed in the Sikh Rehat Maryada. Optionally additional prayers may be added to a Sikh's nitnem. There are five prayer or Five Banis to be done during Amrit Vela (early morning), the Rehras Sahib hymn for the evening and Kirtan Sohila for the night. The morning and evening prayers should be followed by an Ardaas.

Sophocles (497 BC, 496 BC, or 495 BC – 406 BC) was an Ancient Greek writer who wrote over 100 plays, according to the Suda. Only seven of his tragedies have survived complete. Sophocles was the second of the three greatest Ancient Greek writers of tragedies, the others were Aeschylus and Euripides.

The most famous of Sophocles' tragedies are those about Oedipus and Antigone: these are often called the Theban plays. Each play was a part of different tetralogy (set of four), the other members of which are now lost.

Sophocles, the son of Sophillus, was a rich member of the rural community of Colonus Hippius in Attica. This was the setting for his plays. He was probably born there. His birth took place a few years before the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC: the exact year is unclear, although 497/6 is perhaps most likely. Sophocles' first great play was in 468 BC when he took first prize in the Dionysia theatre competition ahead of Aeschylus.

Oedipus' death as a child is planned by his parents, Laius and Jocasta, to stop him fulfilling a prophecy. A servant  passes the infant on to a childless couple, who adopt him. They did not know his history.

Oedipus eventually learns of the Delphic Oracle's prophecy of him. It was: he would kill his father and marry his mother. He thought this meant his adopted parents. He flees to avoid his fate. Oedipus meets a man at a crossroads accompanied by servants. Oedipus and the man fight, and Oedipus kills the man. This man was his father, Laius, not that anyone apart from the gods knew this at the time.

Oedipus becomes the ruler of Thebes after solving the riddle of the sphinx. In the process, he marries the widowed Queen, his mother Jocasta. Thus the stage is set for horrors. When the truth comes out, Jocasta commits suicide, Oedipus blinds himself and leaves Thebes. The children are left to sort out the results for themselves.

In Oedipus at Colonus, the banished Oedipus and his daughters Antigone and Ismene arrive at the town of Colonus where they encounter Theseus, King of Athens. Oedipus dies and trouble begins between his sons Polyneices and Eteocles.

In Antigone the protagonist is Oedipus' daughter. The king, Creon, has forbidden the burial of Polyneices as a traitor to the city. Antigone is faced with a choice: allow her brother Polyneices' body to remain unburied, outside the city walls. There it would be exposed to the ravages of wild animals. Or, she could bury him and face death. Antigone decides to bury his body and face the results of her actions.

Creon sentences her to death. Eventually, Creon is convinced to free Antigone from her punishment, but his decision comes too late. Antigone has committed suicide. Her death leads to the suicide of two others close to King Creon: his son, Haemon, who was going to marry Antigone, and the queen, who commits suicide after losing her only surviving son.

Running through such tragedies is the theme of fate, which cannot be avoided. A forbidden act is committed in innocence, and the consequences follow remorselessly.

Aristotle writes that after Aeschylus introduced a second actor called the deuteragonist into plays so that there could be dialogue between characters, Sophocles added a third actor called the tritagonist so that dialogue became more important. But it was still possible for there to be more than three characters because different actors played more than one character.

Smallpox was a dangerous disease with a high mortality rate. It no longer exists as an epidemic disease. The last naturally occurring case was diagnosed in October 1977. The World Health Organization (WHO) certified the global eradication of the disease in 1980 (said there was no more).

It was caused by a virus. There are two different species of viruses that can cause the disease. They are Variola major and Variola minor. Some people also call smallpox Variola, from the Latin work for "spotted" which is also the viruses' scientific name.

Only humans can get this disease, but it probably came from a virus which infected animals. Variola major killed between 20% and 40% of those who got it. Variola minor killed only about 1%. Many people who survived become blind because of the damage the virus did to the eyes.

During the first half of the 20th century, between 300 million and 500 million people died of this disease. Even in 1967, about 15 million people caught the disease, and about two million people died of it, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).

The first vaccine for smallpox used the results of cowpox infections. It was invented by Edward Jenner. It was used to stop people from getting smallpox.  The word "vaccine" came from "vaccina", the Latin word for cow, because cowpox was used. The WHO (World Health Organisation) vaccinated people all over the world. In 1980, the WHO said the disease no longer existed, and no one would ever get sick from it again. Live copies of smallpox are kept in maximum-security laboratories around the world to make sure the disease can never infect people again.

Some people believe that smallpox could be used as an agent for purposely infecting enemies in a war. Today, most people no longer receive a smallpox shot.

A steam engine is an engine that uses steam from boiling water to make it move. The steam pushes on the engine parts to make them move. Steam engines can power many kinds of machines including vehicles and electric generators.

Steam engines were used in mine pumps starting in the early 1700s and were much improved by James Watt in the 1770s. They were very important during the industrial revolution where they replaced horses, windmills and watermills to work machines.

The first steam engines were piston engines. The steam pressure pushed on a piston which made it move along a cylinder and so they had a reciprocal (back-and-forth) motion. This could move a pump directly or work a crank to turn a wheel and work a machine. They operated at low pressure and had to be very big to make a lot of power.

Steam engines were used in factories to work machines and in mines to move pumps. Later smaller engines were built that could move railway locomotives and steam boats.

The steam to power a steam engine is made in a boiler that heats water to make steam. In most places fire heats the boiler. Fuel for the fire may be wood, coal, or petroleum. Nuclear energy or solar energy may be used instead of fire. The steam coming out of the boiler applies the force on a piston. A valve sends the steam to one end of the piston, then the other, to make it move backwards and forwards. The moving piston pushes and pulls the piston rod, crosshead and connecting rod, to turn wheels or drive other machinery. The heavy spinning flywheel smooths out the power from the piston. The governor controls the speed of the engine.

Today many steam engines are still at work. During the 20th century the pistons were replaced by turbines which spin like a windmill pushed by jets of steam. These turn faster with more energy efficiency than the original kinds of piston steam engines. They are used in power plants to operate generators which make electricity. Some ships are also powered by steam turbines. The boilers of steam turbines can be heated by many different types of fuel, even a nuclear reactor in some power stations and warships.

The small intestine is between the stomach and the large intestine, and is where most of the digestion and absorption happen. In humans over five years old, the small intestine is about 7.5 metres long. However, while it is long in length, it is very short in diameter, which is why it is mostly called the 'small intestine'.

The small intestine has three regions: the duodenum, the jejunum, and the ileum.

The soybean (or soya bean) is a plant with fruit called beans, from Eastern Asia. The height of a grown soybean is between less than 20 centimetres and up to 2 metres. One soybean lives for only one year.

Soybeans can be eaten or used to make oil, sauce, milk, flour, tofu and other foods. These soy foods have much protein, and many vegetarians like that.

Soybean oil has a component of oleic acid that can be used to make an insect repellent.

In 1997, 81% of all soybeans were of genetically modified stock. This means that genes were changed directly.

In China, going back the ancient Chou dynasty soy beans were considered to be one of the five sacred foods.

Simone Lucie Ernestine Marie Bertrand de Beauvoir (, ; ; 9 January 1908 – 14 April 1986) was a French author (writer) and philosopher (person who writes about ways of thinking).

She wrote novels (stories in a book), articles about philosophy ways of thinking or ways of living, and politics, biographies (books about other people's lives) and an autobiography (a book about her life).

Her best known books are She Came to Stay and The Mandarins. Her best known writing about ideas is The Second Sex, which was written in 1949. It describes the bad experiences of women in European society, and suggests how women's lives can be improved.

Her full name was Simone Lucie-Ernestine-Marie-Bertrand de Beauvoir. She was born on January 9, 1908 in Paris. She studied mathematics and ways of thinking at the Institut Catholique. Then she studied literature and languages at the Institut Sainte-Marie. As well, she studied ways of thinking at the Sorbonne, which is at the University of Paris.

In 1943, de Beauvoir published She Came to Stay, a story about her lover Jean-Paul Sartre (who was also a writer and a philosopher). Next, she wrote a novel called The Mandarins, which won prize.

In 1944 de Beauvoir wrote an article called Pyrrhus et Cinéas, which was about a way of thinking about hard choices that people have to make.

In 1949, she wrote Le deuxième sexe. It was translated by Howard Parshley to The Second Sex. It describes the bad experiences of women in European society, and suggests how women's lives can be improved. The book also discussed ways of thinking about hard choices.

At the end of World War II, de Beauvoir and Sartre started a newspaper about ways of living called Les Temps Modernes.

De Beauvoir was bisexual and had sexual relationships with some of her female students.

She died of pneumonia. She is buried next to Sartre at the Cimetière du Montparnasse in Paris.

Sima Qian () was the historian of the Han Dynasty under Emperor Wu. He was born at Xia Yang (present-day Shan Xi Province, Han City) in either 145 or 135 BC. His father, Sima Tan, was also a historian.

When Sima Qian was 10, he could read the articles which were written in Classical Chinese.

He travelled around China and visited a plenty of scenic attractions and heritages when he was 20.

In 108 BC, with the death of Sima Qian's father, he carried on the job of being a historian.

In 104 BC, Sima Qian finished editing Taichu Calendar with the imperial officials, Tang Du and Luo Xiahong.

In 99 BC, Sima Qian got involved in the Li Ling Affair. He was punished and sent to prison. Sima Qian would be sentenced to death if he could not pay a fine or accept the terrible punishment - castration. With the fact that Sima Qian did not have enough money to pay the fine and he hoped to finish writing the Records of the Grand Historian, he accepted the castration. Sima Qian finally spent 19 years to write that book.

A stroke is an illness in which part of the brain loses its blood supply. This can happen if an artery that feeds blood to the brain gets clogged, or if it tears and leaks.

A stroke is when there is a lack of blood flow to the brain. There are two types of strokes. One is when there is a blood clot blocking the artery. The other type of stroke is when a blood vessel bursts and there is blood moving around freely in the brain.

A stroke is the rapid loss of brain function(s) due to disturbance in the blood supply to the brain. This can happen because of ischemia (lack of blood flow) caused by blockage (thrombosis, arterial embolism), or a haemorrhage (leakage of blood).

As a result, the affected area of the brain cannot work properly. Symptoms might include: hemiplegia (an inability to move one or more limbs on one side of the body), aphasia (inability to understand or use language), or an inability to see one side of the visual field.

A stroke is a medical emergency. It can cause permanent damage. If it is not quickly treated, it may lead to death. It is the third most common cause of death and the most common cause of disability for adults in the United States and Europe.

Strokes happen on both the left and right side of the brain. When a stroke happens on the left side of someone’s brain, it affects the right side of the body. It can also cause problems with the patient’s speech and language. If a stroke affects the right side of the brain, it affects the left side of the body. It also changes patient’s spatial (relating to space) perceptions. Getting a stroke on the right side of the brain can also cause people to not acknowledge their illness. Patients behave impulsively and neglect the side of their body.

Factors that increase the risk of a stroke include old age, high blood pressure, a previous stroke, diabetes, high cholesterol, smoking, atrial fibrillation, migraine with aura, and thrombophilia (a tendency to thrombosis). Of those factors, the most easy to fix are high blood pressure and smoking.

The Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale was designed to help "pre-hospital" medical professionals (like EMTs) identify a possible stroke before the patient gets to the hospital. It tests three basic signs.  If any of these signs are not normal, the patient may be having a stroke and should be transported to a hospital as soon as possible.

About 72% of patients who cannot do one of these three tasks normally are having an ischemic stroke.  More than 85% of patients who cannot do all three tasks are having an acute stroke.

The 'spot a stroke' campaign, created by the American Heart Association and the American Stroke Association, teaches everyday people how to recognize a stroke. It teaches the basic tests from the Cincinnati Stroke Scale, using the acronym FAST:

The emergency telephone number is 911 in the United States, and 112 in most of Europe, and on most mobile phone networks. Calls to emergency services are usually free of charge.

Once the patient is in the hospital, doctors can find out for sure whether they are having a stroke by looking at their brain with special scanning machines, like an MRI or a CT scanner.

Strokes can kill. To prevent a stroke, doctors advise people to:

St. Peter's Basilica, which is called "Basilica di San Pietro in Vaticano" in Italian, is a large church in Vatican City, an independent country within Rome, Italy. It is often called “the greatest church in Christendom". In Catholic tradition, St. Peter's Basilica is believed to be the burial place of Saint Peter, who was one of the twelve apostles of Jesus. It is believed that Saint Peter was the first Bishop of Rome.

Although the Bible does not say that the apostle Peter went to Rome, other Roman Christians who were alive in the 1st century AD have written about him. Catholics believe that after Peter was killed, his body was buried in a cemetery where the basilica now stands. A tomb has been found below the altar of the basilica, and there were some bones, but no-one can say for certain if they are the bones of St. Peter.

A church was built here in the 4th century AD. The building that stands here now was begun on April 18, 1506 and was finished in 1626. Many Popes have been buried there. Although many people think St. Peter's is a cathedral, it is not, because it does not have a bishop. The pope is the Bishop of Rome, and although he usually uses St. Peter's as his main church, because he lives in the Vatican, his bishop's throne is in a different church, the cathedral of Saint John Lateran. Large important churches like St. Peter's are often called basilicas. There are four ancient basilicas in Rome that were begun by the Emperor Constantine soon after he made Christianity the legal religion of the Roman Empire in the early 4th century AD (300s). The basilicas are St. Peter's Basilica, St. John Lateran, Santa Maria Maggiore and St. Paul outside the Walls.

One of the books of the Bible, called the Acts of the Apostles, tells what happened to the disciples of Jesus after he was put to death by crucifixion in the 1st century AD. One of his twelve disciples became the leader. His name was Simon Peter and he was a fisherman from Galilee. Peter became one of the most important people in starting the Christian Church. Another important disciple was Paul of Tarsus, who travelled to many places and wrote lots of letters to teach and to encourage people in the new Christian groups that began to spring up in many different parts of the Roman Empire. St. Paul travelled to Rome. It is believed that St. Peter also travelled to Rome and that both Paul and Peter were put to death there as Christian martyrs. St. Paul was beheaded with a sword. Peter was crucified up-side-down. It is believed that the body of St. Peter was buried in a cemetery near the Via Cornelia, a road leading out of the city, on the hill called Vaticanus. Peter's grave was marked, by a red rock, the symbol of his name. The place where Peter died was marked, in the 1400s, by a little round temple called the "Tempietto" designed by Bramante.

St. Peter is very important in Roman Catholic tradition because Peter is believed to have been the head of the Christian Church in Rome, and so he was the first bishop. The Gospel of Matthew (chapter 16, verse 18) tells that Jesus said these words to Peter:

The name Peter means a "rock". The Roman Catholic Church believes that Jesus made Peter the head of the Christian Church, and so all the Bishops of Rome (the Popes) must be the leaders of the Christian Church throughout the whole world. The Protestant and Orthodox churches believe that Jesus was speaking about the important words Peter had just said: "You are the Christ and the Son of the Living God" (Matthew 16:16), and that this Confession of Faith is the rock that the Christian Church is built on.

On December 23, 1950, while making his Christmas radio broadcast to the world, Pope Pius XII announced that Saint Peter's tomb had been discovered. Archaeologists had been searching for ten years in a place under the basilica that had been covered up for about a thousand years. They had found part of a small building dating from soon after St. Peter's death, and some bones, but no-one could be sure if they were the bones of St. Peter.

St. Peter's Basilica, as it stand today, was begun in 1506. The first basilica, which is now called "Old St. Peter's Basilica" was begun by the Emperor Constantine between 326 and 333 AD. This was a big wide church in the shape of a Latin Cross, over 103.6 metres (350 feet) long. The central part called the "nave" had two aisles on either side, separated by rows of talls Roman columns. In front of the main entrance was large courtyard with a covered walkway all around. This church had been built over a small "shrine" (little chapel) believed to mark the burial place of St. Peter. The old basilica contained a very large number of tombs and memorials, including those of most of the popes from St. Peter to the 15th century.

By the end of the 15th century (1400s), the old basilica was falling to pieces. Pope Nicholas V, (1447–55), was worried about it and got two architects, Leone Battista Alberti and Bernardo Rossellino, to make plans to restore it or build a new one. But Pope Nicholas had so many political problems that when he died, very little of the work had been done.

In 1505, Pope Julius II decided to demolish (pull down) the old St. Peter's and build a basilica that would be the grandest church in the world and make Rome (and himself) famous. He held a competition and invited lots of artists and architects to draw designs. A plan was selected and the build was begun, but Pope Julius did not get his new basilica. In fact, it was not finished for 120 years. The planning and construction (or "building work") lasted through the reigns of 21 popes and 8 architects.

The changing plans for St. Peter's. The architectural terms are explained in the article.

When Pope Julius decided to build the "grandest church in Christendom" the design by Donato Bramante was chosen, and Pope Julius laid the foundation stone in 1506. Bramante's plan was in the shape of an enormous Greek Cross, which means that it had four arms all of equal length, and a large dome at the middle. For the next hundred years, the groundplan got changed backwards and forwards between a "Greek Cross" like Bramante's plan and a "Latin Cross" like the old basilica, but one thing never changed, and that was the idea of having an enormous dome at the place where the two arms crossed.

At that time, there were only three very large domes in the whole world. One was far away in Constantinople on the church of Hagia Sophia and not many people in Italy had seen it. The other two domes were both very well known. One was the dome on the temple to the Ancient Roman gods, called the Pantheon. The other dome was built in the early 15th century (1400s) on Florence Cathedral by Filippo Brunelleschi. The dome of the Pantheon is 43.3 metres (142.06 ft) across and the dome of Florence Cathedral is about 42.1 metres (138 ft), but is much taller. Bramante's plan for the dome of St. Peter's was for it to be about as wide as the dome of Florence, and even taller.

No architect with any sense would try to design a dome without first checking out how these other two domes were made. Bramante checked them out. He discovered that the dome of the Pantheon, which had been standing for nearly 1500 years, was made of concrete. So that the concrete wouldn't be too heavy, it was mixed with pumice stone which comes out of a volcano and is full of gas holes so it is very light weight. Bramante learned how to make concrete like the Ancient Romans.

Bramante's dome was to be like the one on the Pantheon. But there was one very big difference between the Pantheon dome and Bramante's design. The Pantheon's dome stands on a round wall like a drum, with only one doorway in it, but Bramante's dome was designed to stand on a drum, which was standing high up on four wide arches. The aches rested on four enormous piers (pillars of stone). He had got this idea from Florence Cathedral which had an enormous dome resting on eight big piers. Another idea that Bramante got from Florence Cathedral was the design for the little stone tower which sits on top of the dome and is called the lantern.

When Pope Julius died in 1513, the next pope, Leo X, called in three architects, Giuliano da Sangallo, Fra Giocondo and Raphael. Sangallo and Fr Giocondo both died in 1515. Raphael made a big change to the plan. Instead of having a Greek Cross, he decided to change the plan to a Latin Cross, which had a long nave and aisles like the old basilica.

Raphael also died, in his mid-30s, in 1520, before any important changes could be made to the building. The next architect was Peruzzi who like some of the ideas that Raphael had, but did not like the Latin Cross plan. Peruzzi went back to Bramante's Greek Cross plan. But there were so many arguments in the church that the building stopped completely. Then in 1527 Rome was invaded by Emperor Charles V. Peruzzi died in 1536 without his plan being built. The only main parts of the building which had been constructed were Bramante's four big piers to hold the dome.

Antonio da Sangallo (known as "Sangallo the Younger") looked at all the different plans by Peruzzi, Raphael and Bramante. He put some of their ideas together in a design that had a very short nave, (not a long one like Raphael's design) and had a big porch at the front. He changed Bramante's dome to be much stronger and also much more decorated. The main new idea that he added were 16 stone ribs to strengthen the dome. This idea came from Florence Cathedral which had eight stone ribs. But Sangallo's plan never got built, either. The main job that he did was to strengthen Bramante's piers which had begun to crack.

On January 1st, 1547 in the reign of Pope Paul III, Michelangelo, who was already over 70, became the architect of St. Peter's. He is the main designer of the building as it stands today. Michelangelo died before the job was finished, but by that time, he had got the construction up to a point where other people could get it finished. Michelangelo had already done a lot of work for the popes, carving figures for the tomb of Pope Julius II, painting the Sistine Chapel ceiling, which took five years, and the enormous fresco the "Last Judgement" on the wall of the Sistine Chapel. Michelangelo found the popes and the cardinals very difficult to work with. When Pope Paul asked him to be the new architect for St. Peter's, Michelangelo did not want the job. In fact, Pope Paul did not really want Michelangelo. But his first choice, Giulio Romano, died suddenly. Michelangelo told the pope that he would only do the job, if he could do it in whatever way he thought was best.

When Michelangelo took over a building site in 1547, the nave of the old basilica was still standing and in use. There were four of the most enormous piers in the world standing where the western part of the old basilica had been. The building work had stopped for so long that weeds and bushes were growing out between the stones of the unfinished building as if it was a cliff. Michelangelo looked at all the plans that had been drawn by some of the greatest architects and engineers of the 16th century. He knew he could do whatever he liked but he had respect for the other designers, especially Bramante. He knew that he was expected to make a design that would be the symbol of the city of Rome, in the same way as Brunelleschi's dome was the symbol of Florence where Michelangelo had lived as a young man. He went back to the Greek Cross idea and re-drew Bramante's plan, making every part of it much stronger and simpler. It had to be strong enough to support the tallest dome in the world.

Michelangelo was a sculptor. When he was going to carve something, he would start by making a clay model. Michelangelo could imagine the building like a lump of clay. What if the building could be pushed and pulled and squeezed? If you could squeeze the corners in, then other bits would bulge out. If you could put your hands around the whole building and squeeze it, then the dome would bulge upwards. The idea of imagining buildings as bendy and bulgy was a completely new one. But other artists like Gianlorenzo Bernini looked at what Michelangelo did at St. Peter's and used this clever new idea in their own work. This is called the Baroque style.

As it stands today, the Greek Cross part of the basilica is Michelangelo's design and the nave, which was added later, is by Carlo Maderna. Comparing Michelangelo's plan with Raphael's plan shows that while the outside-line of Raphael's plan has clear square and round shapes, the outside-line in Michelangelo's plan has lots of changes of direction. That is the way it was built. All around the outside of the building are enormous "pilasters" (which are like giant columns stuck on the building). Almost every pilaster is set at a different angle to the next one as if the flat walls had been folded up. Right around the top of the building is a band called the "cornice". A "cornice" is usually quite flat, but because of all the changes of direction, this cornice ripples like a giant piece of ribbon, tied around the outside of the building. The art historian Helen Gardner wrote that it looked as of the whole building was being held together from top to bottom.

Michelangelo designed the dome again, using ideas from Bramante and Sangallo the Younger. Three important ideas came from the dome that Brunelleschi had built in Florence more than 100 years earlier.

When Michelangelo died in 1564, the walls were being built, the piers had been strengthened and everything was ready for the building of the dome. The Pope wanted Michelangelo's assistant Vignola to finish it, but he was not able to. After twenty years Pope Sixtus V gave the job to the architect Giacomo della Porta and the engineer Domenico Fontana. Giacomo Della Porta successfully built the dome. He made some changes to the design, like adding some lions' heads to the decoration because they were the symbol of Pope Sixtus' family. The main way that the dome is different from the wooden model is that it is much more pointy.

Some writers believe that Michelangelo had changed his mind from his first plan, and did not want the pointy dome. They believe he wanted a round dome which would look more "restful". Other writers believe that Michelangelo wanted the pointed dome, not just because it was safer to build, but also because it looked more exciting, as if the building was pushing upwards. Pope Sixtus V lived just long enough to see the dome finished in 1590. His name is written in gold letters around the inside, just below the lantern.

Pope Clement III, had a cross raised into place on top of the lantern. It took a whole day and everyone in Rome was given a holiday, and all the church-bells of the city were rung. In the arms of the cross are set two lead boxes, one containing a fragment of the True Cross and a bone of Saint Andrew and the other containing medals of the "Holy Lamb".

The dome of St. Peter's rises to a height of 136.57 m (448.06 ft) from the floor of the basilica. It is the tallest dome in the world. Its inside diameter is 41.47 metres (136.06 ft), just slightly smaller than those of the Pantheon and the Florence Cathedral.

Around the inside of the dome is written in letters 2 metres (6.5 ft) high:

TV ES PETRVS ET SVPER HANC PETRAM AEDIFICABO ECCLESIAM MEAM  ET TIBI DABO CLAVES REGNI CAELORVM

("...you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my church ... and I will give you the keys of the kingdom of heaven...." Vulgate, .)

In 1602 Pope Paul V put Carlo Maderna in charge of the building. On February 18 1606, workmen began to pull down the rest of the old basilica. Some people were very upset. The building committee felt guilty. They decided that the church was the wrong shape, and that they wanted a Latin Cross plan because it was the symbol of the death of Jesus. They wanted a nave which would cover all the Holy Ground where the old building had been. In 1607 Maderna's plans for the nave and the facade (the front) were accepted. For the inside, he used very large piers with pilasters like Michelangelo's, but he made a clear join between the two parts of the building. The building work began on May 7 1607 and 700 men were employed to do the work. In 1608, the facade was begun. In December 1614 the building was all finished except for the decorations on the ceiling. Early in 1615 the temporary wall between Michelangelo's building and the new nave was pulled down. All the mess was carted away, and the nave was ready for use by Palm Sunday.

The façade was designed by Maderna. It is 114.69 metres (376.28 ft) wide and 45.55 metres (149.44 ft) high and is built of pale grey travertine stone, with a giant Corinthian columns and a central triangular pediment. Along the roof-line are statues of Christ, John the Baptist, and eleven of the apostles.

Inside the main doors is a portico (a long hall) which runs across the front of the building and has five doors leading into the basilica. Its has a long curving roof decorated with gold. The light that comes through the doors shines on the beautifully patterned marble floor. At each end of the portico, set between columns, is a statue of a figure on horseback. They are Charlemagne sculpted by Cornacchini (18th century) to the south and Emperor Constantine by Bernini (1670) to the north. Maderna's last work at St. Peter's was to design a sunken crypt called the "Confessio" under the dome, where people can go to be nearer the burial place of the apostle. All around its marble handrail are 95 bronze lamps.

As a young boy Gianlorenzo Bernini (1598-1680) visited St. Peter's and said that one day he wanted to build "a mighty throne for the apostle". His wish came true. As a young man, in 1626, Pope Urban VIII asked him to work as architect for the basilica. Bernini spent the next fifty years thinking of new and beautiful things to design. He is thought of as the greatest architect and sculptor of the Baroque period.

Bernini's first work at St. Peter's was to design the "baldacchino" which is like a tent or "pavilion" above the High Altar. This amazing thing is 30 metres (98 ft) tall and is probably the largest piece of bronze in the world. It stands underneath the dome and has four huge bronze twisted columns decorated with olive leaves and bees, because bees were the symbol of Pope Urban. Pope Urban had a niece that he loved very much and he got Bernini to put her face and the face of her new-born baby boy on the columns as well.

Bernini had a great idea for Bramante's great big piers. He had four hollow "niches" carved into them where four huge statues could stand. The basilica owns some precious relics: a piece of the True Cross of Jesus, a veil that a woman wiped the face of Jesus with, while he was carrying the cross, the spear that was used to pierce Jesus side, and the bones of St. Andrew, the brother of St. Peter. No-one knows for sure whether these things are real or not, but for hundreds of years they have been precious. Bernini's plan was the make four marble statues of the four Holy people: St. Helena who found the cross, St. Longinus who was the soldier with the spear, St Veronica who wiped Jesus' face and St. Andrew. (See below)

Bernini's next job was to make a special throne out of bronze, to hold an ancient wood and ivory throne that had been at the basilica for more than 500 years. It is called the Cattedra Petri or "throne of St. Peter". The bronze throne, with the old wooden throne inside it, is held up high at the end of the basilica, by four important saints who are called "Doctors of the Church" because they were all great writers and teachers. The statues are made of bronze. They are Saints Ambrose and Augustine for the Church of Rome and Saints Athanasius and John Chrysostum for the Orthodox Church. Above the chair is a window which is made not from glass but thin translucent stone called alabaster. The Dove of the Holy Spirit is in the middle of the window with rays of light spreading out into the basilica through a sculpture of golden clouds and angels. Bernini designed this to look like a window into Heaven. There was a great celebration when the chair was put in place on January 16, 1666.

Bernini's last work for St. Peter's, 1676, was to decorate of the Chapel of the Sacrament. He designed a miniature version of Bramante's Tempietto, and made it in gilt bronze. On either side is an angel, one gazing in adoration and the other looking towards the viewer in welcome. Bernini died in 1680 in his 82nd year.

To the east of the basilica is the Piazza di San Pietro (St. Peter's Place). The piazza was designed by Bernini and built between 1656 and 1667. It was not an easy job because the designer had lots of things to think about. Firstly, many people complained that Maderna's facade on St. Peter's looked too wide, so Bernini wanted to make it look narrower, not wider. Secondly, in the old square left over from the Old St. Peter's, Pope Sixtus V had a monument set up. This monument was a precious Ancient Egyptian obelisk (which is like a tall column, but with four flat sides). From its base to the top of the cross (that the pope had put on top) it was 40 metres (131 ft) high, and had been brought to Rome in ancient times. The obelisk really should be at the center of the new square, but it was not in quite the right place, and was very difficult to move without breaking. The third problem was that Maderna had built a fountain to one side of the obelisk, and Bernini needed to make another fountain to match it, otherwise the design would look unbalanced.

Bernini solved the problem by making two areas, instead of one huge one. The first area is an almost-square area right in front of the facade. It is cleverly designed with sloping sides that make the building look taller and not so wide. The second part of the piazza is oval. It has the obelisk at the center with two fountains on either side at the widest part. The two parts of the piazza are surrounded by a colonnade (covered walk-way) which is carried on tall columns. All around are large statues of saints which seem to look down on the thousands of visitors that come to the square every day. The colonnade is in two great arcs that seem to stretch out like loving arms, welcoming people to the Basilica. In recent times some buildings were demolished, making another square, to match the one near the piazza.

The famous architectural historian, Sir Banister Fletcher, said that no other city in the world had given such a wonderful view to people visiting their main church. He said that no other architect except Bernini could have imagined such a noble design. He said it is the greatest entrance to the greatest Christian church in the whole world.

St. Peter's Basilica has many treasures. These include Christian relics, the tombs of popes and many other important people, famous artworks which are mostly sculpture and other interesting things.

The Shahnameh or Shāhnāma (Book of Kings, ) is a large poetic opus by the Persian poet Ferdowsi. The book was written between  977 to 1010 AD. The Shahnameh is about the mythical and historical past of Persia/Iran. It is the national epic of Persia/Iran and one of the greatest literary works of the Persian language.

Shahnameh has been composed of 3 main parts: 1. mythical, 2. heroic, 3. historical.

Spain is a country in Europe that controls much of the Iberian Peninsula and nearby islands. The people of Spain are called Spaniards, and in 2026, the population of Spain was about 49.8 million. The capital and most populous city is Madrid. Spain borders Portugal in the west, Andorra and France with the Pyrenees in the north, Gibraltar in the south, and Morocco with its overseas territories of Ceuta, Melilla, and the Peñón de Vélez de la Gomera.

They primarily speak Spanish. Other languages, official and regional, in Spain are Catalan, Basque, Asturian, Galician, Leonese, Aragonese, Occitan, and Portuguese. Around 54.6% identify as Catholic. Another 3.6% identified with another religion, while 11.8% were agnostic, 16.5% indifferent, and 11.5% atheist. The ruling King of Spain is Felipe VI. The current Prime Minister is Pedro Sánchez. Spain is divided into 17 autonomous communities, which can decide upon some affairs themselves.

Spain has an estimated 506,000 square kilometers of land. It is smaller than France, but is bigger than Germany. The geography of Spain is divided mountain ranges in the North and South, and long river valleys. Its highest peak is Mount Teide, 3,715 meters (12,188 feet). The Ebro is the longest river entirely within Spain at about 957 kilometers (595 miles).  Lake Sanabria is Spain's largest natural lake. Spain is also famous for the Tabernas Desert, the only true desert on the European continent.

People have lived in Spain since the Stone Age. Later, the Roman Empire controlled Spain for about five hundred years; then as the Roman Empire broke up, groups of Germanic people including Visigoths moved in and took control.

In 711, many parts of the Iberian Peninsula became under the control of the Muslim Umayyad Caliphate. They called the land Al-Andalus; it was the farthest western point of Islamic civilization. In 756, the Umayyads were defeated by the Abbasid in the east. The Umayyads ruled the Caliphate of Córdoba, which fell apart in the early 11th century. Muslim rulers sometimes fought each other when they were not fighting the Christians. Muslim Spain was focused on learning. The greatest library system outside Baghdad.

At first the Muslims ruled most of Spain but the reconquista slowly forced them out over seven centuries.

The Kingdom of León, the most important in the early Spanish Middle Ages, was started in 910. This Kingdom developed the first democratic parliament (Cortes de Llión) in Europe in 1188. After 1301, León had the same King as the Kingdom of Castile in personal union. The various kingdoms remained independent territories until 1833, when Spain was divided into regions and provinces.

In 1492, the Christians took the last part of Spain that still belonged to the Moors, Granada. Boabdil, the last Moorish King of Granada, surrendered to King Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile on 2 January 1492. Ferdinand and Isabella then ruled all of Spain.

Before this, there were a number of Christian countries in what is now called Spain. Two of these countries, Castile and Aragon, came together when Ferdinand II of Aragon married the queen Isabella of Castile. The King ruled as much as the Queen.

In the same year, 1492, they sent Christopher Columbus to sail across the Atlantic Ocean. Columbus found the islands of the Caribbean Sea.

When other Europeans explored, like Hernán Cortés and Francisco Pizarro, they found out that there were two continents there - North America and South America. Spanish conquistadores took over very large parts of those two continents. This empire did not make Spain a rich country, for most of the money had to be spent in wars in Italy and elsewhere. Some of these wars were fought against other European countries who were trying to take over parts of the Americas.

Meanwhile, at home, the Muslim manuscripts had been either burnt or taken to other countries. Jews had also been expelled from Spain. Some Jews remained but they had to become Christians. Among the few old things kept and respected in Spain were in music: harmony and stringed instruments. The buildings that had been built by the Moors were kept, and many Muslim religious buildings (mosques) were turned into churches. Some Jewish religious buildings were also turned into churches. Many Arab words became part of the Spanish Language

The grandson of Ferdinand and Isabella was Charles. When his grandfather died he inherited Castille and Aragon. He also inherited many territories at the death of his other grandfather, Maximilian I of Austria. Charles received from Maximilian the Austria state and the territories of Burgundy. He was named Charles I in Spain, but he was elected as the emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, and was called Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor. This made the empire bigger than ever. However, it was not a single country, but a personal union of many independent countries with a single King. At first many Spaniards did not want Charles as their king, so they fought against him. However, he won.

Charles did not like the Protestant Reformation, and fought against it.

In the 18th century some of the parts of that large empire became their own countries, or were taken over by new countries, such as the United States of America.

Spain (and other European countries) was invaded by Napoleon of France. Britain sent troops to defend the peninsula, since it was so weak. Most of the Spanish Empire became independent in the following decades.

There was not much peace in Spain during the first part of the 20th century. Some Spaniards tried to set up a government chosen by the people (a democracy), and they made Alfonso XIII leave the country. However, in 1936, two different groups of Spaniards went to war over whether the government should be a democracy, in the Spanish Civil War (although those on the side of the Republic were largely socialist or anarchist), or take orders from one person. In 1939, those who wanted democracy were defeated, and a nationalist dictator named Francisco Franco took over the government.

Francisco Franco died on 20 November 1975. He had decided that Spain should have a monarchy again, and he chose Juan Carlos, the son of Juan of Bourbon who had been forced to leave the country, to be king and Adolfo Suárez to become its first Prime Minister. But the king and Suárez did not rule as a dictator; instead, they chose to set up a democracy.

On 23 February 1981 a group of people who had supported the now dead General Franco tried to take control of the democratic Spanish Parliament by force, they entered the building and fired guns in the air. It was seen live on Spanish television and there was widespread fear that this might be the start of another civil war. However, Juan Carlos I, quickly appeared on television and broadcast to the nation that they should remain calm. The people responsible for the attempt to take over the country were arrested.

Now Spain is a modern democratic country, and does business with many countries around the world. It is the eighth largest economy in the world and is an important part of the European Union.

On 2 June 2014, Juan Carlos I announced that he would abdicate in favour of his son, Felipe VI. The date of abdication and handover to Felipe occurred on 19 June 2014. He and his wife kept their titles.

Ancient religions in Spain were mostly pagan. Today, however, at least 55 percent of Spain is Roman Catholic. Spanish mystic Teresa of Ávila is an important figure within Catholicism. 27 percent of Spaniards are irreligious. 2 percent are from other religions, this include Baha'i Buddhists, Jain, Muslim,Unitarian Universalism and Zoroastrianism.

The middle of Spain is a high, dry, flat land called La Meseta. In La Meseta it can be very hot in the summer and cold or very cold in the winter. Spain also has many mountain ranges. The Mount Teide (Tenerife, Canary Islands), the highest mountain of Spain and the islands of the Atlantic (it is the third largest volcano in the world from its base). In the north there is a range of mountains called Los Picos de Europa (The European Peaks). Here it is very cold in winter with a lot of snow but with gentle warm summers and wet winters.

In the south-east of the country is a range of mountains called La Sierra Nevada (The Snowy Mountains). This range of mountains contains the highest mountain in mainland Spain, Mulacen, at 2952 metres. La Sierra Nevada is very popular in winter for winter sports, especially skiing. Snow remains on its peaks throughout the year. The south coast, has a warm and temperate climate, not very hot or very cold. Since Spain is in the south of Europe, it is very sunny. Many people from Northern Europe take their vacations in Spain, enjoying its beaches and cities.

Spain has a border with Portugal in the west and borders with France and Andorra in the North. In the south, it borders Gibraltar, a British territory. The Spanish territories of Ceuta and Melilla are in North Africa and border onto Morocco.

Spain is divided into Autonomous Communities, which means that they have their own regional governments. They are Andalucía (capital city Seville), Aragon (capital city Zaragoza), Asturias (capital city Oviedo), Balearic Islands (capital city Palma de Mallorca), Basque Country (capital city Vitoria), Canary Islands (capital cities Santa Cruz de Tenerife and Las Palmas), Cantabria (capital city Santander), Castilla-La Mancha (capital city Toledo), Castile and Leon (capital city Valladolid), Catalonia (capital city Barcelona), Extremadura (capital city Merida), Galicia (capital city Santiago de Compostela), La Rioja (capital city Logrono), Madrid Community (capital city Madrid), Murcia Community (capital city Murcia), Navarra (capital city Pamplona) and the Valencia Community (capital city Valencia).

In Spain, many people live in cities or close to cities. The ten biggest city areas are:

While Spanish is the most spoken language in the country, other languages like Catalan, Basque or Galician are also spoken in a few territories.

Spaceflight is when an object (or spacecraft) made by man flies into outer space. A spaceflight can occur with or without humans on board.

The Russian Soyuz program, the American Space Shuttle and the International Space Station are examples of manned missions. (Manned means the spacecraft has humans on board.) On the other hand, examples of unmanned flights are space probes which fly into deeper space, and satellites which travel around and orbit the Earth or other planets. (Unmanned means the spacecraft does not have any people on board.) Space probes and satellites are both machines that work either by radio control from Earth or are fully automatic.

Spaceflight is used for space exploration such as manned missions to the Earth's moon or unmanned missions to other planets in the solar system. Spaceflight can also be used for tourism and satellite telecommunications. A spaceflight begins with a rocket launch, which provides enough energy to get out of Earth's atmosphere and to orbit the Earth. Once the rocket is in space, the activity of the rocket is watched and studied by scientists back on Earth. Some rockets may remain in space forever, some break apart when they re-enter Earth's atmosphere. Some spacecraft are made to land on other planets, and most manned spacecraft are made to land back on Earth, most of the time using a parachute to land safely.

On October 3, 1942, a German V-2 missile crossed the Kármán line ( above the Earth) on October 3, 1942. This was the first spaceflight. The first man-made satellite to travel around Earth was the Russian Sputnik 1 on October 4, 1957.

Some examples of manned spacecraft are Soyuz, Starship, Starliner, Gemini, Apollo, Crew Dragon, Mercury (It is both the name of a spacecraft and a planet), the Space Shuttle, and Orion.

Unmanned spacecraft include communications satellites, space telescopes, space probes and planet rovers.

Switzerland (; ; ; ; Swiss German: Schwiz) is a country in Western Europe. Switzerland is a federation of 26 cantons.

The official name of Switzerland is Confoederatio Helvetica (Swiss Confederation). This is Latin and is not often used except for official state documents. When it was founded in 1291, Switzerland was a confederation, but later became a federation, even though it has kept the word Confoederatio in its official name.

Switzerland does not have an official capital city, but Bern is used as though it is the capital. The largest city of Switzerland is Zürich.

To the north of Switzerland is Germany. East of Switzerland are Austria and Liechtenstein. To the south of Switzerland is Italy. To the west of Switzerland is France.

Switzerland is known for its neutrality. A country is neutral when it does not take sides among the countries who are at war. Switzerland has been neutral since 1815. However, on February 28, 2022 Switzerland joined the imposition of economic sanctions against Russia.

Many international organizations are in Switzerland. The United Nations has a main office (but not its headquarters) in Geneva. Its predecessor organization, the League of Nations, was headquartered in Geneva.

There are four official languages in Switzerland: German, French, Italian, and Romansh. Some cantons and even towns have two languages spoken in them, and the largest canton by area, Graubünden, has three. About 2/3 of the population speak German; French is spoken in the west of the country, and Italian in the canton of Ticino. The Romansh language is spoken in parts of Graubünden, by less than 1% of the Swiss population.

The area of Switzerland is 41,285 km². The confederation is divided into 23 full states called cantons. All 26 cantons are: Aargau, Appenzell Innerrhoden, Appenzell Ausserrhoden, Basel-Stadt, Basel-Land, Berne, Fribourg, Geneva, Glarus, Graubünden, Jura, Lucerne, Neuchâtel, Nidwalden, Obwalden, Schaffhausen, Schwyz, Solothurn, St. Gallen, Thurgau, Ticino, Uri, Valais, Vaud, Zug, and Zürich.

The mountains are very tall in the center and south of Switzerland. About 60% of Switzerland is in the Alps area. Few people live there. The highest mountain is the Dufourspitze at 4,634 m.

Many of the mountains have ice all year. This ice is called glaciers. The rivers Rhine, Rhône, and many other rivers start in the mountains of Switzerland.

There are many lakes in Switzerland. The biggest lakes are all in the north and west: Lake Geneva (Lac Léman), Lake Zürich, Lake Neuchâtel and Lake Constance (Bodensee).

Mountains in the north of Switzerland are fewer and smaller. Most Swiss people live in cities and towns in the north. The Jura mountains are in the northwest of Switzerland.

There are about 8.4 million people in Switzerland. About 64% of the people speak Swiss German (German Alemannic) as their first language, in northern and central Switzerland. 19% of the people speak French as their first language, mainly in the west of Switzerland. 8% of the people speak Italian, in the south of Switzerland. Only 1% of the people speak Romansh, in the southeastern part of Switzerland. Romansh is an old language that is similar to Latin.

The German-speaking people of Switzerland do not actually speak "German" as their native language. Swiss people speak something called Alemannic which has its own writing language and grammar but still is normally considered a German dialect. Alemannic may be difficult for Germans to understand. Swiss people do write like the people from Germany and also speak standard German very well, especially in the larger cities.

About 23% of the people in Switzerland do not come from Switzerland. They come from other places to usually work in Switzerland.

The religion of most people in Switzerland is Christianity. 43% of the population follow Catholicism. 35% of the population follow Protestantism. 2% follow Eastern Orthodoxy. The religion of 4% of the population is Islam. The rest follow other religions, or they have no religion.  In recent years, many people in Switzerland have left the Catholic or Protestant Church.  They may still believe in something, but they no longer want to belong to an official religion or church.  Many couples are choose a non-religious (or "free") wedding ceremony outside the church.

Switzerland is famous for its chocolate, cheese, banking system, watches and mountains.

In 1291, people from Uri, Schwyz and Unterwalden wanted to be free. They signed a contract to work together called the Eternal Alliance. Together, they could be free from the people of Habsburg, who were very strong. In 1315 the people from the Eternal Alliance fought the Habsburgs in battles at Morgarten, Sempach and Näfels. The people of the Eternal Alliance won all the battles.

People from other areas signed the contract and joined the Eternal Alliance. More and more people worked together to be free. In 1648, other countries from Europe made an agreement that Switzerland was free. The name of this agreement was the Peace of Westphalia. More areas came to be part of Switzerland.

Switzerland was important to the slave trade that forced black Africans to be sold as slaves. Swiss companies made indiennes, which are a kind of cloth. These cloths were sent to Africa and exchanged for captured slaves. Some Swiss also joined French companies already making indiennes or owned plantations with slaves in French colonies.

In 1798, France invaded Switzerland. The ruler of France was Napoleon. He changed many laws. In 1815 Switzerland again became independent from France. Other countries agreed at the Congress of Vienna that Switzerland was free and neutral.

The constitution of Switzerland that was made after a short civil war in 1848 was replaced in 1999. Switzerland did not fight in World War I or World War II. Since 2002, Switzerland is part of the United Nations. It did not join the United Nations for 57 years because of its neutrality.

Switzerland is a republic. Switzerland does not have the same kind of president as the United States or France. Seven people (called ministers) do the job of president. They are called the Federal Council in English, Bundesrat in German, Conseil Fédéral in French, Consiglio Federale in Italian and Cussegl Federal in Romansh. Every year one of these people is made president. The president is not more important than the other six people. At present 3 of the 7 people are women.

There are two parts of parliament in Switzerland. The Council of States and the National Council. Only both together can make laws. There are 46 people in the Council of States. Every full canton of Switzerland can send 2 people. There are 200 people in the National Council. The biggest canton sends most people to the National Council. The smallest 6 cantons can only send one person to the National Council.

The people of Switzerland can collect signatures if they do not like a new law or a law change. This is called a referendum. If enough people sign a referendum, the people vote. The people can also collect signatures to change the constitution. This is called an initiative. The constitution is the basic law of a country.

Switzerland is not a member of the European Union, but it is member of the European Free Trade Agreement (EFTA). The EFTA makes trade with other countries in Europe easier. In 1999 Switzerland and the European Union made a contract. This contract makes trade even easier. They recently made two other contracts.

The banks of Switzerland and the insurance companies in Switzerland together produce eleven per cent of the gross domestic product. Tourism is important in Switzerland. There are many places for tourists. Davos, St. Moritz, Pontresina and Flims are in Switzerland. These towns are important both in winter (for skiing) and in summer. Tourists also like the cities of Lucerne, Geneva, and Zürich.

In 2011 the pharmaceutical industry in Switzerland directly and indirectly employed about 135,000 people. The companies Novartis and Roche are the second and third largest pharma companies in the world. They both have invented many life saving drugs because of well developed research and development facilities.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Switzerland was , on 11 August 2003 in Grono.

The lowest temperature ever recorded in Switzerland was , on 12 January 1987 in La Brévine.

The literature of Switzerland is divided according to the language used. Most Swiss literature was written in German from 1291 until 1798. French became popular in Bern and elsewhere in the 18th century and many words also in the German speaking parts of Switzerland come from the French and are not known to Germans. Italian language and Romansch-Latin literature are less common in Switzerland.

Heidi, a book for children by Johanna Spyri, is the most famous book of Switzerland. It is set in the mountains in Graubünden.

Skiing, snowboarding and mountaineering are among the most popular sports in Switzerland. Because of the large mountain range the nature of the country is well suited for such activities. Bobsleigh was invented in St. Moritz. The first world ski championships were held in Mürren (1931) and St. Moritz (1934). St. Moritz hosted the second Winter Olympic Games in 1928 and in 1948. Among the most successful skiers and world champions are Pirmin Zurbriggen and Didier Cuche.

Many Swiss are fans of football. The national team or 'Nati' is widely supported. Switzerland was the joint host, with Austria, of the Euro 2008 tournament. Many Swiss also follow ice hockey. In April 2009, Switzerland hosted the 2009 IIHF World Championship for the 10th time. The National League A is the most attended league in Europe.

The many lakes in the country make Switzerland a good place for sailing. The largest, Lake Geneva, is the home of the sailing team Alinghi. They were the first European team to win the America's Cup in 2003. They also won in 2007. Tennis has become more popular. Swiss players such as Martina Hingis and Roger Federer have won multiple Grand Slams.

Motorsport racecourses and events were banned in Switzerland after the 1955 Le Mans disaster. There were exceptions for events such as Hillclimbing. This ban was overturned in June 2007. During this period, the country still had successful racing drivers such as Clay Regazzoni, Sebastian Buemi, Jo Siffert and successful World Touring Car Championship driver Alain Menu. Switzerland also won the A1GP World Cup of Motorsport in 2007–08 with driver Neel Jani. Swiss motorcycle racer Thomas Lüthi won the 2005 MotoGP World Championship in the 125cc category.

Traditional sports include Swiss wrestling or "Schwingen". It is an old tradition from the rural central cantons and considered the national sport by some. Hornussen is another native Swiss sport. It is like a cross between baseball and golf. Steinstossen is the Swiss version of stone put, a competition in throwing a heavy stone. It is recorded to have taken place in Basel in the 13th century. It is also central to the Unspunnenfest, first held in 1805.

Time is the continued proсess of existence and events. It happens in an apparently irreversible way from the history, through the now and to the future.

To measure time, we can use anything that repeats itself regularly. One example is the start of a new day (as Earth rotates on its axis). Two more are the phases of the moon (as it orbits the Earth), and the seasons of the year (as the Earth orbits the Sun).

Even in ancient times, people developed calendars to keep track of the number of days in a year. They also developed sundials that used the moving shadows cast by the sun through the day to measure times smaller than a day. Today, highly accurate clocks can measure time in less than a billionth of a second. The study of time measurement is known as  horology.

The SI (International Systems of Units) unit of time is one second, written as s. When used as a variable in mathematics, time is often represented by the symbol .

In Einsteinian physics, time and space can be combined into a single concept. For more on the topic, see space-time continuum.

Terrorism is the use of fear and violence for political, religious or ideological reasons. Many different types of social or political organizations might use terrorism to try to achieve their goals. People who carry out terrorism are called terrorists. The foundation of modern terrorism is the work of Sergey Nechayev, a Russian  who developed strategies for carrying out terrorism, which also includes politics.

It is difficult to explain terrorism. Terrorism has no official criminal law definition at the international level. Common definitions of terrorism refer to violent acts which are intended to create fear. The acts may be done for a religious, political or ideological motive and use illegal violence. Some definitions now include acts of unlawful violence and war crimes. The use of similar tactics by criminal gangs is not usually called terrorism. The same actions may be called terrorism when they are done by a politically-motivated group.

There are over 10,000 definitions of "terrorism". In some cases, the same group may be described as "freedom fighters" by its supporters and "terrorists" by its opponents. The term is often used by states to criticize political opponents. One form of terrorism is the use of violence against noncombatants for the purpose of gaining publicity for a group, cause, or individual. According to Memorial Institute for Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT), terrorists killed 20,498 people in 2006. The major effect of terrorism comes from the fear that is generated.

Counter-terrorism is broad in scope. Types of counter-terrorism include but not limited:

The more modern governments restrict weapons to their military, the more ordinary people are helpless against terrorists. The Global Terrorism Database (University of Maryland, College Park) has recorded more than 61,000 incidents of non-state terrorism. These caused at least 140,000 deaths between 2000 and 2014.

Transport, or transportation, is moving people or things from one place to another place. Transport can be divided into infrastructure, vehicles and operations.

Infrastructure includes cableways, roads, railways, airports, canals and pipelines. The infrastructure is the network where things are carried. Infrastructure also includes airports, railway stations, bus stations and seaports (docks). Infrastructure is usually built by governments and paid for by taxes from the citizens of a country or region. Infrastructure such as roads and railways are designed by civil engineers and urban planners.

Vehicles or vessels travel on the infrastructure. Vehicles include cable cars, cars, trucks, trains, spaceships and airplanes. Vehicles are usually designed by mechanical engineers. Vessels include boats, ferries, and barges which travel on canals and use docks and seaports. In the same way that trains use train stations, airplanes use airports. In the same way that trains use railway lines (train tracks), airplanes use flight paths and then fly in the sky.

Operations control the system. Operations include traffic signals, railway signals and air traffic control. Operations also include the government policies (a policy is a plan of action to guide decisions and actions) and regulations (a set or group of laws and rules) used to control the system, such as tolls, fuel taxes, and traffic laws.

Transport and communication can be used instead of each other (someone could telephone a person rather than visit them). Transport traffic also needs communication.  For example, air traffic control lets more airplanes fly. So, an increase of either transport or communication usually leads to an increase in the other one.

Transport uses a lot of energy. Trams, trolleybuses and trains use electricity and cycling is human-powered. Most transport uses hydrocarbons (oil and gas). This can create pollution. Environmental regulations (laws) and low-pollution fuels (for example liquified natural gas) can reduce pollution. But as more vehicles are used, more pollution is created.  Ethanol and biodiesel pollute less than petroleum.

Time zones give specific areas on the Earth a time of day that is earlier or later than the neighboring time zones. This is because when it is daytime on one side of the earth, it is night-time on the other side. There are 24 time zones dividing the earth into different times, each with its own name, like the North American Eastern Time Zone. The North American Eastern Time Zone contains large cities in North America like New York City and Miami.

Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) began in 1675. This was when the Royal Observatory, Greenwich was built to help ships find their longitude at sea. GMT was a standard reference for time keeping when each city kept a different local time. When railways began carrying many people quickly among cities keeping different time, they adopted time zones to simplify operations. By about 1900, almost all time on earth was in the form of standard time zones.

Greenwich Mean Time is now called UTC (Coordinated Universal Time). UTC is the time standard of the world. All other parts of the world are offset (plus or minus) according to their longitude. Most of the zones are offset by a full hour, but there are some offset by half an hour or 45 minutes.

In some parts of the world they follow the Daylight Saving Time (DST), and during this period of time in summer they add one hour to their normal solar hour.

In the poles, the time is UTC in the North Pole and UTC+12 in the South Pole.

The time zones are numbered in relation to the UTC, so in Los Angeles the time zone will be UTC−8, in London UTC+0, in Rome UTC+1, and in New Delhi UTC+5:30.

The government uses the money it gets from taxes to pay for things. For example, taxes are used to pay for people who work for the government, such as the military and police, provide services such as education and health care, and to maintain or build things like roads, bridges and sewers. The earliest known taxes were those of the Egyptian Old Kingdom.

There are many different kinds of taxes. They may be direct tax or indirect  tax.

Often because different parts of governments use taxes for different things, people end up paying lots of taxes.

In the United States, for example, the national government has an income tax; most states have an income tax or a sales tax, or both; and cities and towns may have a sales tax or a property tax. In some states such as Ohio, the sales tax is different in each county.

In ancient times, people from one city or area would attack another place, and make the people there pay tribute. Tribute meant that the attacked people would pay money (or other things), and the attacker would stop attacking them. A famous tribute was the Danegeld, when people from Denmark conquered part of England and made the English pay thousands of silver coins.

Anarchists and Libertarians are against all taxes or against high taxes. As people are paying them unwillingly and under the threat of sanctions, they say that taxation is the same as robbery. (Taxation as theft)

Tokyo () is the capital and largest city of Japan. It is on the island of Honshu in the region of Kanto. Tokyo is the center of the Japanese government. The Imperial Palace is in Tokyo but it's not actually public for tourists to visit. Tokyo is the center of business, trade, and industry of Japan. The city is the center of the second largest metropolitan area in the world. It faces Tokyo Bay.

It became the capital city of Japan in the middle of 19th century, when its name changed from "Edo" to "Tokyo". Before then, Kyoto was the capital of Japan. The Emperor of Japan, or Tenno, lived in Kyoto. Edo was the place where the Tokugawa Shoguns lived. The city grew up under the control of the shoguns. Before then it was a small town on the sea. Edo means "the mouth of a river" in Japanese.

Tokyo was destroyed by fires started by the Great Kantō earthquake in 1923. It was also badly damaged by bombs during World War II. After Japan lost the war, the city was rebuilt.

Tokyo began as a small fishing village named Edo(江戸、えど). Edo was in the old Musashi Province.

The Edo clan built walls to protect the town in the late 12th century. In 1457, Ōta Dōkan built Edo Castle. In 1590, Tokugawa Ieyasu made Edo his base. He became shogun in 1603, and the town became the center of his military government. This marked the beginning of the Edo period. During this time, Edo grew into one of the largest cities in the world. More than one million people lived there by the 18th century.

Edo was not the capital of Japan. The emperor lived in the capital, Kyoto. However, since the shogun was more powerful than the emperor throughout Japanese history, Edo had more power. After about 263 years, the Meiji Restoration removed the shogun from power. In 1869, the 17-year-old Emperor Meiji moved to Edo. The old Edo Castle became the Kokyo, the Imperial Palace.

The Tokyo Prefecture and the city of Tokyo were established. This was the capital city until 1943.

In 1943, Tokyo City and the " municipalities of what was formerly  (1869-1943)" combined into one.

Central Tokyo is built around major railway stations. Suburban railways were built relatively cheaply at street level. There are some expressways.

Tokyo suffered two major catastrophes in the 20th century. The 1923 Great Kantō earthquake left 140,000 dead or missing. World War II was the other disaster for the city. The Bombing of Tokyo from 1944 through 1945 killed between 75,000 and 200,000 people and destroyed half the city. This was almost as much damage as the atomic bombs of Hiroshima and Nagasaki combined.

Tokyo was completely rebuilt after the war. The 1964 Summer Olympics were a major world event. New high-rise developments such as Sunshine 60 started in the 1970s.

Tokyo has a four-season humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfa) with hot rainy summers and cool dry winters.

As of October 2007 about 8.7 million were living in Tokyo's 23 special wards. The number of people in Tokyo increases to over 15 million during the day. About 2.5 million workers and students enter the city everyday. The three central wards of Chiyoda, Chūō, and Minato increase the most. As of 2005, the regular population in those three areas was only 326,000 at night, but there are 2.4 million in those areas during the day.

Tokyo has many international residents. As of 2005, the most common groups in Tokyo are Chinese (123,661), Koreans (106,697), and Filipinos (31,077). Americans (18,848), British (7,696), Brazilian (5,300) and French (3,000) are less common.

The 23 special wards of Tokyo are the same area that had been called Tokyo City. On July 1, 1943, Tokyo City was merged with  to become a special government area. This made the wards different from other wards in Japan. Other city wards are part of a larger city government, but these are not.

Each ward is a municipality with its own mayor and assembly like the other cities of Japan. The special wards often use the word city in their official English name, e.g. Chiyoda City.

The wards have a unique administrative relationship with the prefectural government.  The Tokyo Metropolitan Government manages some public works such as water, sewer, and fire-fighting. To pay for these things, the prefecture collects the municipal taxes usually collected by a city.

Three wards of Tokyo make up the central part of the city. They are Chiyoda, Chūō and Minato.

Tokyo has many sight-seeing spots, but very few of them are old. There are very few buildings in Tokyo that are more than 50 years old. Popular places for visitors range from Tokyo Tower in the center of the city to Mount Takao out in the western countryside. Tokyo Skytree is a new tower and is the tallest in Japan. Traditional religious sights such as Meiji Shrine and Sensō-ji attract many tourists. The Imperial Palace can be seen in the middle of the city, but is not open to the public.

Tokyo is the cultural, business, and political center of the country. It is also the center of many transport systems. There are many air, rail, sea, and road links in and out of the city. Local subway and bus systems serve every part of the city.

Two commercial airports serve Tokyo. Haneda Airport is in the city limits next to Tokyo Bay. This airport is mostly for domestic travel. Most international flights to and from Tokyo go through Narita Airport in Chiba Prefecture(千葉県).

Several Shinkansen super-express railway lines begin at Tokyo Station, including the Tōkaidō Shinkansen going west, and the Tōhoku Shinkansen going northeast. Tokyo Metro is the city's major subway system.

Tokyo has a busy international and domestic port, but more traffic goes through the nearby port of Yokohama. There are domestic ferries to the islands of Tokyo, but also to other parts of the country such as Hokkaido.

Many highways meet in Tokyo, including: the Chūō, Kan-Etsu, Tōhoku, and Tōmei Expressways. All highway distances in Japan start from zero at a marker at Nihonbashi, Tokyo.

The Holocaust was the genocide of Jews in Europe by Nazi Germany, other Axis powers and their local collaborators in occupied territories between 1933 and 1945. At least 6,000,000 (six million) Jews (67% pre-war European Jews) were killed.

The Nazis called themselves Übermensch ("master race") and wanted to kill every Jew in Europe. In an organized, planned and deliberate way, they murdered around six million Jews and five million others who were not part of the "master race".

The Nazis persecuted Jews and other groups in many ways. They forced many Jews to live in bad neighborhoods. They transported millions of people to forced labor camps and death camps. They built death camps with gas chambers that could kill up to 2,000 people at a time.

In 1933, around 9,500,000 Jewish people lived in Europe. (This was less than 2% of Europe's population.) By the end of the Holocaust, nearly two out of every three Jews in Europe had been murdered in the Holocaust. The Nazis murdered Jews in every community they could during the Holocaust.

According to the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA),

The word holocaust originally described a religious sacrifice where animals were burned to ashes. At some point during the late 19th century, it also came to mean "large-scale destruction of a group of men". For instance, some people described the Armenian Genocide as a holocaust when it happened. After World War II, the Nazis' genocide against the Jews became widely known as "the Holocaust." This name was chosen to reflect how the bodies of concentration camp victims were burned to ash in fires or crematoria.

Today, mainstream scholars say it is offensive to use the word holocaust to describe something other than the World War II-era Holocaust. Holocaust survivor Elie Wiesel said that the word had become too trivialized. He pointed out examples of news networks using the word to describe a small-scale murder case or the defeat of a sports team.

The Nazis established around 44,000 concentration camps, death camps, and ghettos in Nazi-controlled parts of Europe and North Africa during World War II.

By mid-1941, the Nazis had forced almost all Jews in Nazi-occupied Poland into ghettos. The largest of these was the Warsaw Ghetto. In November 1940, the Nazis forced 380,000 Jews into the ghetto and locked them in. Over 80,000 of them died from starvation, overcrowding, disease, freezing to death, and other terrible conditions. The second largest, the Lodz Ghetto, held around 210,000 people in total. In this ghetto, more than one in every five people died from the terrible living conditions. According to Leo Schneiderman, who survived the Lodz Ghetto: "The whole ghetto was designed, actually, to starve the people out."

There were 23 main concentration camps and hundreds of sub-camps throughout the lands that Nazi Germany controlled. According to Karin Orth in the Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos: 1933-1945, as many as one thousand camps may have operated at a time. The Nazis used concentration camps for many purposes: to gather and isolate the Nazis' "enemies"; to punish and torture these "enemies"; to obtain forced labor; to steal victims' belongings on a massive scale; to perform medical experiments on prisoners; and to kill people.

The Nazis established six death camps in Poland. Their sole purpose was to kill Jews as quickly and  as possible.The death camps were:

Special Schutzstaffel (SS) units like the Einsatzgruppen killed hundreds, thousands, or even tens of thousands of Jews at a time in mass shootings. Sometimes they forced Jews and other prisoners to dig giant holes in the ground where, after days of hard work, they were shot. Their bodies were buried and burned in mass graves.

At Babi Yar in Kyiv, Ukraine, Einsatzgruppen killed 33,771 Jews in two days, between 29-30 September 1941. The Nazis continued to use Babi Yar for mass executions of Jews, Soviet prisoners or war, and Roma people throughout the war. As many as 100,000 people may have died there.

The Nazis first used gas chambers to kill people as part of their T4 Project (Aktion T4). The Nazis believed in eugenics and thought that people with disabilities, chronically ill people, and many elderly people were "useless eaters."

To eliminate these people, the Nazis sent them to killing centers like Hartheim Killing Facility, where they murdered them in gas chambers. According to the Britannica,

When they first used poison gas to kill Jews, the Nazis used gas vans that piped carbon monoxide into the passenger compartment. Soon, though, the Nazis built permanent gas chambers where they killed up to 2000 people at a time. By 1942 the Nazi's main method of murdering people in concentration camps was to kill them in gas chambers with Zyklon-B. This was a rat poison which had cyanide. In a planned, organized, and methodical way, they deported trains full of people to the extermination camps and sent them straight to the gas chambers. The Nazis killed around 1,100,000 people in concentration camp gas chambers using Zyklon-B.

The Nazis executed many people by shooting, stabbing, or beating them to death. Some people survived beatings, but suffered broken bones and/or died when their wounds got infected.

Many people also died in  from one camp to another. Some were killed in medical experiments by SS doctors like Josef Mengele. Others were worked to death.

The Nazis also deliberately killed prisoners in some concentration camps by treating them so terribly that many died. They forced prisoners to do hard forced labor, but fed them very little (about 25% of the calories needed to survive). In the winter, prisoners did not have warm clothing or heating, and many froze to death. Others developed frostbite, which sometimes worsened into gangrene.

Diseases spread quickly in the camps because there was no healthcare, no sanitation, and a lot of overcrowding. Lice were everywhere, and they spread typhus, which was "ever-present, both endemic and epidemic, [and] ". Other illnesses were common, including tuberculosis, malaria, meningitis, scabies, pneumonia, and diarrheal diseases. Prisoners who were too sick or injured to work were often killed.

The Nazis killed at least 6,000,000 Jews during the Holocaust.

67% European Jews were murdered in the Holocaust, including at least 3,000,000 Polish Jews. The Holocaust killed almost all of the Jewish children in Europe. Before World War II, there were about 1,600,000 Jewish children living in the lands that the Nazis would soon control. Only 6% of them survived World War II; between 1,000,000 and 1,500,000 died. Most European Jews had been killed by 1943 before reports of the mass extermination were received. As per the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM),

Between the 1st century the Holocaust, antisemitism had been a significant problem in Europe. Many people wrongly thought that all Jews became rich by stealing money from others, like Christians. Many believed Jews only liked other Jews. Since at least the 2nd century BC, people have levelled a range of false accusations against Jews, including the blood libel – the lie that Jews are taking blood from Christian kids.

These beliefs were not true and were based on stereotypes. However, these beliefs were popular in the German-speaking world and elsewhere in the late 1800s. Adolf Hitler was born in Austria during this time, when many people disliked Jews. He may have been jealous of Jewish success in Austria. However, in his book Mein Kampf ("My Struggle"), he said it was the Jews' fault that Germany and Austria lost World War I. He also said Germany's economic problems were the Jews' fault. Many people agreed with Hitler’s ideas and supported him as the leader of the Nazi Party.

Also, the Nazis justified the Holocaust with conspiracy theories based on self-victimization and inversion of reality. They accused Jews of controlling the world and blamed every problem on them. American historian Jeffrey Herf wrote in his book The Jewish Enemy: Nazi Propaganda during World War II and the Holocaust:

Herf said that Nazis' view of the Jews being an inferior race was not the motive for the Holocaust. Instead, it was the stereotype of Jews being an "all-powerful anti-German force" that made the Holocaust happen:

American legal scholar Kenneth L. Marcus presented the idea Accusation in a Mirror (AiM) to describe the tendency of genocide perpetrators – from Nazi Germans to Hutu nationalists – to accuse their victims of seeking a genocide against them in order to justify a genocide themselves. In psychology, such behaviour is called projection.

On the other hand, Some persons saved Jews during the Holocaust because they thought it was the right thing to do. Some of them were later given Righteous Among the Nations awards by Yad Vashem.

Some extremists say that the Holocaust did not happen or was not as bad as it was. This is called Holocaust denial, or Holocaust distortion.

Many Holocaust deniers say that the Nazis did not kill so many victims. Instead, they claim many of them died because they were ill or starving. However, a significant amount of evidence proves that Holocaust deniers are wrong. Jews were killed because Hitler ordered it. In Germany and some other countries, it is criminal to deny the Holocaust.

Contrary to public misconceptions, Holocaust denial does not only mean denying that the Holocaust happened. Instead, it also includes the following acts:

For instance, someone acknowledging that the Holocaust happened while denying the Nazi use of poison gas is also a Holocaust denier.

A trend of Holocaust distortion, some state-sponsored, is also seen in other European countries, including Austria, Croatia, Czechia, Hungary, Germany, Italy, Poland, The Polish government’s resolve to control the past culminated with [...] the Amendment to the Act on the Institute of National Remembrance [...] penalizes those who ‘slander the good name of the Polish nation’ and who ‘blame the Polish society for crimes committed by the Nazi Third Reich.’ In the book Decoding Antisemitism, co-author Hagen Troschke said that the common strategies of such Holocaust distortion consisted of:

Some scholars said that Holocaust distortion was going mainstream amid the rise of nationalism across Europe, where Jews were sometimes equated with the disliked Soviet communists against whom the Holocaust was considered "a reaction".

Some described the phenomenon with the concept mnemonic politics, where nationalist governments distorted the Holocaust by painting their ethnic majority as the victims rather than the Jews or Roma. Such distortion is sometimes rooted in the conspiracy theory that the focus on Jews is an EU plot to suppress national identity and promote "cosmopolitanism" and "multiculturalism".

The Suez Canal (Arabic: قناة السويس, Qanā al-Suways, French: Le Canal de Suez) is a canal in Egypt. It lies west of the Sinai Peninsula. The canal is 163 km long (101 miles) and, at its narrowest point, 200 m wide (656 ft). It runs between Port Said (Būr Sa'īd) on the Mediterranean Sea, and Suez (al-Suways) on the Red Sea. It was built by a French company. The canal was started in 1859 and finished in 1869.

The canal allows ships to travel between Europe and Asia without having to go the way around Africa. This saves time and fuel. It was built for Europeans to go to and from the Indian Ocean.

In 1859, Egyptian workers and European engineers, working for Ferdinand de Lesseps of the Universal Suez Ship Canal Company, began digging under a contract with the Khedive of Ottoman Egypt. It took ten years to build. The first ship passed through the canal 17 November, 1869; Giuseppe Verdi wrote the famous opera Aida for this ceremony.

The canal made it possible to easily transport goods across the world. The canal also allowed Europeans to travel to East Africa, and soon to take control of it. The British tried to stop the canal, fearing that it would increase French power in the Indian Ocean. Later, they bought shares in the company.

The success of the Suez Canal encouraged the French to try to build the Panama Canal. But they did not finish it. The Panama Canal was finished later.

The canal was a central point during the Six Day War in 1967. A UN peacekeeping force has been stationed in the Sinai Peninsula since 1974, to avoid more wars. The canal reopened in 1975.

About 15,000 ships pass through the canal each year, which is about 14% of world shipping. Each ship takes up to 16 hours to cross the canal. In 2015 a central part of the canal was expanded so more ships can go through and go faster.

The canal was blocked for part of late March 2021 by the Ever Given, a container ship, which became stuck diagonally.

The Beatles were an English pop/rock band, started in Liverpool, England in 1960. The members were John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison, and Ringo Starr. Most people say they are the most  and  band in the history of popular music. The group were a main part of the creation of 1960s counterculture. They began as a skiffle band, and were influenced by 1950s American rock and roll. In their later years, the band experimented with genres like different types of rock, classical and Indian music.

Their main songwriters were Lennon and McCartney. Before The Beatles became popular, they played in clubs in Liverpool and Hamburg over three years between 1960 and 1963, with Stuart Sutcliffe playing bass. They went through many drummers, including Pete Best, before finally asking Ringo Starr to join in 1962. Sutcliffe also quit, meaning Paul McCartney started playing the bass instead. Brian Epstein was their manager and George Martin produced most of their music. Their first single was "Love Me Do", in late 1962. It was a hit and they became popular in the United Kingdom. As they became more popular, their popularity was named "Beatlemania".

By 1964, the Beatles were worldwide stars and led the "British Invasion" of the USA. They made some of the best-selling albums of the 1960s, with twelve studio albums. They broke up in 1970. John Lennon was later murdered by Mark David Chapman in New York City in 1980 outside of The Dakota and George Harrison died of lung cancer in 2001. McCartney and Starr still make music. In 2023, they released their final single "Now and Then".

Starting in 1956, John Lennon and several of his friends played in a British band called the Quarrymen. Over the next few years, the members of the band changed, and by 1960, the band was called the Beatles. They did not have their first hit until 1962. In February 1963 their song, "Please Please Me", reached the number 1 position on the British charts. This was the first of a record 19 British number 1 singles. They first came to the United States in 1964. They were met at the John F. Kennedy International Airport in New York City by thousands of screaming American teenagers. The Beatles were so popular that they were attacked by screaming fans everywhere they went around the world. The effect they had on their fans was known as 'Beatlemania'. The Beatles made their first live American television appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show on 9 February 1964. About 74 million viewers—about half of the American population—watched the group perform on the show. Beatles songs soon filled the top 5 places on the American top 40 chart - a record that has never been matched.

After the Beatles became so popular in the US, other British bands, such as The Rolling Stones, The Animals, The Kinks and Gerry and the Pacemakers had songs become hits there as well. So many British bands became popular after the Beatles' success that this time became known in America as the "British Invasion".

Toward the mid-1960s, The Beatles became bolder with their style of music. This largely started in 1965, with the release of the album Rubber Soul, which expanded even more with Revolver in 1966, and hit a peak in 1967 with the release of Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, which was named as the greatest album of all time by Rolling Stone Magazine. They were also named the most influential artists of all time by Rolling Stone magazine, because their music, clothing style, and attitudes shaped much of what was popular among young people in the 1960s. They were all  awarded an OBE in 1965 by Harold Wilson. He was accused of having debased and cheapened the honours system.

The Beatles became so popular that no regular concert venue was big enough for their concerts. This led to them playing the first ever stadium rock concert at Shea Stadium in America, to around 50,000 people. The Beatles stopped touring and playing live music in 1966 because they were sick of audiences screaming so loudly that their music could not be heard. They were also tired of the pressures of touring. Among other things, they were so popular that thousands of people would gather outside the hotels they stayed in day and night meaning that they could never leave their rooms unless they were playing a concert.

The Beatles broke up in 1970 because of the pressures of fame and each member becoming more independent both in their personal lives and musically. In 1973 the two-disc sets "1962-1966" (the "Red Album") and "1967-1970" "(the "Blue Album") were released. These were both re-released on CD in 1993.

The band was still very popular all over the world after they broke up. They are the best-selling music acts of all time, with sales between 600 million to 1 billion records. Their music is still important and still influences many musicians. Musicians today perform cover versions of Beatles songs, and people everywhere still listen to their music. Their song 'Yesterday' has been recorded by more artists than any other song. It is also the song that has been played the most on radio ever.

The Beatles made thirteen albums and twenty-six singles together. They also started their own record label, Apple Records. They made two movies, A Hard Day's Night and Help!, where they appeared as actors. Later they made Magical Mystery Tour, a television special. Yellow Submarine was a cartoon movie based on their music. Let It Be showed them working on a new album.

After the Beatles broke up in 1969, all four members started their own solo careers.

John Lennon became a famous peace activist in the late 1960s and early 1970s. He wrote successful songs including "Give Peace a Chance", "Imagine", and "Happy Xmas (War Is Over)". John Lennon was murdered on December 8, 1980 outside his home in New York. Part of Central Park in New York and an airport in Liverpool are named in his honor.

The other three Beatles got together in the 1990s to make two new records. They used demo recordings of two John Lennon songs and added their own new parts. Producer Jeff Lynne helped them so all four members could appear on the songs. The songs were "Free as a Bird" and "Real Love". Both were top 5 hits in the UK in 1995 and 1996.

Paul McCartney started the band Wings with his wife Linda. In 1977 his song, "Mull of Kintyre", became the biggest selling single in British history. It sold even more copies than the Beatles' singles. Paul McCartney was knighted in 1997.

George Harrison and Ringo Starr had early success as solo artists but were less successful later on. Harrison formed the group the Traveling Wilburys in the 80s with other rock legends Bob Dylan, Roy Orbison, Tom Petty, and Jeff Lynne. Harrison died of lung cancer on November 29, 2001. Starr still tours the world with his "All Starr Band" and was knighted in 2018.

The Beatles made 13 very successful albums during their active years from 1960 to 1970. Listed below are the albums made during their career.

Sydney (, also ) is a city on the east coast of Australia which is the capital city of New South Wales. About five and a half million people live in Sydney which makes it the biggest city in both Australia and Oceania.

Sydney started in 1788, when the Captain Arthur Phillip brought the First Fleet to settle in Australia. The settlers were mostly convicts from crowded prisons in England and Ireland, with a group of soldiers to guard them. The country is home to more than 200 spoken languages with a large population of overseas-born residents. The first people to occupy the area were Australian Aboriginals.

In Sydney, there are many famous buildings: the Sydney Opera House, the Queen Victoria Building and the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Sydney has a large harbour and many beaches. The most famous beach is Bondi Beach. Some other famous beaches are Coogee Beach and Manly Beach. A popular coastal walk to do is the Bondi to Coogee Coastal Walk. Famous parts of the harbour are Darling Harbour and Circular Quay. The Royal National Park is a popular and famous park in southern Sydney.

Sydney has many things to see and do. These include visiting Taronga Zoo (a park for animals) on the northern side of the harbour, eating food, looking at art or watching sports (like cricket or rugby) or walking down George Street which has many nice shops. Sydney has some of Australia's best shopping, and the Blue Mountains are about two hours' drive away to the west. Many people go to Sydney City to watch the great fireworks display over the harbour on New Year's Eve. Sydney holds events throughout the year that attract tourists from around the world, some namely events are Vivid Sydney, Royal Easter Show, and more.

Sydney is home to a range of events that happen throughout the year, drawing many tourists and visitors to the city. One of Sydney's biggest event holding convention centre is the newly rebuilt International Convention Centre located by Darling Harbour, Sydney.

High-profile global events held in Sydney were: 2007 APEC Leaders Conference, 2008 World Youth Day and the 2014 G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting.

Vivid Sydney is held every year in May and June in the winter and is a display of light shows, art installations and music from local and international artists.

The Royal Easter Show is held in Sydney Olympic Park throughout the Easter public holiday period in March or April. It is a family attraction with rides, carnival games, showbags and food tents. There are also agriculture shows where children can learn more about farm animals as well as animal feeding areas. Shows such as woodcutting and animal competitions are popular every year.

Mercedes Benz Fashion weekend runs for two days every year and features runway shows by leading Australian designers. The event is attended by fashion journalists, magazine editors, bloggers and fashion buyers. There are also Styling Sessions and VIP parties at the home of fashion week in Carriageworks in the inner city suburb of Redfern.

Sydney is a city located on the East Coast of Australia. It is currently the largest city in Australia, and the continent of Oceania. Sydney is known for having been the original landing spot for the British. It is situated next to the Blue Mountains. Sydney has more than 650 suburbs, and 38 local government areas.

Sydney lies on a drowned coastline on the east coast of New South Wales, where the ocean level has risen up to flood deep river valleys carved in the Sydney Triassic sandstone, which was laid down about 200 million years ago. Sydney has over two major regions: the Cumberland Plain, a mostly flying to the west of Sydney Harbour, and the Hornsby Plateau, a tableland north you  of the Harbour. Sydney's native plant species are mostly eucalyptus trees,  and its soils are red and yellow in colour. Sydney has nine rivers and just over a hundred creeks.

Sydney has a humid subtropical climate with warm to hot summers and cool winters, and rainfall spread throughout the year. Hotter temperatures are recorded inland in the western suburbs, because the coast is moderated by the ocean. Rainfall is higher in the first half of the year when easterly winds are common, and lower in late winter/early spring when winds are more westerly, but rain has been very changeable in recent years.

East coast lows bring heavy rainfall to the Sydney area, typically in autumn to early winter. In the warm months, rain comes in short heavy falls in the afternoons, usually with a thunderstorm. Snow is unheard of, but major snowfall was last reported in Sydney on 28 June 1836. The El Niño–Southern Oscillation are an important feature in Sydney's weather patterns: drought and bushfire on the one hand, and storms and flooding on the other.

The highest recorded temperature in the city was , which was experienced on 18 January 2013. The highest recorded temperature in the west was , observed on 4 January 2020 in the suburb of Penrith. Hot days are usually ended by a southerly buster, a windy sea breeze that comes from the southeast. While Sydney CBD (Observatory Hill) has never recorded frost, the far western suburbs usually get frost in winter. The ultraviolet index rating in the summer averages at 12, but can reach as high as 13. Windspeed recorded in Sydney Airport averages at 24.3 km/h (15.0 mph), making Sydney the windiest capital city in Australia.

Translation means to copy writing or speech from one language into a different language.

The people who do translation are called translators. A translator who is copying a book into another language may use a language dictionary to find out how a word is written in another language. A translator who works with the spoken word is also called an interpreter. Translators can work independently as freelancers or by being hired by translation agencies. People who translate poetry, novels, drama, or short stories are called literary translators.

In computer technology, translation from a programming language to a machine language is called compiling.

There are free translators on the internet. A notable example of this is Google Translate.

A tank is an armored fighting vehicle, typically armed with a  gun mounted on a gun turret and a few machine guns.

A tank is covered in thick armour to protect it from enemy weapons. Tanks have tracks that wrap around its wheels to spread out its weight and let it cross rough terrain. Most tanks have a powerful gun and one or more machine guns.

A tank normally has 3-5 crew members with at least a driver, commander and gunner.  There may also be a loader, who handles the ammunition for the main gun (so the gunner does not have to take eyes off the target).  Some WWII tanks also had a separate soldier responsible for the radio.  Since then, tank crews have evolved to have each person do one of these things, but in their early stages, the commander was often the loader and radio operator, and in a few tanks was also the driver.

The first tanks were made by the British Royal Navy and French car manufacturers during World War I as a way of attacking enemy trenches. They were called tanks to trick the Germans into thinking they were water carriers for the Middle Eastern theatre of World War I. Their use in a surprise attack in the Battle of the Somme caused fear among the German soldiers but their small numbers and poor reliability prevented them from making much difference.

Tanks became a main weapon during World War II, when the German Army introduced a way of using them called Blitzkrieg.  Battles between great numbers of tanks were fought, especially between the Germans and the Soviet Union. The Battle of Kursk was the biggest. Well-known World War II tanks were the German Panzer IV, Panther and Tiger I, Soviet T-34 (made in the largest numbers of any tank of the war and second most ever), the British Matilda, Churchill and Cromwell, and the American M4 sherman (second most produced tank of the war) and Stuart tanks.  There were plans for much larger and more heavily armoured tanks such as the Maus but they were determined to be of little use.  Their huge weight would have made moving them very difficult, and their huge size would have made them easy targets for heavy artillery.

Old tanks are often modified for other uses like carrying soldiers or equipment. Combat engineers use special tank-based vehicles, for example minesweeper tanks or bridge-layer tanks.

The tank is a major part of all large armies today. Tanks have replaced the cavalry everywhere and do the things that soldiers on horseback did in the past. Most modern tanks are of the heavy or Main Battle Tank type, able to fight other tanks. Compared to older types MBTs are very heavy (Russian MBTS being about 40 tons and Western around 60 tons) with a 120 mm (Western) and 125 mm (Russian) calibre cannon and 2-3 machine guns. Marines and other specialized forces also use some light tanks.

Armies have invented many ways to fight against enemy tanks and to defend their own tanks.  Artillery was found to be effective when tanks were first introduced, and special anti-tank guns were made.  Elephant guns, large versions of ordinary rifles, were tried.  They worked against the earliest tanks but later tanks have tougher armor.  Obstacles such as tank traps and anti-tank trenches can catch tanks so artillery can hit them.  Anti-tank land mines can also catch or even destroy them.

The main weapons infantry uses for fighting against tanks are anti tank missiles and rocket propelled grenades.  Often a tank force has its own infantry troops for protection against those weapons.  Tanks are much used to fight tanks, and some tanks are specially made to be good at destroying other tanks.  Heavy artillery and bombs can destroy tanks with a blast wave.  Starting in the early 21st century, combat drones have sometimes destroyed tanks.  Ground attack aircraft can destroy them with guns, bombs, and guided missiles.

A syllable is a unit of pronunciation uttered without interruption, loosely, a single sound. All words are made from at least one syllable.

Monosyllables are words that have only one vowel sound; polysyllables have more than one. If a syllable ends with a consonant, it is called a closed syllable. If a syllable ends with a vowel, it is called an open syllable. Patterns of syllables can be shown with C and V (C for 'consonant', V for 'vowel'). Closed syllables are often shown as CVC (such as got), and open syllables as CV (such as go). Some languages like English have many kinds of closed syllables. Other languages, like Japanese, have few kinds of closed syllables. Other languages still, like Hawaiian and Swahili, have no closed syllables.

Notice that the consonant (C) and vowel (V) notation does NOT match the letters of English spelling in a one-to-one relationship (e.g. 'th' is one sound), but rather individual sounds.

However, in several languages, such as English, syllables can have consonant clusters (having multiple consonants next to each other), which easily allow for words to have much more complicated syllables, such as:

Some languages do not use an alphabet with letters. Instead, each sign may stand for a syllable. For example: Japanese can be written using Kana. A writing system based on syllables is called a syllabary. Since words in languages like English can have many different complex syllables (well over 10,000 can be produced in English), writing such languages using a syllabary would be completely impractical, thus alphabets are much better suited to write languages with complex syllable structures. However, since words in Japanese can be made with just a few simple syllables (around 90), writing such languages are well suited for the type of language.

Temperature is how hot or cold something is. The human body can feel the difference between something which is hot and something which is cold. To measure temperature more accurately, a thermometer is used. Thermometers use a temperature scale to record how hot or cold something is. The scale used in most of the world is in degrees Celsius, sometimes called "centigrade". In the US and some other countries degrees Fahrenheit  are more often used while scientists mostly use kelvins  to measure temperature because it never goes below zero.

Scientifically, temperature is a physical quantity which describes how quickly molecules are moving inside a material. In solids and liquids the molecules are vibrating around a fixed point in the substance, but in gases they are in free flight and bouncing off each other as they travel. In a gas the temperature, pressure and volume of the gas are closely related by a law of physics.

Temperature is not the same as heat. Heat is energy which moves from one thing, cooling it, to another, heating it. Temperature is a measure of the movements (vibration) of the molecules inside a thing. If the thing has a high temperature, it means the average speed of its molecules is fast. A thing may have a high temperature but because it contains very few or light atoms it has very little heat.

The amount of heat that is needed to make a substance one degree higher is called its heat capacity. Different substances have different heat capacities. For example, a kilogram of water has more heat capacity than a kilogram of steel. This means that more energy is needed to make the temperature of water 1°C hotter than is needed to make the temperature of steel 1°C hotter.

Temperature is also important in weather and climate. It is related to the amount of heat energy in the air. Isotherm maps are used to show how temperature is different across an area. Temperature will be different during different times of day, different seasons and in different places. It is affected by how much heat reaches the place from the suns rays (insolation), how high the place is above the level of the sea, and how much heat is brought to the place by the movement of winds and ocean currents.

São Paulo (Portuguese for Saint Paul) is the capital of the Brazilian state of the same name. It is the most populous city city in Brazil, South America, and the Southern Hemisphere, and the second-most populous city in the Western Hemisphere, after Mexico City, Mexico.

São Paulo is a major city in Brazil with a population of over 11 and a half million people according to the last Brazilian census. It has been criticized for its high cost of living and was ranked one of the world’s ugliest cities according to Forbes in 2013 and Harvard Business Review in 2015. A study by the Instituto Locomotiva found that nearly half of São Paulo's residents would leave the city if they could, due to the high cost of living, stress and other factors. Another study by the United Nations Human Settlements Programme found that São Paulo had the second-highest housing cost in the world, after Hong Kong. The average amount of time lost in traffic by workers in São Paulo is approximately three hours per day. According to the São Paulo City Traffic Performance Index, time lost in traffic is the main reason why people are not satisfied with their quality of life in the city. The CNT (Brazilian National Transportation Company) estimates that on average, a resident of São Paulo loses 374 days of their lifetime in traffic, which is considered one of the worst averages in the world. The city concentrates almost 1/4 of all homeless people in Brazil according to the "Observatório Brasileiro de Políticas Públicas com a População em Situação de Rua, da Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais (Polos-UFMG)", having around 80 thousand homeless people living in the city alone, and currently has a serious drug problem epidemic with hundreds of thousands of people addicted to drugs living in the city, including several crack addicted people living on the streets especially in the central region of São Paulo. According to IQAir in September 2024 the city of São Paulo had the worst air quality in the entire planet for several days among big cities and metropolitan areas.

The city has an area of 1,523 square kilometres and more than 11 million people live there. It is the 11th-most populous city on Earth.

In January 25, 1554, two priests, Manuel da Nóbrega and José de Anchieta, built a school - Colégio de São Paulo de Piratininga - to convert natives to Catholic religion. Today, this building is the Padre Anchieta Museum.

The first people moved to the region in 1560, when São Paulo became a village.

Because São Paulo was a poor village and was far away from the colony centre, the bandeirantes (explorers) chose it to start expeditions to enslave natives, recapture runaway slaves, and to find precious metals and stones (gold, diamonds, etc.).

In 1711, São Paulo became a city. In the end of the 18th century, people started growing sugarcane in the rural area of the province, and São Paulo was the way to the port of Santos.

In the 19th century, after the construction of São Paulo's Law School, São Paulo became the capital of the province, politicians and philosophers went there, and the first newspapers and books were printed. At this time, many European immigrants, especially Italians, moved to São Paulo to work at the big coffee plantations.

At the end of the 19th century and the start of the 20th century, the city grew quickly. Some people who study Brazilian History say "the city was rebuilt".

In the 20th century, many factories were built, and more immigrants moved to work there.

Today, São Paulo is a centre of commerce, services and technology, and some people consider it the most important Latin American city.

The current mayor of São Paulo is Ricardo Nunes, and his party is "MDB".

São Paulo is crossed by the Tropic of Capricorn. It is in a plateau (a high flat area), 760 metres above the sea level.

Because of its , its climate (subtropical) is not so warm as it is near the coast. São Paulo is  far from the coast,  far from Rio de Janeiro,  from the Brazil–Uruguay border, and  far from Brasília, the Brazilian capital city.

The metropolitan area formed by São Paulo and 39 surroundings cities is the biggest in the Latin America. More than 19 million people live in this metropolitan area, which is also called Greater São Paulo and is the fifth-biggest of the world.

The city is divided into 31 boroughs, and each borough is divided into neighbourhoods. The boroughs form nine regions (or "zones"), with similar geographic location and history, but most people and companies prefer to use another division, with only five regions.

Descendants of many peoples live in São Paulo: Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, African, German, Lebanese, Japanese. There are also descendant of peoples from other South American countries, for example Argentina and Bolivia, and other places, for example Chinese people, Jews, and South Koreans.

Every day, people from other cities or states move to São Paulo. Many are people from the Northeast region of Brazil that try to find a job in the city.

São Paulo is the commercial and industrial center of Brazil. There are factories and shops of all sizes and kinds. For example, in São Paulo there are some of the more expensive shops of Brazil, but also there are commercial districts formed only by cheap shops, and people from many places (also from other cities) buy clothing, electronics and other products at these districts.

Football is the sport with the biggest number of fans in the city. The most important clubs from the city are Corinthians, Palmeiras, and São Paulo. They are all playing in the Brazilian Série A, the major football championship in Brazil. Except Palmeiras.

There are also other big and medium teams from São Paulo, for example Portuguesa and Juventus, and many small teams. However, Santos FC, that is a club from Santos, a city in the coast, is the fourth team in number of supporters.

São Paulo also hosts the Formula One Brazilian Grand Prix, in Autódromo José Carlos Pace (known as Autódromo de Interlagos).

Other major sports are basketball and volleyball. Some people also play handball, tennis, and other sports.

Some people do not like São Paulo because of the big number of cars, trucks and motorcycles on streets and avenues. The public transport is also very important for the people who live there. There are many bus lanes in the city, and a big Metro (underground railway) and railway system.

São Paulo has three airports and is the second-city in number of helicopters of the world (New York City is the first).

A submarine (or sub) is a vessel that goes underwater. Most large submarines are war vessels. Some small ones are used for scientific or business purposes. These are often called "submersibles" and cannot go far or stay long away from base. Some people buy their own to explore under the sea. A submarine is a boat, not a ship.

Early submarines were often powered by hand. This is because boat engines had not been invented yet. They were almost always made for war. Submarines would try to sink enemy ships by crude methods. These included drilling screws into their wooden hulls. Some tried to blow up a ship. This often destroyed the submarine, too.  At the end of the 19th century, the Whitehead torpedo and electrical systems allowed much better submarines.

These better submarines were much used during the First and Second World Wars. Many of these better submarines were created by Germany, called U-boats. The submarines were powered by a diesel-electric system. A diesel motor would be used to turn a generator. The generator would charge a large battery while the submarine was on the surface. The power in the battery was then used by the submarine when it went underwater. These submarines were dangerous to enemies. They were difficult to see while underwater but it was easy to attack them when they surfaced to recharge.  Many modern boats still use this diesel-electric propulsion system.

The First Battle of the Atlantic was the first major battle that was mainly fought between submarines and their enemies. As in later wars, the main jobs of submarines were to enforce a blockade and to sink enemy warships. They usually attacked freighters at night, shooting with their deck guns and then hiding under the water. Sometimes they used their torpedoes, which they could fire while underwater, especially against larger ships and warships. During World War II The US Navy lost around 52 submarines due to combat and non-combat causes.

After World War II better sonar helped the enemies of submarines to find and destroy them. New subs were more streamlined and had no deck guns because water dragging against the guns made noise underwater and slowed the subs.

Most large modern military submarines are powered by nuclear reactors. These submarines often have a system which can get air from the seawater. These two things allow them to stay underwater for long periods of time. Their most important uses are attacking ships or launching missiles. These include cruise missiles and nuclear missiles. There are two main kinds of subs. Attack submarines are small and fast. They attack other subs and surface ships with torpedos. Missile subs are larger and slower. They are built to shoot missiles at far-away targets on land.

Tobacco is a product prepared from the leaves of the tobacco plant by curing them. The plant is part of the genus Nicotiana and of the Solanaceae (nightshade) family. It is used as a drug, mostly by inhaling the smoke of, but also by using snuff or chewing. People use cigarettes, cigars, and pipe to make tobacco smoke. Tobacco contains the chemical nicotine, which causes pleasure as a stimulant drug. It also causes addiction   after people start using nicotine, it is difficult to stop. Tobacco use can cause diseases, such as many types of cancer.

Native Americans used tobacco before Europeans arrived in the Americas.  The earliest know use of tobacco comes  from  nicotine residue from a  pipe in the Southeastern United States.  It is Radiocarbon dated  at  1685-1530 BC.  Europeans in the Americas began to smoke and brought it back to Europe, where it became fashionable. At that time tobacco was usually smoked in a pipe.

The Europeans who moved to America started to farm tobacco so that they could sell it in Europe. This became one of the main causes of the African slave trade. In 1610 a European man called John Rolfe arrived in the American state of Virginia and set up a tobacco farm which made him very rich. Rolfe was the first  non-native farmer to use nicotiana tabacum, which is the type of tobacco most commonly smoked today.

In the 17th and 18th centuries tobacco made farmers very rich and towns quickly grew in the states of Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. In 1883 one third of United States tax money came from tobacco.

In 1864 the first American tobacco factory opened to produce 20 million cigarettes annually. By 1964 the cigarette contained over 500 added chemicals. Today tobacco manufacturers are still not required by law to list the 500+ ingredients.

Tobacco users (especially those who inhale) and people around them (with passive inhalers) risk many very serious and often deadly illnesses, such as cancer, strokes, heart disease, and lung disease. The United States' Centers for Disease Control and Prevention describes tobacco use as "the single most important preventable risk to human health in developed countries and an important cause of premature (early) death worldwide". There are over 4800 chemicals in tobacco, including arsenic. Sixty-four of them are known to cause cancer. Smoking can also make men lose erections, and make their penises a bit smaller. Tobbaco however has been used as a cure for Alzheimer's and the nicotine in tobacco has been used to treat ADHD.

A sword is a hand-held weapon made for cutting.  It is often made of metal. It has a long blade, and a handle called a hilt.  Often there is some form of hand protection, such as a cross-guard or a basket. It can be used either for cutting, slashing or stabbing, depending on the type of sword.

Swords were first created from bronze by blacksmiths in Ancient Egypt in 1150 BCE. Soon other cultures adopted them, and they began to spread quite quickly. Before guns were invented, swords were much more common as a weapon. After the invention of the gun, swords remained as sidearms, as secondary weapons used in man-to-man fight once the battle lines had contacted after shooting. Since after the American Civil War, swords have not been used as much by armies, except as a ceremonial part of uniforms. Some guns, however, have bayonets to perform the same function.

Today, Sport fencing, is an Olympic games sport which uses very light swords and a strict scoring system. Western Martial Arts use swords that are much closer to the original blades, such as longswords, rapiers and sabres. The blades used are blunt, but they are much heavier than a sport fencing sword, which means the fencers need much more armour. Likewise, the Japanese sport kendo is swordplay in armour with two-handed bamboo swords called shinai.

There are many kinds of swords.  One kind of sword is a sabre (or saber). A sabre is a curved, light sword, sharpened on one side and at the tip, and was generally used on horseback.  A broadsword is a straight sword that is sharp on both sides and at the tip. A rapier is long and thin, with a basket protecting the hand. Another type of sword is a foil, used in sport fencing, and is long and thin, with a button at the tip to protect the fencers from injury. Larger swords, such as Longswords or claymores are used with two hands. In Eastern martial Arts, swords like the Katana are used. A Katana has one sharp edge and a small guard near the handle. Some Katanas are used with one hand, while other larger versions are used with two hands.

The sword of King Arthur, Excalibur, is one of the most famous swords, although it is suspected it is legendary and does not exist.

In a Vietnamese legend, the Dragon King gives a sword called Heaven's Will to Emperor Lê Lợi so he can free Vietnam from the Chinese.

The Frisian freedom fighters Pier Gerlofs Donia and Wijerd Jelckama are known to have wielded swords of great size. Donias sword was a long as 210 cm (seven feet) and weighed 7 kg (15 lbs). The swords are kept in the Frisian Museum in Leeuwarden.

Thailand (  or  ; , ), officially the Kingdom of Thailand (, ; ), is a country in Southeast Asia. Its neighbours are Laos, Cambodia, Malaysia, and Myanmar. Its name was Siam until June 1939 and between 1945 and May 11 1949. The word Thai (ไทย) comes from the ethnic group in the center of Thailand.

Thailand is a constitutional monarchy. It has a king as a head of state, king Vajiralongkorn.

Most people there (95 percent) follow the philosophy called Buddhism. Smaller number of people (4.4%), mostly to the south, follow Islam. Other religions in Thailand are Christianity, Hinduism, and Sikhism.

A century later, a bigger kingdom named Ayuthaya appeared south of Sukhothai. Later Sukhothai became a part of Ayuthaya. Ayuthaya existed for more than 400 years before its fall by the attack of a Burmese kingdom.

A soldier of Chinese origin then founded a new capital city at Thonburi, and became King Tāksin.

The founding of Bangkok as the capital city, was the start of the Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782–1932). It was founded by King Rama I of the Chakri Dynasty.

Before 1932, Thailand was an absolute monarchy. On June 24, 1932, a group of people staged a coup and changed Thailand to a constitutional monarchy. It was not until 1973 that Thai people voted for a Prime Minister in an election.

In 1951, there was a failed coup - the Manhattan Rebellion. On September 19, 2006, the army did a coup d'état and took control from Thaksin Shinawatra's government.

In May 2014, a new military coup d'état removed another government. Thailand had 12 coup d'etats, between 1932 and 2014.

By December 2025, at least ten soldiers had died when there were some attacks between the militaries of Cambodia and Thailand. The 2025 Cambodia–Thailand border conflict started in May 2025; One soldier died that month.

On July 23, a Thai soldier stepped on a landmine in a district of Ubon Ratchathani, resulting in the loss of a leg. The next day, soldiers from both countries were killing. Thai F-16 fighter jets, hit (things belonging to the Cambodian military, or) Cambodian military targets along the border. By the last week of July, dozens of people had been killed. Among the dead, are soldiers. Attacks were still happening on July 28; A ceasefire started, at the end of that day.

Thailand is made up of 76 provinces (จังหวัด, changwat), put into 5 groups. There are 2 specially governed districts: the capital Bangkok and Pattaya. The 76 provinces including Bangkok are as follows:

The economy of Thailand "is based on trade and investment in the agricultural and tourism sectors, according to media. In 2022, the country with investors that invested the most in Thailand, was Japan; Chinese investors had the second place.

Industry had a contribution to the GDP, of 43.9 percent (in 2007), and 14 percent of the workforce are in that sector (of the economy). Within that sector, manufacturing was the biggest part, and it had a contribution (to the GDP), with 34.5 (in 2004). As of 2025's first quarter, media said that there is "weakness [...] in the manufacturing sector, especially automotive, petrochemicals and construction materials".

Agriculture in Thailand: Rice is the country's most important crop; Some 60 percent of Thailand's 13 million farmers grow that, according to media (2017). Amount of crops produced: sugarcane; [c. 104 million tons] or 104.3 million tons was harvested in 2018 (4th largest producer in the world); Rice, [c. 32 million tons or] 32.1 million tons; However, as of 2025, the 3rd largest producer in the world, is Thailand. Production of Cassava, was [c. 31 million tons or] 31.6 million tons, as of 2018; The 2nd largest producer in the world, was Thailand.

"The Thai-US trade volume has been roughly 6.0% of GDP", but on top of that significant amounts of Chinese goods are getting labels Made in Thailand, while in many cases the goods were actually Made in China, according to media. "The US was Thailand's largest export market" in 2024; The U.S. imported things for $55 billion.

"In 2024, Thailand produced about 220,000 tons of beef while" 40,000 tons came from other countries.

"Exports to China ... amount to [c. 6% or] 6.7% of GDP", media said in 2025.

Trade tariffs between the U.S. and Thailand, have changed several times (during 2025).

About becoming a partner country in BRICS: Thailand became a partner in 2025.

In regard to the number of cars made: On average, [c. 118,000] cars were made per month during the first five months of 2025 (out of a total of 594,492 automobiles).. [C. 21% or] 21.9% of the cars made, were Toyota cars, year 2022. Other cars being made, include BMW, BYD, Deepal, Ford, GAC Aion, GWM, Haval, Honda, Isuzu, Mazda, Mercedes-Benz, Mitsubishi, MG, Nissan, Ora, and Neta. Neta had been building c. one car in Thailand, for every car that they import from their factories in China.

In regard to tourism: From each of these four countries, there came one million tourists during 2025's first six months: Malaysia, China, India and Russia.

In 2014, Credit Suisse reported that Thailand was the world's third most unequal country, behind Russia and India. The top 10% richest held 79% of the country's assets. The top 1% held 58% of the assets.

In regard to [buying or] consuming gold: Inside Thailand, 49 tons were bought (in 2024); Only 9 countries bought more gold during that year, according to media.

A new prime minister, Anutin Charnvirakul, has been in place since September 7, 2025. He was elected two days earlier.. However, his cabinet "began its term on October 1 under a four-month mandate", according to media; Furthermore, there is an expectation that all the members of parliament will lose their office, in December or January or "ahead of the expected dissolution of parliament and upcoming general elections".

The next general election is supposed to happen on February 8, 2026.

There is a new foreign minister or minister of foreign affairs, energy minister, tourism minister, commerce minister, transport minister, justice minister, and minister of digital economy and society (as of 2025's fourth quarter). The interior minister's (job or) post, is being held by the prime minister (as of 2025's fourth quarter).

The South Thailand armed rebellion has its origins from 1948; It started as an ethnic and religious separatist armed rebellion in Patani (historical region); Many Malay people live there; That region is made up of the three southernmost provinces of Thailand and parts of a fourth province (Songkhla); The conflict has become more complex and more violent since the early 2000s; Drug cartels, oil smuggling networks, and some pirate raids have much to do with the violence.

Since 2025, using cannabis for fun, is (again) against the law. Physicians and "Thai traditional doctors, Chinese medicine practitioners and pharmacists [are some of those that] can authorise cannabis use", according to media.

Environmental issues: Industrial growth has created (much or) high levels of air pollution in Thailand. Vehicles and factories (give or) contribute to air pollution.

Measurement of PM 2.5 pollution is one of the ways of measuring air pollution; In that way, the particulates (in the atmosphere), that are smaller than 2.5 microns, get measured.

Suicide (from Latin language suicidium, "self-murder") is when someone chooses to kill themselves. When someone kills themselves, people say that they have "committed suicide," "completed suicide," or "died by suicide". When a person seriously considers killing themselves, they are described as suicidal.

Suicide is one of the top three causes of death for young people aged 14–35. It is the second most common cause of death for college students. Every 3 seconds, a person somewhere in the world tries to kill themself. Every 40 seconds, someone dies by suicide. For every suicide, at least six other people are seriously affected.(WHO 2000) When people start having thoughts about killing themselves, it may be a medical emergency. They should get a suicide risk assessment as soon as possible. They should not be left alone.

There are many reasons why a person might think about suicide. Most people who are suicidal have some type of mental disorder. They may have a chronic condition, which has been going on for a long time. But it may be an acute condition, which means the first symptoms of mental illness happened rather quickly. Depression is a mental illness that may affect a person to have suicidal thoughts. Depression may also be a symptom of other mental or medical disorders. Another mental condition which may lead to self-harm or suicide is schizophrenia. The stress of life, and its events, like losing a job or getting sick, are less likely to cause suicide. Other causes of suicidal thoughts are extreme cases of bullying and social isolation. Although depression is the main factor in suicide, it is also treatable, and suicide is often preventable.

There are many risk factors for suicide. However, it is important to remember that risk factors are not the same as causes. Risk factors do not cause suicide or suicidal thoughts. They only make it more likely that some people with those risk factors may become suicidal. If a person has a risk factor, that does not mean they will become suicidal.

Mental illness is present at the time of suicide 27% to more than 90% of the time. Of those who have been hospitalized for suicidal behavior, the lifetime risk of completed suicide is 8.6%. Comparatively, non-suicidal people hospitalized for affective disorders have a 4% lifetime risk of suicide. Half of all people who die by suicide may have major depressive disorder; having this or one of the other mood disorders such as bipolar disorder increases the risk of suicide 20-fold. Other conditions implicated include schizophrenia (14%), personality disorders (8%), obsessive compulsive disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder. Those with autism spectrum disorders also attempt and consider suicide more frequently.

Among people with a mental disorder, 25% also have alcohol abuse issues. People who abuse alcohol have a 50% greater risk of suicide than those who do not.

While acts of self-harm are not considered suicide attempts, a person who self-harms may be more likely to die by suicide.

Substance abuse is the second most common reason for suicide and feeling suicidal. Only two serious mental illnesses - depression and bipolar disorder - cause more harm. A person is at greater risk for suicide whether they have been using drugs for a long time or just a short time. When a drug abuser is also suffering from great sadness or grief, suicide is even more common.

Problem gamblers have more suicidal ideation and make more suicide attempts compared to the general population. (Problem gambling is gambling that causes major problems in a person's life.)

If a person becomes a problem gambler earlier in life, they have a higher risk of suicide for the rest of their life. Gambling-related suicide attempts are usually made by older people with gambling problems. Substance use and mental disorders increase the risk of suicide even more in people with problem gambling.

There is a link between suicidality and medical conditions, including chronic pain, mild brain injury, (MBI) or traumatic brain injury (TBI). People with these conditions had a higher rate of suicide that was not caused by depression or alcohol abuse. People with more than one medical condition had an even higher risk of suicide.

Problems with sleeping, such as insomnia and sleep apnea, may be risk factors for depression and suicide. In some people, the sleep problem itself, not depression, may be what increases their risk for depression.

People being treated for mood disorders should be checked by a doctor. This should include a physical examination and blood tests. This can ensure the person's mood disorder is not caused by a medical problem. Many medical conditions can cause problems with mood and thinking. Seeing a doctor will also help make sure that it is safe to prescribe medications for the person's mood disorder.

Some mental disorders that are risk factors for suicide may be partly caused by problems in the brain and body.

Even if they have the same risk factors, some people are at a higher risk for suicide than others. This is partly because of genetic inheritance. Genetics causes about 30–50% of the difference in suicide risk among different people. For example, a person whose parent died by suicide is much more likely to try to kill themselves. Epigenetics may also affect suicide risk.

How the media shows news stories of suicide may have a negative effect and trigger the possibility of copycat suicides (this is called the Werther effect). This risk is greater in teenagers and young adults. The opposite of the Werther effect is the Papageno effect. This means that the media can help make suicide less likely if they cover good ways of dealing with stress and difficult things in life.

Protective factors make it less likely that a person will die by suicide. They help protect a person from the risk of suicide. They can also help protect a suicidal person from the effects of suicidal thinking.

Protective factors can be internal, such as a person's personal strengths and beliefs. For example:

Protective factors can also be external, such as a person's relationships and life situation. These factors can include:

Protective factors are as important to identify as risk factors. Just as risk factors can be reduced, protective factors can be increased.

Suicide prevention tries to decrease the number of suicides by using protective measures. Some prevention strategies make it harder for people to get the most common things used to commit suicide. This includes taking away guns, poisons, and drugs.

Studies have shown that good treatment of depression, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse can decrease the number of suicides. So does follow-up contact with those who have made a suicide attempt.

In many countries, people at high risk of hurting themselves can check themselves into a hospital emergency department. In some countries or states, a doctor, judge, or police officer can force a person to go to the hospital if they seem suicidal, even if the person does not want to go. The person will be watched closely at the hospital to make sure they do not hurt themselves. A doctor or mental health professional will decide whether the person needs to go to a psychiatric hospital.

"SOS Signs of Suicide" is a suicide prevention program used in secondary schools for students between 13 and 17 years old. The program educates students about suicide and tests them for suicide risk. Students who have done this program make fewer suicide attempts than students who have not done the program.

Suicide hotlines, and crisis intervention centers help students at high risk. They help people who have suicidal thoughts.

A suicide risk assessment looks at how likely a person is to attempt suicide. A good assessment can help prevent suicide. It is also the first step in coming up with a treatment plan. Even though suicide risk assessments are very important, they are usually not done. Many mental health care workers have little or no training in how to do a suicide risk assessment.

Worldwide, suicide rates have increased by 60% in the past 45 years, mainly in the developing countries. As of 2006:

According to 2007 information, suicides happen twice as often as homicides in the United States. Suicide is the 11th leading cause of death in the country, ahead of liver disease and Parkinson's disease.

Suicide rates vary a great deal across the world. Lithuania has the highest suicide rate.

30% of deaths by suicide are by people who are intoxicated.(Source: SAMSHA)

In the United States, suicide has been increasing for African American teens. Native Americans and whites have the highest rate of suicide in the United States. More blacks than whites have committed suicide during the COVID-19 pandemic. White men are most likely to commit suicide. White males account for nearly 70% of suicide deaths. Middle-aged white men have the highest suicide rate.

The most common ways of death by suicide are not the same in every country. In different areas, they include hanging, pesticide poisoning, and firearms.

A 2008 report compared 56 countries using information from the World Health Organization. It found that:

Sometimes, suicidal people do something that will make another person kill them. For example, a suicidal person might point a gun at a police officer so the police officer will shoot the person in self-defense. This is commonly called "suicide by cop."

Modern medicine treats suicide as a mental health issue. It is considered a medical emergency when a person starts having many thoughts about killing themselves.

The Abrahamic religions (like Christianity, Judaism, and Islam) think that life is sacred. They believe that when a person kills themselves, they are murdering what God has made. For this reason, many followers of Abrahamic religions think that when a person dies by suicide, they will go to Hell.

The Dharmic and Taoist religions (like Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Taoism, Confucianism, and Shinto) believe that someone who dies by suicide will be reincarnated in the next life with a less enlightened soul. However, many people of these religions are more likely to commit suicide because they believe there will be the next life. They think that by dying by suicide, they may have a better chance in the next life.

There are several famous examples of suicide attacks in history. The Kamikazes were one example. They were Japanese fighter pilots during World War II, who would try to kill American soldiers by crashing their planes into American ships. By crashing their planes, they would kill themselves as well.

The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States were also done by suicide attackers. They flew planes into the World Trade Center buildings and the Pentagon.

Learn more about suicide and how to get help for yourself or others

Sufism (Arabic: الصُّوفِيِّيُّ) (also known as Tassawuf) is a group or branch in Islam with a mystic path or system. Someone who practices Sufism is called a Sufi, and may be a Dervish or a Fakir.

At first, Sufism only meant making Islam more personal and internal. Some say it first came from constantly reciting the Qur'an, meditating, and through experience. Others believe that Sufism is trying to live as the Islamic prophet Muhammad did, to be closer to God. This is how the Prophet taught his disciples. Additionally, the Muslim conquests had brought large numbers of Christian monks and hermits, especially in Syria and Egypt, under Muslim rule. They believed in a deeply spiritual and mystical (even 'Platonic')  way of life and many of their ways became part of early Sufism.

Some of these teachings were summarized in texts (in Arabic initially). Important contributions in writing are attributed to Uwais al-Qarni, Harrm bin Hian, Hasan Basri and Sayid ibn al-Mussib, who are regarded as among the first Sufis in the earliest generations of Islam. Harith al-Muhasibi was the first one to write about moral psychology. Rabia Basri was a Sufi known for her love and passion for God, expressed through her poetry. Bayazid Bastami was among the first theorists of Sufism.

Sufism already had a long history when some teachers began to set up formal schools or orders (Tarika or Tariqah)  in the early Middle Ages. Almost all existing Sufi orders today trace their roots and chain of transmission (silsila) back to Muhammad, via one of these orders.

The main idea in Sufism is that people can have 'personal knowledge' or oneness with God in their lives. In order to be one with God, you have to destroy your idea of yourself, or your ego. This is known as fanaa (annihilation). Apart from saying Sufi prayers, that vary according to different orders, you should be humble, considerate, and only act in order to control your desires.

After fanaa is achieved, you are reborn to live with, in, through and for God, (baqaa, permanency). This is the state where you have achieved the divine love of God, and come ever closer to a unity with God. You should now strive to be one with God. A person who has crossed the various Sufi 'stages' and achieved this sort of mystic union with Allah, is called a Wali (a saint or friend of God) and the state is termed Wilayat (friendship/union).

In Sufism there exist many different orders (tarikas), that were founded from the 12th and 13th centuries until today/contemporary times. Some of the major Sufi orders are:

Some of the major, notable Sufis in history, from the 'classical age' of Sufism,  include:

Modern practitioners, who have achieved the degree of sheikh (Master/Preceptor) and are accounted to have a high spiritual status, are still found in various places.

Sufi practices are usually defined within the basic tenets of Islam, the Sharia (or Shariah)  although some orders include singing and dancing in the love of God, something some Muslims disapprove of. Some Muslims of a more orthodox mind-set believe that any actions outside the scope of Sharia, or Sufi activities practised by non-Muslims are wrong.  For a non-Muslim the most important ideas in Sufism are love for fellow human beings (which reflects one's love of God) and living ones life in such a way where all actions are against the self. This starts  the path of fanaa. In terms of discipleship and training, almost all the major Sufi orders are willing to take students who are not Muslims.

There are some Muslim schools of thought, such as the Wahhabi,  who oppose Sufism because they feel it obliterates the difference between God and man and bypasses the common method of salvation in their interpretations of Sharia. Although there are non-Islamic versions of Sufism too (generally defined as 'Universal Sufism') puritanical and rigid people in Islam don't like them. As a result, we often see a great deal of misunderstanding and conflict regarding Sufism and Sufic practices.

Orthodox Islam, especially fundamentalist groups like the Wahhabi and Salafi have been the most intolerant and violent against what they think of as 'Deviant Sufism'. They have persecuted the Kharijites, the Ismaili Shia cult (sometimes termed the 'Assassins'), the Ahmadiyya movement and several other groups and individuals with Sufi-like mystical tendencies and practices. During the later Mughal Empire in India, even the early gurus of Sikhism were persecuted by orthodox Islamic mullahs since they had chosen to put some of the ideas and poetic verses of the Sufi saint Baba Farid into their scriptures. Over the last two decades, considerable persecution has been made of the spiritual reformer and sage Riaz Ahmed Gohar Shahi and his followers in Pakistan. He was opposed and threatened and forced to flee the country and his books banned there, and anyone publicly supporting him is liable to immediate arrest.

Even proper, formal Sufi orders have suffered persecution for various reasons. In recent times Sufism was banned in Iran. This happened in spite of the famous Amman Message, a joint declaration made by over 200 of the most noted moderate Islamic scholars in a conference in Amman, Jordan, in 2005, stressing that Sufism is very much 'part' of Islam.

Tanzania is a country in East Africa. The official languages are Kiswahili and English. It is next to Africa's biggest lake, Lake Victoria.

In 2017, there were about 54,000,000 people living in Tanzania. They are divided into 120 tribes; none have more than 10% of the population. Tanzania is a multicultural society. There are many languages and religions in Tanzania; the main religions being Christianity and Islam.

The president of the United Republic of Tanzania is Samia Suluhu Hassan. Tanzania is a member of the United Nations, UNIDO, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Commonwealth of Nations, the Non-Aligned Movement, SADC, PTA, and the ADB. It is also signatory to the Lome Convention.

Mainland Tanzania (formerly Tanganyika) received independence in December 1961, while Zanzibar gained her independence in January 1964, through a revolution. The two countries joined to form the United Republic of Tanzania in April 1964. Until July 1992, Tanzania was a one-party state. Following a Presidential Commission, the country has started a multi-party political system. It has held successful general elections in 1995 and 2000.

Tanzania is home to the Serengeti. Many animals such as lions and cheetahs live there.

Tanzania is divided into 31 Regions. 26 are on the mainland and five in Zanzibar.

Tanzania's regions are: Arusha Dar es Salaam Dodoma Geita Iringa Kagera Katavi Kigoma Kilimanjaro Lindi Manyara Mara Mbeya Morogoro Mtwara Mwanza Njombe Pemba North Pemba South Pwani Rukwa Ruvuma Shinyanga Simiyu Singida Songwe Tabora Tanga Zanzibar Central/South Zanzibar North Zanzibar Urban/West

Thomas Alva Edison (February 11, 1847 – October 18, 1931) was an American inventor, entrepreneur and businessman. He developed many devices in the fields such as electricity generation, mass communication, sound recording and reproduction, and motion pictures .

These early designs and inventions, including the phonograph, the movie camera, and early versions of the electric light bulb, had a major impact on industrialized society. He was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of organized science and teamwork to the process of progress and invention, working with many researchers, staff members, and employees. He established the first industrialized research institute. Edison's 1093 patents were the most granted to any inventor in his time. He started the General Electric Company to make some of the things he invented. He died from diabetes in 1931, aged 84.

Thomas Alva Edison was born in Milan, Ohio. When Thomas Edison was seven years old, he moved with his family to Port Huron, Michigan. Thomas Edison started school late because of an illness. Three months later, Edison was removed from school because he could not pay attention to his teacher. His mother, who was a teacher in Canada, taught Thomas Edison at home. Thomas Edison's mother helped him become motivated for learning, and he was a good student for her.

When Thomas Edison was twelve years old, he got scarlet fever. The effects of the fever, as well as getting picked up by the ears by a train conductor, caused Edison to become completely deaf in his left ear, and 80 percent deaf in the other. He learned Morse code of the telegraph, and began a job as a "brass pounder" (telegraph operator). At age sixteen, Thomas Edison made his first invention, which was called an "automatic repeater." It used punched tape to send telegraph signals quickly between unmanned stations, more quickly than a telegraph operator could do.

In 1868, Edison moved East and began to work for the Western Union Company in Boston, Massachusetts as a telegraph operator. He worked twelve hours a day, six days a week, and continued to "moonlight" on his own projects. Within six months, he had applied for and received his first patent for an electric vote recorder. It made the voting process faster but he could not find buyers. Then Edison moved to New York and began working for a company fixing their machines. At night, he continued to work on his projects.

In 1876 Edison used the money from his inventions to start his own laboratory in Menlo Park, New Jersey. In 1877~78, he invented the carbon microphone there, which made the sound for Alexander Graham Bell's new telephone invention louder. In 1877, Edison invented the phonograph, the first machine that could record and play sound. The phonograph made him internationally famous. However, a new discovery proved that the French inventor Édouard-Léon Scott de Martinville invented sound recording before Edison. In 1879, Edison made a light bulb that lasted longer. Another invention, the electric power distribution network, lasted even longer.

He married Mary Stilwell in 1871. He had three children in that marriage: Marion Estelle Edison (also called Dot), Thomas Alva Edison, Jr. (also called Dash) and William Leslie Edison. Mary Stilwell died in 1884. Thomas Edison bought some land in Florida and built a house. When he was thirty-nine, Edison married his second wife, Mina Miller, who was 19. He had 3 children in that marriage: Madeleine Edison, Charles Edison (who took over the company when his father died and was later elected Governor of New Jersey), and Theodore Miller Edison. As he got older, he threw dinner parties for fellow inventors. Since he was older, he had impaired hearing, so his wife would tap out all the conversations at the dinner table in Morse code into his hand.

Sudan is a country in East Africa. The official name of Sudan is The Republic of the Sudan. Its capital and largest city is Khartoum.

Sudan borders Egypt to the north, Eritrea and Ethiopia to the east, South Sudan to the south, the Central African Republic to the southwest, Chad to the west, and Libya to the northwest. Sudan has a sea to the northeast called the Red Sea.

Sudan used to have the largest area of all the countries in Africa.  However, on 9 July 2011, the southern part of the country separated and became a new country, South Sudan. Sudan now has an area of . It is the third largest country in Africa by area.  The Nile flows through Sudan, providing water to crops. There are many different tribal and ethnic groups, though the country is mainly divided between the north, which has more Arabic people, and the south, which has more people of African descent.

People from Sudan are called Sudanese. About 45 million people live in Sudan. Almost two million people live in the capital Khartoum.

Arabic is the official language of Sudan. Most of the people speak in the Sudanese dialect, which is known as Sudanese Arabic. Beja and Hausa are other Afro-Asiatic languages that are spoken in certain parts of the country. Dinka and Nuer are the main Nilo-Saharan languages spoken in Sudan. Several Nubian and Niger-Congo languages are also spoken. As a former colony of Great Britain, English is also spoken throughout the country.

Islam is the official state religion and the majority of Sudanese are Muslims, mostly Sunni. Along the southern border there are also people who are Christian or animist.

The currency of Sudan is called the Sudanese Pound (SDG) (Jinneh Sudani).

For several years, the Darfur conflict has been going on in Sudan. Over 400,000 people have died in it.

Timur (Emir Timur), Tamerlane or Tamerbeg (9 April 1336 – 17 February 1405) was a Central Asian conqueror of Mongolian origin in the 14th century who is regarded as one of history's greatest military leaders and strategists. He founded the Timurid Empire in 1370. The empire was large and included Transoxiana, parts of Turkestan, Afghanistan, Persia, Syria, Kurdistan, Baghdad, Georgia and Asia Minor. He successfully conquered southern Russia and parts of India. He invaded Delhi in 1398. He called himself "Sword of Islam". He is also known to have invented the Tamerlane Chess. In 1402, his vast empire stretched from Izmir on the Aegean coast in the west to Xinjiang in the east.

Timur was of Mongol origin from Noble Aristocratic Confederacy Barlas, and he adopted both Turkified and Persianized cultures, but he could not claim to become a Khan because he was not direct descent, a title exclusive reserved for Genghis Khan’s descendants, although he paternally sharing common ancestries with Genghis Khans Borjigin tribe His title was Emir.

His empire led to the Gunpowder Empires in the 1500s and 1600s, most notably his great-great-great-grandson Babur making the Mughal Empire of India.

His real name is Tīmūr bin Taraghay Barlas. He is also known by these names: Temur, Taimur, Timur Lenk, Timur-i Leng, Temur-e Lang, Amir Timur, Aqsaq Timur, and Tamburlaine.

He began his military career after conquering Movarounnahr (now Uzbekistan) through various political betrayals and military campaigns. In allegiance with other rulers in the area, he spent the next ten years fighting to gain territory, supporting the Khan empire against the Russians and defeating many large, imposing armies.

But this was only the beginning. In 1383, Tamerlane began conquering Persia, challenging several rival dynasties in an effort to preserve his empire and expand his territory.

After securing the majority of eastern Persia and defeating a major Mongol king, Tokhtamysh, Tamerlane and his army occupied Moscow for a year. During his time of absence from Persia, major revolts broke out. So he repressed them. Knowing his home territory of Samarkand was being handled by his military forces, Tamerlane then attacked India. He crossed the Indus River in 1398 and marched his army into Delhi where he reduced much of the city, an event that would cause a great setback for the region. As a result of this conquest, he left the territory with an immense quantity of spoil, using 90 captured elephants to carry treasure and stones from quarries to erect a mosque in his homeland.

He invaded and massacred India and devastated Delhi for decades.

In 1399, Tamerlane organized a new military expedition to attack the sultan of Egypt for territory infringement and marching on Syria, he stormed and sacked the city of Aleppo. In 1401, his army occupied the city of Damascus. He then moved on to storm Baghdad that same year and massacred 20,000 of its citizens, destroying all of its buildings and significant monuments in the process.

Timur and his army of 200,000 soldiers traveled through deep snow and frozen rivers towards China, eventually stopping in what is now Kazakhstan for a rest. Timur caught a cold and died on the journey. The trip to China stopped, and his body was taken home to Samarkand where it was buried beneath the dome of the Gur Amir mausoleum in a steel coffin under a slab of black jade six feet long. On the stone was inscribed, “This is the resting place of the illustrious and merciful monarch, the most great sultan, the most mighty warrior, Lord Timur, Conqueror of the World.”

Tehran is the capital and largest city of Iran. It is also the capital of Tehran province and the administrative center for Tehran County and its Central District. With a population of around 9.8 million in the city, and 16.8 million in the metropolitan area, Tehran is the most populous city in Iran and Western Asia, the second-largest metropolitan area in the Middle East after Cairo, and the 24th-most-populous metropolitan area in the world. Greater Tehran includes several municipalities, including Karaj, Eslamshahr, Shahriar, Qods, Malard, Golestan, Pakdasht, Qarchak, Nasimshahr, Parand, Pardis, Andisheh and Fardis.

Tehran was well known as a village in the 9th century, but was way less well known than the city of Rey. Tehran today, replaces Rey, the ancient capital of Iran who was not conquered by the Mongol Empire. In 1869/70 A.D., Tehran acquired considerable prestige and was enclosed in an 8 km rampart which had 12 gates.

During the Safavid period, Shah Safi created a military base in Tehran, and had two great towers erected therein, which became known as Ghaleh Meydan and Ghaleh Hessa. Karim Khan Zand lived in Tehran. for 4 years. In the early 18th century, Karim Khan Zand, ordered a palace, and a government office to be built in Tehran. Later he moved his government capital to Shiraz.

Tehran became the capital of Iran, in 1795, when Agha Mohammad Khan, became King. It is still the capital. During the reign of Agha Mohammad khan, the government headquarters were built north of Emam_zade Zayd. Agha Mohammad Khan became King of Iran in Khalvat Karimkhani Palace in Tehran. During the reign of Fath Ali Shah, the soltani mosque, the Abbas_abad bazaar, and the Ilchi garden (the site of today`s Russian embassy) were added. Nasser_e_din_Shah changed the palace from center of Tehran to Sadabad. He changed the view of Tehran from a town to a modern capital.

During 1980–88, Tehran was attacked by scud missiles and air strikes. After the Islamic Revolution in Iran and during war between Iran and Iraq, many people left Tehran. In recent years, many professional people who lived in Tehran, left Iran for freedom and a better life in other countries. Traffic, crime, drugs and lack of freedom in Tehran, are most important reasons.

Tehran is the center of most Iranian industries and services. Modern industries of this city include the making of automobiles, electronics, weaponry, textiles, sugar, cement, and chemicals. Tehran is also a leading center for the sale of carpets and furniture.

Tehran has a steppe climate (BSk in the Köppen climate classification). Summers are hot and dry; winters are cold with moderate precipitation, which also falls as snow. Spring and autumn are mild with moderate rainfall and sometimes snow.

The highest recorded temperature is 43 °C (109 °F) and the record low is −20 °C (−4 °F).

In this vast city, many historic sites can be admired, the most famous of which are the palaces of Sadabad, Niavaran, Sahebqaranyyeh and Golestan, the mosque of Seyyed Azizollah, the great Bazar of Tehran and many museums, such as Reza Abbasi museum, the carpet museum of Iran, Abguineh (glass and ceramics) museum, the Azadi museum, etc. Tehran has 740 parks.

Leisure and sport resorts around Tehran include Abali, Dizin, Gajereh and Shemshak ski stations, the dam water ski station and the slopes of Darband and Shemiran.

A toy is something to play with. Toys are for children, adults, and animals. Before 1970, most toys were made of metal and wood. Now, they are mostly made of plastic. Sometimes they are made of electronic material. Some people also consider video games toys. Toys include balls, plastic cars, and dolls. They also can be sex related products.

Toys  many years ago. Dolls of infants, animals, and soldiers and toy tools are found in archaeological places. The origin of the word "toy" is not known. However, it is thought that it was first used in the 14th century.

The earliest toys were made from rocks, sticks or clay. In Ancient Egypt, children played with dolls made of clay and sticks. In Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome, children played with dolls made of wax or terracotta, sticks, bows and arrows, and yo-yos. Later these developmental games were used in creation of indoor playsets for homes. When Greek children, especially girls became adults, it was required to sacrifice the toys to the gods. On the eve of their wedding, young girls around fourteen would offer their dolls in a temple as a rite of passage into adulthood.

Tin is a chemical element with symbol Sn (for ) and atomic number 50. It is in Group 14 on the periodic table. It has ten isotopes that are not radioactive, which is more than any other element.

Tin is a silver, somewhat soft metal. It is a post-transition metal. Its melting point is 231.93°C and its boiling point is 2602 °C. It can melt easily in a flame. It is . It makes a crackling sound called tin cry when a piece of it is bent. Tin has more non-radioactive isotopes than any other element.

Tin is found in two allotropes: alpha-tin and beta-tin. Alpha-tin is a brittle, dull, powdery, semimetallic form of tin. It is made when very pure tin is cooled. Beta-tin is the normal shiny, soft, conductive, metallic form. It is made at higher temperatures. The decay of tin by turning from beta-tin to alpha-tin is called tin pest. Alpha-tin is not wanted in many places. When small amounts of other elements like antimony are added, the tin cannot change into alpha-tin. When alpha-tin is heated, it changes into beta-tin.

Tin can be hardened by adding antimony or copper, as well as some other elements. These also make it resistant to tin pest. Tin can also be made very shiny. Tin can make an alloy with copper called bronze.

Tin resists many corrosive substances and is often used to protect other metals.  Salt water and fresh water do not affect tin.  It dissolves in strong acids to make tin salts.  It reacts with some strong bases.

Tin forms chemical compounds in two oxidation states: +2 and +4. +2 compounds are reducing agents. Some of them are colorless while others are colored. +4 compounds are more unreactive and act more covalent.

Tin burns in air to make tin(IV) oxide, which is white. Tin(IV) oxide dissolves in acids to make other tin(IV) compounds. Tin(IV) chloride is a colorless fuming liquid when anhydrous and a white solid when hydrated. It easily reacts with water to make tin(IV) oxide and an acid again.

Tin reacts with hydrohalic acids to make tin(II) halides. For example, tin(II) chloride is made when tin dissolves in hydrochloric acid. Tin(IV) halides are made when tin reacts with the halogens. Tin(IV) chloride is made when tin reacts with chlorine. Tin(II) sulfate is different as it does not oxidize to tin(IV) sulfate. Tin(II) oxide is a blue-black solid that burns in air to make tin(IV) oxide.

+2 compounds are reducing agents. They are about as common as +4 compounds. Some are colorless, while others are colored.

Tin is not found as a metal in the ground. It is normally in the form of cassiterite. Cassiterite is a mineral containg tin(IV) oxide. The cassiterite is normally found downstream of the cassiterite deposit when it is by a stream or river. Tin is also found in some complicated sulfide minerals.

Tin is made by heating cassiterite with carbon in a furnace. China is the biggest maker of tin.

People discovered tin long ago and used it with other metals.  When copper and tin are mixed together, bronze is made. Bronze was important in the past, because it was one of the strongest metals available, which meant it was useful in weapons and tools. Bronze changed the world when it was first invented, starting the Bronze Age. People organized themselves more, because making tools from bronze was harder than making them from rock and wood like they did before.

Tin is used in solder. Solder used to contain a mixture of lead and tin. Now the lead is removed because of its toxicity.

Tin is also used to make pewter, which is mainly tin mixed with a small amount of copper and other metals. Babbitt metal also has tin in it. Tin is used to coat several metals, like lead and steel. Tin plated steel containers are used to store foods. The pipes on a pipe organ are made of tin. Tin foil was used before aluminium foil. Tin was one of the first superconductors to be found. Organotin compounds are more common than almost any other organometal compound. They are used in some PVC pipes to stop them from decaying. Organotin compounds are toxic, though.

Tin is not toxic, but tin compounds are very toxic to marine life. They are a little toxic to humans.

The Taj Mahal is a Mughal Historical Site, mosque and tomb in India. It was built in the 17th century by Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan as a mausoleum in memory of his wife, Mumtaz Mahal.

The building is in the city of Agra, Uttar Pradesh. It is widely thought as one of the most beautiful buildings in the world. It is one of India's biggest tourist attractions.

The Taj Mahal is listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site, together with the Agra Fort, 2.5 kilometers away. It was listed as one of the 7 Wonders of the World in 2007. It is on the south bank of the Yamuna river in Agra.

The building was originally white. Because of pollution, it is turning yellow. Sulphur dioxide in the atmosphere reacts with water molecules and becomes sulphuric acid, which slowly destroys the outer layer of the building. The building also appears to be pink in the morning, yellow-ish in the evening, and gold at night.

The Taj Mahal is one of the most notable examples of Islamic architecture ever built. When it was built, most of India was ruled over by the Mughal Empire except the South. Shah Jahan was a Mughal emperor who came into power around 1628. According to historians, Shah Jahan loved building and architecture, which made his nickname “The Builder Of Marvels”. The Taj Mahal was built for Shah Jahan’s third wife, Mumtaz Mahal- meaning the “Jewel of the palace”. She became ill giving birth to their 14th child. As she was about to die, she asked Shah Jahan to make her the most beautiful tomb that was ever built. She died on 17 June 1631. In 1657, Shah Jahan fell ill. He died in captivity in 1666. His tomb was placed beside Mumtaz Mahal's.

The Taj Mahal is an example of Muslim Architecture – a mixture of building design influenced from Middle Eastern, Indian, Turkish, and Ottoman architecture.

The Taj Mahal was built with materials from all over the world. Over 20,000 people were used to move building materials. It is generally thought that Ustad Ahmad Lahauri (from Lahore) was in charge of the construction. The building was finished in 1648.

The Taj Mahal had 2 million visitors in 2001. In 2014-2017 there were more than 7-8 million visitors.

Many people think the Taj Mahal is one of the most beautiful buildings ever built. However, it is slowly being damaged by acid rain in the nearby Yamuna Basin. A nearby oil refinery has been blamed for some of the damage. In 1996, the Indian Supreme Court said that local industry was harming the Taj Mahal. The court set up an area of 10,400 square metres around the Taj Mahal called the Taj Trapezium Zone. Industries within this zone must use Natural gas instead of coal.

Because of pollution, the Taj Mahal is getting yellower slowly.

A tornado is an area of fast spinning winds made by a strong rotating thunderstorm that touches the ground. Tornadoes can be anywhere between a few hundred feet wide and several thousand feet wide. Wind inside a tornado can be intense and life-threatening, though winds outside or around the tornado perimeter can be as dangerous as the inflow. Tornadoes are life-threatening weather hazards, and heavy precipitation shafts (called the bears cage in meteorology) often obscure appropiate details like the edges of a tornado and potential multi-vortices systems. Tornadoes are especially hazardous to people in cars, trucks, buses and mobile homes. About 60 people are killed by tornadoes every year, and EF5 (F5 historically) or EF4 (F4 historically) make up many of those deaths every year. The word "tornado" comes directly from the Spanish word tronada (thunderstorm), which comes from the word tronar (to thunder).

Tornadoes are very destructive – they can wipe a second-story house off of its foundation if they reach historic EF5 and EF4 wind levels. Cars and trucks may be lofted and tornadic damage often leaves many individuals financially unstable. Tornadoes are detected by visible wind rotation in an area and funnel clouds (distinct from SCUD clouds). Nearly three quarters of the world's tornadoes happen in the United States. However, they can happen anywhere. The strongest tornadoes were estimated to have winds around 300 mph, though most tornadoes have winds between 60 and 100 miles per hour.

Tornadoes mostly happen during rotating thunderstorms called supercell storms. These supercells have a rotating updraft, called a mesocyclone, which can lead to them being very hazardous, often producing large and damaging hail and/or damaging winds.

Tornadoes are ranked on the Enhanced Fujita scale, from EF0 to EF5. EF0 is used for tornadoes that cause the least amount of damage, and EF5 is used for tornadoes that cause the most amount of damage. Before 2007, tornadoes used to be rated on the Fujita scale, a now outdated scale made by tornado scientist Ted Fujita. Fujita was one of the first people to make detailed research on tornadoes and discovered many things about tornadoes. He made the Fujita scale in 1971.

Tornadoes can happen in nearly any part of the world. In the United States, a tornado has happened in every state. The middle part of the United States is nicknamed "Tornado Alley" because of the number of tornadoes detected every year. However, many go their entire lives, usually 60–70 years, without seeing one.

Other tornado-like phenomena that exist in nature include gustnadoes (not a true tornado), dust devils(categorized as a wind phenomenon), fire whirls, and steam devils; downbursts are frequently confused with tornadoes, though their behaviors are distinct.

Low pressure caused by the high wind speeds and rapid rotation may cause water vapor in the air to condense into a visible condensation funnel. Occasionally, the condensation funnel of a tornado does not show the full size of the wind vortex. A tornado may have a small condensation funnel but still have tornado-force winds a mile away, meaning they can be extremely dangerous to people caught unprepared, including drivers and even experienced storm chasers. Funnels do not need to touch the ground to be dangerous, and this assumption takes several lives every year.

A single storm may produce multiple tornadoes and mesocyclones. Tornadoes produced from the same storm are referred to as a tornado family. Sometimes multiple tornadoes from different mesocyclones can be on the ground at the same time. Families like these can lead to oblong paths of damage, like with the 2021 Quad-State tornado family. (Tragically taking the lives of over 50+ people in one incident on December 10, 2021)

Occasionally, tornadoes are spawned from a severe weather event spanning multiple states. If there is little to no break in their activity, this is considered a tornado outbreak, although there are various definitions. A period of several successive days with tornado outbreaks in the same general area (spawned by multiple weather systems) is a tornado outbreak sequence, occasionally called an extended tornado outbreak. 148 tornadoes struck on the same day in April 1974. Many towns in the midwestern United States and Canada were destroyed with more than 300 people losing their lives.

The Fujita scale and the Enhanced Fujita Scale rate tornadoes by how much damage they cause. The Enhanced Fujita (EF) Scale was an update to the older Fujita scale. The updated scale uses engineered wind estimates and has better damage descriptions. The EF Scale was designed so that a tornado rated on the Fujita scale would get the same numerical rating, and was used in the United States since 2007. An EF0 tornado may damage trees, but leave most of the land intact, whereas an EF5 tornado can rip well-built buildings off their foundations leaving nothing left and even permanently damage big skyscrapers.

In the United States, 80% of tornadoes are EF0 and EF1 (equivalent to T0 through T3) tornadoes. Less than 1% of tornadoes are violent tornadoes (EF4 or EF5, or equivalent to T8 or stronger). Although they account for less than 1% of tornadoes, they make up the vast majority of deaths according to weather statistics and tracking data.

Due to a change in the way tornadoes were rated after 2013, no tornadoes ended up getting an EF5 rating until 2025, where a large tornado struck near Enderlin, Nebraska, sending train cars flying through the air. A survey by the Northern Tornadoes Project found that winds well above the EF5 threshold would be needed to do the damage done.

A "tornado watch" is given when the weather conditions look like a storm capable of making tornado could form. A 'PDS (Particularly Dangerous Situation)' watch is given when a likely tornado outbreak is to start, many strong tornadoes will form in the area, or an ongoing tornado outbreak is currently occurring. A "tornado warning" is issued over a small area (usually the size of a city or a portion of a county) if meteorologists think a tornado could form or is on the ground, using radar data or if a tornado has been reported by an individual. Tornado emergencies can be issued if a likely strong or intense tornado is about to hit an area with a lot of people in it (especially cities in Tornado Alley), a tornado has been spotted, and the tornado is expected to cause deaths or severe harm.

It is often thought that opening windows will lessen the damage caused by a tornado. While there is a big drop in atmospheric pressure inside a strong tornado, it is unlikely that the pressure drop would be enough to cause the house to explode. Opening windows may actually increase the tornado's damage. A violent tornado can destroy a house whether its windows are open or closed.

Another common misconception is that highway overpasses provide adequate shelter from tornadoes. Due to the Venturi effect, tornadic winds are stronger in the small space of an overpass. In the 1999 Oklahoma tornado outbreak of May 3, 1999, three highway overpasses were directly hit by tornadoes. At each of the three places there was a death, along with many life-threatening injuries. By comparison, during the same tornado outbreak, more than 2000 homes were completely destroyed, with another 7000 damaged, and yet only a few dozen people died in their homes.

There are areas which people believe to be safe from tornadoes, whether by being in a city, near a major river, hill, or mountain, or even protected by supernatural forces. Tornadoes have been known to cross major rivers, climb mountains, hit valleys, and have damaged several city centers. As a general rule, no area is safe from tornadoes, though some areas are more likely to be hit than others.

To keep safe in a tornado, here are some tips people can follow:

Taoism or Daoism () is both a philosophy and religion originated in China, which has 2,500 years of history.

Tao (or Dao, ) is the name of the force or the Way that Taoists believe makes everything in the world. Taoists think that words cannot be used to correctly describe Tao. The very first line of the Dào Dé Jīng (), the most important text in Taoism, says that

There are many other sacred writings by the teachers of Taoism. Instead of spending a lot of time trying to explain what the Tao is, Taoists focus on living a simple and balanced life in harmony with nature. This is one of the most important principles in Taoism. Taoists also believe that conflict is not good and that if you have an issue, it is better to get around with it.

Taoism first showed up in writing in China in 142 C.E. People do not always write about their religions at first, so this religion may be much older. Some important people of the history of Taoism are:

Taoists believe that the main principle behind the universe is an esoteric force known as the Tao. The Tao can best be described as the chaotic power of reality that causes change to happen and things to come in and out of the world without direction or intention. The essence of the Tao is seen in nature, in which all action occurs without any sort of meaning or greater purpose, but is rather the flow of change and energy. Some Taoists describe the Tao as God. Many scholars have labeled Taoism as  pantheistic.

Taoists use the word Qi () to describe energy moving through and altering things in the universe as a result of the Tao. Taoists believe the best way to live life is through the principle of Wu-wei (), which translates to "inaction" or "inexertion". The doctrine of Wu-wei advocates to not push back or resist whatever befalls you but let it run its course. It also advocates for being happy with what you have and not pursuing unrealistic dreams.

The yin and yang () symbol, the famous icon of Taoism, represents the idea that one must be in a harmony between two opposing forces in one's life and remain neutral to either side. Traditionalist polytheistic Taoists believe in traditional concepts of Heaven and the Underworld, but many modern Taoists today disregard old conceptions of the afterlife and instead believe that people can live on in the Tao after their physical death through metaphysical union.

There are several different sects of Taoism, some that combine the principles of Laozi (or Lao Tzu) with traditional Chinese deity worship, and some that adhere more strictly to the original tenets and believe only in the concepts of the Tao, Qi, and Wu-wei.

Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that studies the relations between heat, temperature, and energy. A branch of math called statistics is often used in thermodynamics to look at the motion of particles.

Thermodynamics is useful because it helps us understand how the world of the very small atoms connects to the large scale world we see everyday.

Thermodynamics also has two main branches called classical thermodynamics and statistical thermodynamics. An important idea in thermodynamics is that of a thermodynamic system.

An example of a thermodynamic system is a brick. A brick is made up of many atoms which all have their own properties. All thermodynamic systems have two kinds of properties, extensive and intensive. For the brick, the extensive properties are the ones you get by adding up all the atoms. Things like the volume, energy, mass, and charge are extensive because two of the same brick put together have twice as much mass as one brick. The intensive properties of the brick are the ones you get by looking at the average over all atoms. Things like temperature, pressure, and density are intensive because two of the same brick still has the same temperature as one brick alone.

There are four laws of thermodynamics that say how energy can be moved between two objects in the form of heat. The laws of Thermodynamics point out how the energy in a system changes and if the system can work well with its surroundings.

Earlier, thermodynamics was studied to make steam engines work better. Now, ideas from thermodynamics are used in everything from making engines to studying black holes.

Scientists use thermodynamics for many reasons. One is to make better engines and refrigerators. Another is to understand the properties of everyday materials so that they can make them stronger in the future. Thermodynamics is also used in chemistry to explain which reactions will work and which will not (this study is known as chemical kinetics). Thermodynamics is powerful because simple models for atoms work well in explaining the properties of large systems like bricks.

The strong interaction or strong nuclear force is one of the four fundamental forces in physics.

The other fundamental forces are electromagnetism, the weak interaction, and gravitation. They are called fundamental because there is no simpler way for physicists to understand what the forces do or how they do it.

The strong nuclear force is what holds most ordinary matter together. It does this in two ways: it holds subatomic particles, like neutrons and protons, together, and then it holds the atomic nucleus together.

It is the strongest fundamental force—many times stronger than gravity (1038 times stronger: that's 1 followed by 38 zeros). But it works only over very short distances of a few femtometres (fm). A femtometre is 10−15 (0.00000 00000 00001) metres.

Scientists often think about the two ways the strong interaction works as separate forces: the color force and the nuclear force. At distances of 0.8 fm and less, the color force holds subatomic particles like protons and neutrons together. At distances of 1 to 3 fm, the residual (leftover) strong force is what keeps protons and neutrons together in the atomic nucleus, so it is called the nuclear force. (This is like thinking of electricity and magnetism as separate forces, when the fundamental force is electromagnetism.)

The strong interaction is often thought to be the action of gluons, which 'glue' quarks together. Gluons can be exchanged (moved) between quarks, antiquarks and other gluons. All of those particles are said to carry a color charge, something that some elementary particles have which is like electric charge. Particles with color charge exchange gluons, like particles with electric charge exchange photons.

The theory of quantum chromodynamics (QCD) says that the strong force acts between quarks and gluons. Quantum chromodynamics is the theory that explains different colors . The strong force is the basic force controlled by gluons: affecting quarks, antiquarks, and the gluons themselves.

The strong force affects only quarks directly (as the color force). Between hadrons (like protons and neutrons), made up of quarks, the effect of the strong force is known as the nuclear force (which is not fundamental).

The strength of the strong force is the reason why we cannot detect free quarks (that is, quarks that are by themselves). The theory is that so much energy would be needed (to separate a quark) that new hadrons would be created instead. This is called color confinement and it is seen to happen in particle accelerators.

The color strong force is the strong interaction between the three quarks that a proton or neutron is made of. It is called the color strong force because, like the electromagnetic force, the strong force has charges. The electromagnetic force has only one type of charge, which can be either positive or negative (magnetic charges are just slow-moving electric charges), but the strong force has three types. These three types of charges are named after colors: red, green, and blue. They also have anti-colors: anti-red, anti-green and anti-blue. Like the electromagnetic force's positive and negative charges, different colors attract, and the same colors repel. Some particles that have color charge are quarks and antiquarks. The type of quark is not related to that quark's color charge at all. Quarks are one of the smallest particles currently known. They take up no space because they are points, and they are the only particles that we have not been able to break apart from other particles yet. This is because the nature of the strong force between particles is that it becomes stronger the further away the particles are. The force carrier of the strong force is called the gluon. Gluons also have color charge. Both quarks and gluons have properties that make them unique from other particles, as described in the Standard Model.

The nuclear force, or residual strong force (the force left over after holding the quarks together to make hadrons) is the (leftover) strong force acting between hadrons (particles made of quarks, like protons and neutrons). It is what holds the nucleus of an atom together.

A symphony is a piece of music written for an orchestra to play. It may be quite a long piece. Usually it is divided into parts, usually 3 or 4 parts, which are called movements.

The first movement of a symphony can be a fast movement, often in sonata form. The second movement can be a slow movement. The third movement can be a minuet or scherzo and a trio. The fourth movement may be called “Finale”; it can be in Rondo form or sonata form or a combination of these. There are lots of different ways of writing a symphony, but this is the pattern that was used by Joseph Haydn who is known as the “Father of the Symphony”, and many composers since have used his pattern of movements for their symphonies and the sound they create.

The word “symphony” comes from the Greek words “sym” (together) and “phone” (sound).

“Symphonic” means “like a symphony”. It is often used to describe music which is quite long and develops tunes over a long period.

A large orchestra is often called a “symphony orchestra”. This is to distinguish it from a small orchestra called a “chamber orchestra”.

Some of the most famous composers of symphonies are Joseph Haydn, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven, Franz Schubert, Felix Mendelssohn, Robert Schumann, Anton Bruckner, Johannes Brahms, Pyotr Tchaikovsky, Gustav Mahler, Jean Sibelius and Dmitri Shostakovich.

Symmetry is a property of some geometrical objects. Objects with symmetry appear the same when reflected along an axis or when rotated around a point. An object with symmetry is said to be symmetrical. The opposite of symmetry is asymmetry, which describes an object that does not have symmetry.

In reflectional symmetry, the axis of symmetry must cross the shape through the middle, dividing it into equal halves. In rotational symmetry, the object is identical when it is rotated by a certain amount.

There are many ways to see the idea of symmetry in different things. Symmetrical objects can be material, such as a crystal, a quilt, a living being, floor tiles, or a molecule. Transformations such as moving across a regularly patterned tile floor and rotating an eight-sided vase show those objects' symmetry. A set of objects sharing a spatial relationship could be symmetrical.

Abstract structures can also have symmetry, such as a mathematical equation or in the way music is played (as in a series of tones). Symmetry may be found with respect to the passage of time; it can be seen as an aspect of scientific models, language, music and even knowledge itself.

A transistor is an electronic component that can be used as part of an amplifier, or as a switch. It is made of a semiconductor material. Transistors are found in most  electronic devices. The transistor was a major advancement after the triode tube, with using much less electricity, and lasting many years longer, to switch or amplify another electronic current.

The transistor can be used for a variety of different things including amplifiers and digital switches for computer microprocessors. Digital work mostly uses MOSFETs. Some transistors are individually packaged, mainly in order to handle high power. Most transistors are inside integrated circuits.

Transistors have three terminals: the gate, the drain, and the source  (on a bipolar transistor, the wires can be called the emitter, the collector, and the base). When the source (or emitter) is connected to the negative terminal of the battery, and the drain (or collector) to the positive terminal, no electricity will flow in the circuit (if you have only a lamp in series with the transistor). But when power flows through the gate (or base), the transistor will allow electricity through. This is because when the gate is positively charged, the positive electrons will push other positive electrons in the transistor letting the negative electrons flow through. The transistor can also work when the gate is just positively charged, so it doesn't need to be touching the drain.

An easy way to think of how a transistor works is as a hose with a sharp bend that stops the water from going through. The water is the electrons, and when you positively charge the gate, it unbends the hose, letting water flow.

The basic Darlington transistor circuit is formed from two bipolar transistors wired emitter to base so they act as one transistor. One of the transistors is connected so that it controls the current to the base of the other transistor. This means that you can control the same amount of current with a very small amount of current going into the base.

When the gate of a P-channel MOSFET is positively charged, electricity will flow through, this is useful for electronics that require a switch to be turned on, making it an electronic switch. This rivals the mechanical switch, which requires a constant force pressing on it.

In a MOSFET used as an amplifier, transistors take the flow of the drain and source, and since the source current is so much larger than the drain's current, it is common for the drain's current to rise to the value of the sources, amplifying it.

Transistors are made of semiconductor chemical elements, usually silicon, which belongs to the modern Group 14 (formerly Group IV) in the periodic table of elements. Germanium, another group-14 element, is used together with silicon in specialized transistors. Researchers are also studying transistors made from special forms of carbon. Transistors can be also made from compounds like gallium arsenide.

The transistor was not the first three terminal device. The triode served the same purpose of the transistor 50 years earlier. Vacuum tubes were important in household technology before transistors. Unfortunately, tubes were big and fragile, used a lot of power, and didn't last very long. The transistor solved these problems.

Three physicists were credited with the invention of the transistor in 1947: Walter H. Brattain, John Bardeen, and William Shockley who contributed the most.

The transistor is a very important component today. If not for the transistor, devices such as cell phones and computers would be very different, or they might have not been invented at all. Transistors have been made very small (dozens of atoms wide) so that billions of them can be put into a small computer chip.

Sir Timothy John Berners-Lee  (born 8 June 1955) is a British computer scientist who was the inventor of the World Wide Web and he created a new computer language called HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) which most web pages are written in. The first web page was available on 6 August 1991.

Berners-Lee now leads the World Wide Web Consortium. That is an organization that looks after the World Wide Web.

He is the author of the book Weaving the Web. He is a director of The Web Science Research Initiative (WSRI), and a member of the advisory board of the MIT Center for Collective Intelligence. In April 2009, he was elected as a member of the United States National Academy of Sciences, based in Washington, D.C. In 1999, Time Magazine named Berners-Lee one of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century.

In March 2000 he was awarded an honorary degree from the Open University as Doctor of the university.

Tim Berners-Lee was born in London, on 8 June 1955. He is the son of Conway Berners-Lee and Mary Lee Woods. First, he attended Sheen Mount primary school. Then he went on to Emanuel School in London, from 1969 to 1973. After that, he studied at Queen's College, Oxford, from 1973 to 1976. While he was there, he received a first-class degree in Physics.

In 1989, while working at CERN, the European Particle Physics Laboratory in Geneva, Switzerland, Tim Berners-Lee proposed a global hypertext project, to be known as the World Wide Web. Based on the earlier "Enquire" work, it was designed to allow people to work together by combining their knowledge in a web of hypertext documents. He wrote the first World Wide Web server, "httpd", and the first client, "WorldWideWeb" a what-you-see-is-what-you-get hypertext browser/editor which ran in the NeXTStep environment. This work was started in October 1990, and the program "WorldWideWeb" first made available within CERN in December, and on the Internet at large in the summer of 1991.

Through 1991 and 1993, Tim continued working on the design of the Web, coordinating feedback from users across the Internet. His initial specifications of URIs, HTTP and HTML were refined and discussed in larger circles as the Web technology spread.

Tim Berners-Lee graduated from the Queen's College at Oxford University, England, 1976. Whilst there he built his first computer with a soldering iron, TTL gates, an M6800 processor and an old television.

He spent two years with Plessey Telecommunications Ltd (Poole, Dorset, UK) a major UK Telecom equipment manufacturer, working on distributed transaction systems, message relays, and bar code technology.

In 1978 Tim left Plessey to join D.G Nash Ltd (Ferndown, Dorset, UK), where he wrote among other things typesetting software for intelligent printers, and a multitasking operating system.

A year and a half spent as an independent consultant included a six-month stint (Jun-Dec 1980) as consultant software engineer at CERN. Whilst there, he wrote for his own private use his first program for storing information including using random associations. Named "Enquire" and never published, this program formed the conceptual basis for the future development of the World Wide Web.

From 1981 until 1984, Tim worked at John Poole's Image Computer Systems Ltd, with technical design responsibility. Work here included real time control firmware, graphics and communications software, and a generic macro language. In 1984, he took up a fellowship at CERN, to work on distributed real-time systems for scientific data acquisition and system control. Among other things, he worked on FASTBUS system software and designed a heterogeneous remote procedure call system.

In 1994, Tim founded the World Wide Web Consortium at the then Laboratory for Computer Science (LCS) which merged with the Artificial Intelligence Lab in 2003 to become the Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Since that time he has served as the Director of the World Wide Web Consortium a Web standards organization which develops interoperable technologies (specifications, guidelines, software, and tools) to lead the Web to its full potential. The Consortium has host sites located at MIT, at ERCIM in Europe, and at Keio University in Japan as well as Offices around the world.

In 1999, he became the first holder of 3Com Founders chair at MIT. In 2008 he was named 3COM Founders Professor of Engineering in the School of Engineering, with a joint appointment in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at CSAIL where he also leads the Decentralized Information Group (DIG). Co-Chaired by Dr. Lalana Kagal, the DIG Research Group works on projects including: how to re-decentralize the Web and help radically change the way Web applications work today, resulting in true data ownership; working to ensure the rights of users in big data and analytics and systems; as well as harnessing mobile technologies to aid during disaster relief and help society. In 2016, Sir Tim joined the Computer Science Department at the University of Oxford as a professor.

In 2008 he founded and became Director of the World Wide Web Foundation. The Web Foundation is a non-profit organisation devoted to achieving a world in which all people can use the Web to communicate, collaborate and innovate freely. The Web Foundation words to fund and coordinate efforts to defend the Open Web and further its potential to benefit humanity.

In June 2009 then Prime Minister Gordon Brown announced that he would work with the UK Government to help make data more open and accessible on the Web, building on the work of the Power of Information Task Force. Sir Tim was a member of The Public Sector Transparency Board tasked to drive forward the UK Government's transparency agenda. He has promoted open government data globally, is a member of the UK's Transparency Board.

In 2011 he was named to the Board of Trustees of the Ford Foundation, a globally oriented private foundation with the mission of advancing human welfare. He is President of the UK's Open Data Institute which was formed in 2012 to catalyse open data for economic, environmental, and social value.

He is the author, with Mark Fischetti, of the 1999 book "Weaving the Web" on the past, present and future of the Web.

On March 18 2013, Sir Tim, along with Vinton Cerf, Robert Kahn, Louis Pouzin and Marc Andreesen, was awarded the Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering for "ground-breaking innovation in engineering that has been of global benefit to humanity."

On 4 April 2017, Sir Tim was awarded the ACM A.M. Turing Prize for inventing the World Wide Web, the first web browser, and the fundamental protocols and algorithms allowing the Web to scale. The Turing Prize, called the "Nobel Prize of Computing" is considered one of the most prestigious awards in Computer Science.

Berners-Lee, T.J., et al., "", Electronic Publishing: Research, Applications and Policy, April 1992.

Berners-Lee T.J., et al, "", Communications of the ACM, Volume 37 Issue 8, August 1994, Pages 76-82

Tim Berners-Lee with Mark Fischetti, Harper San Francisco, 1999

Tim Berners-Lee, Dan Connolly, Ralph R. Swick "", W3C Note, 1999/6-7.

Berners-Lee, Tim. and Hendler, James "", Nature, April 26 2001 p. 1023–1025.

Berners-Lee, Tim; Hendler, James and Lassila, Ora "", Scientific American, May 2001, p. 29-37.

James Hendler, Tim Berners-Lee and Eric Miller, , Journal of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan,

Hendler, J., Berners-Lee, T.J., and Miller, E., '  ', Journal of the Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan, Vol 122(10), October, 2002, p. 676-680.

Nigel Shadbolt, Wendy Hall, Tim Berners-Lee, "", IEEE Intelligent Systems Journal, May/June 2006, pp 96-101

, 12th-13th September, 2005. Hosted by the British Computer Society, London

Tim Berners-Lee, Wendy Hall, James Hendler, Nigel Shadbolt, Daniel J. Weitzner, Science Vol. 313, 11 August 2006, pp. 769-771

Tim-Berners Lee, Wendy Hall, James A. Hendler, Kieron O'Hara, Nigel Shadbolt and Daniel J. Weitzner, Foundations and Trends in Web Science, Volume 1, Issue 1 (also available as a book:  144pp September 2006)

Nigel Shadbolt, Tim Berners-Lee "", Scientific American, Vol. 299, No. 4, P. 76, October 2008

Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, Tim Berners-Lee, "" (pdf), International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS), 5(3): 1-22. DOI: 10.4018/jswis.2009081901, 2009

Tim Berners-Lee, ", Scientific America, Vol. 22, November 2010

The Queen's College, Oxford University, England, BA Hons (I) Physics, 1973–1976.

Born London, England, 8 June 1955. Married to Rosemary Leith.

The Thirty Years' War was fought from 1618 to 1648. It was fought primarily in Germany, but several other countries became involved in the conflict, including France, Spain, and Sweden. In fact, almost all of the powerful countries in Europe were involved in the war, which began as a fight about religion between Protestants and Catholics. As the war continued, the Catholic Habsburg dynasty and other countries used the war to try to get more power. For example, Catholic France fought for the Protestants, which made the French-Habsburg  even worse.

The Thirty Years' War caused things like famine and disease in almost every country involved. The war lasted for 30 years, but the problems that had caused the war were not fixed for a long time after the war had been over. The war ended with the Treaty of Westphalia.

There were several reasons that the Thirty Years' War started.

Firstly, the Peace of Augsburg (1555), which was signed quickly by Charles V, stopped the fighting between the Lutherans and the Catholics in Germany.

The Peace made the violence end somewhat, but it did not fix the real reason for the fighting. Both groups thought that the Peace meant different things. The Lutherans said it was only an agreement that would last for a short time. Calvinism came quickly into German as a third Christian group in Germany, but it was not part of the Peace of Augsburg. That meant that Calvinists fought both Lutherans and Catholics.

Secondly, the powerful countries in Europe in the 17th century often disagreed about matters of politics or economics. Spain wanted land in some of the Holy Roman Empire states in what is now Germany because the empire owned some of the Spanish Netherlands. The Dutch fought the Spanish to get independence and got it after some wars, which ended in 1609.

Thirdly, the Holy Roman Empire was a broken group of nations inside a large empire, which had nations like the Austrian House of Habsburg, Bavaria, the Electorate of Saxony, the Margravate of Brandenburg, the Electorate of the Palatinate, Hesse, the Archbishopric of Trier and Württemberg and other small nations and towns. Only Austria was capable of operating on its own. Countries often made alliances with other places ruled by relatives. Because there were so many nations inside the empire, they often disagreed with one another, and the empire could not control the whole territory very well. That meant that the empire could not fix the problems in the whole country.

Fourthly, religious groups did not agree during the second half of the 16th century. The Peace of Augsburg did not work because some bishops had not given up their bishoprics, and Catholic rulers in Spain and Eastern Europe wanted to make Catholicism strong in the region, which caused fighting between the groups. The Catholics made many Protestants leave their homelands. Some places gave Protestants permission to worship. Those disagreements caused violence.

Fifthly, Holy Roman Emperor Matthias, a Catholic, died without any children to take his place in 1619. His lands were given to his cousin Ferdinand of Styria, Matthias's closest male relative, who became Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor. Ferdinand had been educated by the Jesuits. A Catholic, he wanted to make Catholicism the only religion again. That made him unpopular in the German state of Bohemia since most people there were not Catholics but Hussites. The Bohemians rejected Ferdinand and launched the Thirty Years' War.

The war can be divided into four major phases: the Bohemian Revolt, the Danish intervention, the Swedish intervention, and the French intervention.

Emperor Mattias, who had no children, wanted to give the throne of the Holy Roman Empire to Ferdinand II when he died. To ensure that the transition would work, he wanted to make Ferdinand the Crown Prince of Bohemia, a country that was part of the Holy Roman Empire, in the meantime. Some of the Protestant leaders of Bohemia thought that Ferdinand would take away their religious rights. They liked the Protestant Frederick V, Elector of the Palatinate better. However, some of the other Protestants supported Ferdinand. Enough people preferred Ferdinand that in 1617, he was elected to become the Crown Prince of Bohemia.

Ferdinand sent two Catholic governors to Prague, the capital of Bohemia, in May 1618. Ferdinand wanted them to run the government while he was gone. Suddenly, many angry Protestants took them and threw them out of the high palace window (The Defenestration of Prague), that made the Catholics angry with the Protestants.

The Protestants who had thrown the Catholics out the window created a new Protestant government in Bohemia. Many Protestants in Bohemia and the nearby countries started hating the rest of the Holy Roman Empire. The Holy Roman Empire wanted to stop them from doing so, to fight Bohemia, and borrow Spain's money. However, they thought that if that happened, Bohemia's Protestant friends might come in and start fighting them. That made them try to make an agreement with Bohemia to stop the fighting. However, when Emperor Matthias died in 1619, Bohemia decided not to make the agreement because they thought the Holy Roman government was weak now.

Bohemia was so angry about the Catholics it they decided to not make Ferdinand II the king of Bohemia anymore and but made Frederick V the king instead. However, because Matthias was dead and so Ferdinand was the next person waiting to be the emperor, Ferdinand was in charge of the whole Holy Roman Empire now. Some people also thought Frederick should not be allowed to be king of Bohemia. All of that made the Holy Roman Emperor decide to fight Bohemia.

A large army got money from Maximilian I was led by Count Tilly invaded Bohemia. At the Battle of White Mountain, the Holy Roman Empire beat the Bohemian rebels. Frederick ran away. and the revolt collapsed.

Frederick was also in charge of a German nation called the Palatinate. Maximilian I, who was in charge of a nearby nation, Bavaria, wanted more power and decided to take over some of the Palatinate. Spain, a Catholic country,. joined the war to help Maximilian, who was disliked in the Netherlands. Other countries now became involved in this war. After some fighting, Maximilian and Spain won, and Emperor Ferdinand decided that all of the Palatinate should go to Maximilian. That made some of the other Protestant nations very scared because that meant that Protestant areas were being taken over by Catholics.

Thought is the operation of the brain in conscious activity. It may or may not be goal-directed, aimed at solving specific problems. It is not the only way brains operate. Behaviour may occur as a result of instinct, and the adaptive unconscious may solve problems without a person being aware.

Other animals can use their brains to solve problems, but there is no way of telling whether they do so consciously. Thought is investigated by four or five academic disciplines, each in its own way. The disciplines include psychology, philosophy, biology, physiology, psychoanalysis and sociology.

Philosophy of mind is a branch of philosophy that studies the nature of the mind, mental events, functions, properties, and consciousness. The mind-body problem, i.e. the relationship of the mind to the body, especially the brain, is a central issue in philosophy of mind.

The mind-body problem has to do with the explanation of the relationship that exists between minds, or mental processes, and bodily states or processes. The main aim of philosophers working in this area is to determine the nature of the mind and mental states/processes, and how—or even if—minds are affected by and can affect the body.

Our perceptual experiences depend on stimuli which arrive at our various sensory organs from the external world and these stimuli cause changes in our mental states, ultimately causing us to feel a sensation, which may be pleasant or unpleasant. Someone's desire for a hat, for example, will tend to cause that person to move his or her body in a specific manner and in a specific direction to obtain what he or she wants. The question, then, is how it can be possible for conscious experiences to arise out of a lump of gray matter endowed with nothing but electrochemical properties. A related problem is to explain how someone's beliefs and desires can cause that individual's neurons to fire and his muscles to contract in exactly the correct manner. These comprise some of the puzzles that have confronted epistemologists and philosophers of mind from at least the time of René Descartes.

The Tang dynasty () (June 18, 618 – June 4, 907) was an imperial dynasty of China.

The Tang Dynasty came after the Sui Dynasty (隋) and was followed by the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Period (Traditional Chinese: 五代十國). It was founded by the Li (李) family, who came to power during the fall of the Sui Dynasty. The dynasty was interrupted briefly by the Wu Zhou (Traditional Chinese: 武周) usurper regime, (October 16, 690 – March 3, 705) founded by Empress Wu Zetian (Traditional Chinese: 武則天) who managed to claim the throne, becoming the first and only Chinese Empress.

The Tang Dynasty, with its capital at Chang'an (Traditional Chinese: 長安) in present-day Xi'an (Traditional Chinese: 西安), was the biggest city in the world at the time. It is considered by historians as a high point in Chinese civilization – maybe even greater than the earlier Han Dynasty (Traditional Chinese: 漢朝) – as well as a golden age of cosmopolitan culture. Empress Wu, the first woman to ever rule in China, was also included in the Tang Dynasty. Her ruling methods were sometimes vicious, but she was very talented and intelligent.

It is believed to have been written by the Japanese noblewoman Murasaki Shikibu at the beginning of the 11th century, around the highest point of the Heian Period. The form of the language used at that time is called Late Old Japanese. The Tale of Genji is sometimes called the world's first novel, the first modern novel, or the first novel to still be considered a , but many readers do not agree on this.

Japanese cultural scholar Motoori Norinaga first used the term Mono no aware in his review of the book.  This term in now important in understanding Japanese literature.

The first translation of part of Genji Monogatari into English was by Suematsu Kencho. It was notably translated by Japanese nun Jakucho Setouchi in 1998. Arthur Waley made a free translation of the work, except for one chapter.  Edward Seidensticker made the first complete translation into English, using a more literal way than Waley.  The most recent English translation, by Royall Tyler (2002), also tries to respect the original text.

St. Thomas Aquinas, (1225 – 7 March 1274) was a Catholic Dominican priest from Italy, saint and philosopher. He was born in Roccasecca, as the son of Count Andulf of Aquino and Countess Theodora of Teano.

His early education was at the Benedictine monastery at Montecassino. He attended the University of Naples, where he got the nickname "dumb ox" for his slow demeanor, though he was an intelligent and talented student. He studied philosophy, Catholic theology, church history, liturgy, and canon law.

Thomas de Aquinas is an essential character of Western philosophy and Christianity. We have access to his academic work, teachings, and writings approaching abstract thinking.

Thomas de Aquinas began his journey with the monastery (religious life) at five years old. Coming from a wealthy and influential family, Thomas de Aquinas was destined by his family to become the Abbot of Montecassino. He didn't want to follow the path his family had paved for him and decided to become a monk with the Dominicans. They were monks who lived by eliminating all material wealth. For his family, being a monk of the Dominicans was a dishonor. His family kidnapped him and kept him prisoner in the their castle for over a year in an attempt to change his mind. This was until he escaped and became a friar with the new Dominican Order against the wishes of his family.

He was sent to Paris by the Dominicans to study theology and philosophy. He became one of the 33 Doctors of the Church and is known for his work with Natural Law.  Aquinas took an optimistic view of human nature, believing that it is human nature to do good and not evil.

He was the author of the cosmological argument. Catholics think Aquinas is the best teacher for one who wants to become a priest. His most famous book being Summa Theologica. Many schools are named after him including the Pontifical and Royal University of Santo Tomas in Manila, Philippines.

Suleiman I, commonly known as Suleiman the Magnificent in Western Europe and Suleiman the Lawgiver () in his Ottoman realm, was the tenth Sultan of the Ottoman Empire. He became sultan when he was 26 years old. He reigned for 46 years, from 1520 to 1566, which was longer than any other Ottoman sultan. He is known in the West as Suleiman the Magnificent and in the Muslim world, as the Lawgiver (in Turkish Kanuni; Arabic: القانونى, al‐Qānūnī), because he changed the organization of the Ottoman legal system. This nickname shows how important he was in the Ottoman Empire. Some people even considered Suleiman as the “World Emperor and Messiah of the Last Age”.

He also led many wars in Europe, including wars in Hungary, Austria, the Mediterranean, and parts of North Africa.

Suleiman was the only son of Sultan Selim I and Ayşe Hafsa Sultan. Suleiman spent his childhood in the city of Trabzon, where he got a basic education from his personal teachers. One of his first known teachers was Hayreddin Efendi. Suleiman spoke eight languages fluently. He also wrote Persian poetry and his hobby was composing lute music. Besides battle, he also enjoyed philosophical debate.

During his childhood, Suleiman became friends with Damat Ibrahim Pasha, who was a slave of the sultan. Later during Suleiman’s reign Ibrahim became an important adviser and grand vizier.

When Suleiman was 10 years old, he was expected to take over an administrative position (sancak) in the Ottoman government, but the sons of Beyazid II held him back. Suleiman followed his father Selim I to become ruler of the Ottoman Empire in September 1520.

Suleiman tried to capture Vienna, the capital of the Habsburg Austrian Empire, two times. The first time was in 1529 after he destroyed and captured the Kingdom of Hungary in the 1526 Battle of Mohács. The second time was in 1532. Both times Suleiman failed. The Siege of Vienna resulted in the end of the expansion of the Ottoman Empire into Europe. After these failed attempts, Suleiman started to focus on growing his Empire into Asia and the Mediterranean instead of Central Europe.

The empire that Suleiman ruled over had Ottoman Turkish as its main language. The religion of Islam played a central role during his reign.  The Ottoman Empire ruled a diverse population.  They were separated by differences in race, language, religion, and customs.  Muslims were favored, because they followed the state religion, which was Islam.  Others, for example Jews and Christians, had a lesser position but still were allowed to have their own religion.  Throughout Suleiman's reign, the government was made up of the Ruling Institution.  This institution included the family of the sultan, the ministers of the sultan, and the army.  During Suleiman’s reign, it can be said that the Muslim Institution had more power and influence than the Ruling Institution.  However, the Muslim Institution was aiming to catch up with the Sharia Institution.

Suleiman wanted to keep the power to himself. To prevent his son Mustafa from taking power with a coup, Suleiman had Mustafa strangled in 1553. Several other sons also died. Suleiman’s successor was his only surviving son, Selim II. He came to the throne during civil conflicts with his surviving brothers. Selim II had the urge to live a life of pleasure, instead of focusing on the difficult task of governing. He assigned affairs of state to his grand vizier (chief minister) and son-in-law, Mehmed Sokullu.

After Selim II came to power to follow Suleiman, the reign of the Ottoman Empire steadily went downhill, because Selim II was more focused on his personal pleasure.

Suleiman died on September 7th 1566. He died during the war with Austria. After his death, his body was moved back to Istanbul. He was buried in Mimar Sinan’s biggest mausoleum.

A transformer is a device that transfers electrical energy from one electrical circuit to another, without sharing any wires. This happens because the first circuit creates a magnetic field as its power rises and falls. The energy of the second circuit rises and falls with the first circuit, so there is no change in frequency between them. Transformers are an important part of electrical systems.

Transformers are made in many different sizes, from a very small coupling transformer inside a stage microphone to big units that carry hundreds of MVA used in power grids.

The main reason to use a transformer is to make power of one voltage level into power of another voltage level. High voltage is easier to send a long distance, but less voltage is easier and safer to use in the office or home.

Transformers are used to increase or decrease alternating current (AC) voltage in circuits. The transformer is usually built with two coils around the same core. The primary coil or input coil is connected to supply side while secondary coil supplies power to load. The secondary coil is called the output coil. Energy is transferred from the primary to the secondary by electromagnetic induction. In power grids many transformers are used. These are networks for delivering electricity from the generator and to the user.

The transformers in your neighborhood, on electricity poles, or the ones connected to underground wires, usually transform high voltage of 7,200 volts to 220-240 volts of electricity to power lights and appliances such as refrigerators in homes and businesses. Some countries, such as America use different voltages in homes, such as 120 volts.  Transformers cannot increase power, so if the voltage is raised, the current is proportionally lowered. If the voltage is lowered, the current is proportionally increased.

Transformers inside electronics equipment provide the kinds of electricity the various parts need.

The Art of War () is an ancient Chinese military text that was written by Sun Tzu, a high-ranking military general, strategist, and Taoist philosopher over 2,500 years ago. The text contains 13 chapters, each of which covers an  of warfare.

It is one of the earliest books on Chinese warfare. It remains one of the best known and most influential books ever written. The book was widely copied in the ancient world. At first, it was written on bamboo slats that were sewn together. It was read by politicians, scholars and military leaders.

Translations of the book were first read in Japan and Korea. The oldest copy from Japan dates to the 8th century. It was translated into French in 1772 by a Jesuit named Jean Joseph Marie Amiot. The first translation into English was published by Lionel Giles in 1910. The Art of War was first translated into Russian in 1950. The Russians' knowledge of French culture makes it probable that they had copies in French much earlier.

The book is used today by business schools and militaries worldwide.

When Sun Tzu first wrote The Art of War, it was not the first book on military tactics. He quotes from The Book of Military Administration by Chun Cheng. The quote is limited to the use of signal flags and drums to move soldiers. Chun's book has not d and so little is known of what else was in it. However, books of the time were based on rules of warfare that all sides followed. War was the sport of rich noblemen. The rules were based on chivalry.

Sun Tzu refused to see war as a sport. He used Taoist principles and applied them to warfare. In doing this he changed the rules of war. Unlike generals who enjoyed long campaigns, he understood that war is serious. Sun Tzu believed that once a war started, the goal was to defeat the enemy. Sun Tzu was  in that he did not follow the prevailing wisdom of his time. Other generals were simply unprepared for Sun Tzu's s. Sun Tzu mastered the art of being  in warfare.

In situations where a smaller weaker force is faced with a stronger larger force, Sun Tzu's tactics are very often successful. David and Goliath is a Biblical story of a weaker shepherd boy facing a giant who is a skilled warrior. David uses an unconventional weapon and slays Goliath. David refused to fight by Goliath's rules. The political scientist Ivan Arreguín-Toft did s on wars. He discovered that about a third of the time the weaker country actually wins.

The Art of War is credited by Mao Zedong as having helped him defeat Chiang Kai-Shek during the Chinese Civil War. Ho Chi Minh was a fan of Sun Tzu. He led communist North Vietnam in their fight against American-backed South Vietnam. American Generals Norman Schwarzkopf, Jr. and Colin Powell followed Sun Tzu's princples during the Gulf War.

The Three Gorges Dam () is a dam in the Three Gorges region on the Yangtze River in Sandouping, in the country of China. Being one of the largest dams in the world, it also generates the biggest amount of hydroelectric power (22,250 megawatts), pushing the massive Itaipu Dam in Brazil from first place to second place.

The Three Gorges Dam project was completed on July 4, 2012. The dam was built for flood control, irrigation, and electricity. However, this has not come without problems. The dam covers a lot of historic sites and has caused 1.24 million people to lose their homes under the rising water. The dam forms the Three Gorges Reservoir, which extends nearly   upstream to the city of Chongqing.

The dam was proposed by Sun Yat-sen, a Chinese political leader, in 1919. The site was surveyed in 1932 and 1939, by the Chinese and Japanese respectively. The Japanese drew up a plan (the Otani plan) for the dam, only to realize later that China would remain under Chinese control. Later, in 1944, the United States helped make plans for the dam, but all work on the dam stopped in 1947, because of the Chinese Civil War. In 1949, work resumed, but the work was slow because of problems in the economy. Later in 1958, some engineers who were against the dam were put in jail.

In 1980, work on the dam continued faster. The National People's Congress voted in 1992 for the dam. The dam was accepted by the government, and on December 14, 1994, construction began. In 2009, the dam began to make hydroelectricity. Some new plans, such as a set of 6 new power generators under construction, became operational in the year 2011. The reservoir filled to capacity at the end of 2008.

The Three Gorges Dam consists of a main dam wall, and a section on the right with a set of five locks, which are devices used to raise boats and ships.

The dam cost $180 billion Chinese Yuan Renminbi (about $30 billion USD). While this cost seems huge, it actually was $20 billion yuan (about $3.3 billion USD) less than the original budget of $203.9 billion yuan (about $34 billion USD). However, this cost will be recovered when the dam makes money by making electricity. In about 10 years, the complete cost of the dam will be recovered.

One of the big reasons the dam was built to control floods. It protects large cities like Wuhan, Nanjing, and Shanghai, which are very close to the river. Lots of farms, small villages and towns, and factories are also located near the river. In the event of a flood, there are 22 cubic kilometers (18 million acre feet) of space behind the dam to hold back the flood waters. The flood waters are stored behind the dam for future use. In the dry season, the water is released down the river, and the reservoir level drops to prepare for the next flood. However, the dam does not protect the lower river tributaries from flooding.

Another reason the dam was built was for water navigation, or the transport of people and goods by ship. There are two sets of locks each of which has five stages. Each lock is  long,  wide, and  deep, which is similar in size to the original locks of the Panama Canal, one of the biggest canals in the world. The reservoir behind the dam floods dangerous sections of the river, so boats and ships can go safely and easily. There is also a "ship lift" (an elevator for ships) that can lift ships that weigh up to 3,000 tons.

The Three Gorges Dam generates 22,250 megawatts, which makes it the biggest single hydroelectric power source in the world. It has 34 electricity generators, and 32 are main generators. Each generator is powered by water that comes from the reservoir.  Each of these 32 generators makes about 700 megawatts of electricity. (This is more electricity than the entire electricity generation of Glen Canyon Dam, one of the biggest dams in the United States.) The other two generators will make power for the dam itself. These two generators each make 50 megawatts.

Of the 32 main generators, 14 generators are on the north side of the dam. 12 are on the south side of the dam. 6 are in a separate powerhouse under a mountain just south of the dam. The generating capacity of the dam is 10,000 MWh (megawatt-hours), or the amount of megawatts generated per hour. Each main generator weighs a massive 6000 tons (about the same weight as three thousand cars). The water drops  from the reservoir to the generator, which uses a type of turbine called a Francis turbine. Each turbine is  wide and  tall. The amount of water that goes into the turbine can be from 1,968 cubic feet (600 m3) to 3,116 cubic feet (950 m3) per second. The turbines turn at a speed of 75 RPM (rotations per minute). The efficiency of the generators is from 94 to 96.5 percent.

The 14 main generators on the north side were installed from 2003 to 2005. The first one to begin making electricity (Generator No.2) started on July 10, 2003. The last one (Generator No.9) started on September 7, 2005. The full power (9,800 megawatts) of the north side generators was first tested on October 18, 2006, when the reservoir had risen to  above sea level. The 12 main generators on the south side were installed from 2007 to 2008. The first one to begin making electricity (Generator No.22) started on June 11, 2007. The last one (Generator No.23) started on August 19, 2008.

From its completion to March 2009, the Three Gorges Dam has generated about 296,550,000 MWh (Megawatt-hours) of electricity.

Three power lines send electricity away from the dam, to three electricity grids called the East, Central, and South China grids.

The dam provides about 3% of China's electricity. However, the dam was originally planned to supply 10% of China's electricity. The reason for the decrease is, China's energy use grew much faster than the designers expected.

Because of reducing electricity needs on fossil fuels like coal and oil, the Three Gorges Dam has saved 31 million tons of coal per year, and prevented:

The dam has also benefited transportation on the river. Because of the locks (devices used to lift ships) installed on the dam, the benefits are:

In response to the dam, many sewage pipes that once dumped sewage straight into the Yangtze River now have to be treated. Over 65 percent of this waste water is now treated before flowing into the reservoir. There are now about 50 water treatment facilities in the area. Also, solid waste is now collected in 32 landfills. They can handle 7,664.5 tons of waste every day.

The dam also persuaded the government of China to think seriously about the pollution in the Yangtze River and the rest of China.

A total of 1.24 million people had to move to different places because their homes were flooded by the dam. This number is about 1.5% of the total population of Hubei Province (60.3 million) and Chongqing City (31.44 million) where the reservoir is located. 140,000 from Hubei Province alone.

On July 22, 2008, most of the people were safely relocated. 4 million more people will ultimately have to move to Chongqing from their homes near the Three Gorges Dam.

A large amount of animal habitat has also been destroyed. Many animals with critically low populations have lost their vital habitat. These include the endangered Siberian Crane, the Yangtze river dolphin (baiji), and Yangtze sturgeon. About one billion tons of dirty water flow into the Yangtze River each year. The dam has stopped this dirty water from being washed away to Shanghai, and led to serious pollution problems.

About 1,300 historical sites have been flooded by the Three Gorges reservoir.  Many of these historic sites have been moved to safer places.  Some historic sites cannot be moved because of their location, size, or design.

The Three Gorges Dam will become much less spectacular, because the water level will rise up to  in places, reducing the depth of the canyons.

A lot of silt (sediment) that is carried by the river has been trapped in the reservoir. Eventually, if the dam is not removed, the reservoir will fill with silt, making it useless. Also, because the river's silt doesn't go downstream anymore, the city of Shanghai will suffer because there has been no silt to replace land that is washed away at the river's mouth. In a high-silt content river like the Yangtze, sediment can clog the dam's outlets, and it cannot release water. The water would back up behind the dam and have nowhere to go, and would eventually go over the dam, making it collapse.

The dam is also a possible target in war, weakening China's national security. The temperature gets higher. It is more likely to have droughts and floods.  It is also possible that the dam sits on a seismic fault.

The Gezhouba Dam (Gezhouba Water Control Project, Chinese: 长江葛洲坝水利枢纽工程) is an afterbay (smaller dam in front) of the Three Gorges Dam. It forms a pool that extends upstream to the base of the Three Gorges Dam, improving navigation. The dam was built from December 30, 1970 to December 10, 1988. The dam is  long and up to  tall. It generates 2,710 megawatts of electricity. There are three ship locks at the dam. Lock No.2, which is  long,  wide, and  deep, is among the 100 largest in the world.

A series of other dams are also planned upstream, on the Yangtze and Jinsha rivers. About four dams are planned on the stretch of the Yangtze River, and they will produce 38,500 megawatts in total. Eight dams are planned on the Jinsha River, and eight more upstream of it, and one original plan called for a dam in the Tiger Leaping Gorge, one of the deepest river canyons in the world. This plan was, however, scrapped in December 21, 2007, because of the gorge's status as a World Heritage site.

Sun Wen, Sun Zhongshan or Sun Yat-sen (12 November 1866 – 12 March 1925) was born in China and was a Chinese political leader. On his 8th attempt while living in Maui Sun helped overthrow the Qing Dynasty in October 1911 during the Xinhai Revolution. This was the last imperial dynasty of China. He is often called as Father of the Nation.

He was president when the Republic of China was founded in 1912. He later co-founded the Kuomintang. Sun remains revered in both mainland China and Taiwan. A massive portrait of Sun continues to appear in Tiananmen Square for May Day and National Day.

Sun Yat-sen was born on 12 November 1866 to Sun Dacheng and Madame Yang in Cuiheng, Xiangshan County (now Zhongshan City), Guangdong. He had a cultural background of Hakka (with roots in Zijin, Heyuan, Guangdong) and Cantonese. His father owned very few lands and worked as a tailor in Macau, and as a journeyman and a porter. After finishing primary education, he moved to Honolulu in the Kingdom of Hawaii, where he lived a comfortable life of modest wealth supported by his elder brother Sun Mei.

Sun Yat-Sen died of adenocarcinoma of the gallbladder at the age of 58 in 1925. After his death in Beijing, his body was shown at a temple in the Fragrant Hills.

The universe is space and everything in it. It is made of billions of stars, planets, and enormous clouds of gas separated by huge voids of space. It is believed that an event called the Big Bang started the expansion of the universe.

Astronomers use telescopes to look at distant galaxies. This is how they see the universe as it was a long time ago. The past tense is because the light from distant parts of the universe takes a very long time to reach us. From these observations, it seems the physical laws and constants of the universe have not changed.

Physicists are currently unsure if anything existed before the Big Bang. The size of the universe is not known, but there are many theories that are debated today.

People have long had ideas about the universe. They saw the sky at night, with fixed stars and other stars moving among them. Most early ideas had the Earth at the center of the universe. This is known as geocentrism.

Some ancient Greeks thought that the universe had infinite space and existed forever. They also thought it had a set of celestial spheres which corresponded to the fixed stars; the Sun and various planets. The spheres circled about a round but unmoving Earth.

Over hundreds of years, better observations led to Copernicus's Sun-centered model, known as heliocentrism. This was very controversial at the time, and was fought by religious authorities, most famously by the Christian church (see Giordano Bruno and Galileo).

The invention of the telescope in the Netherlands in 1608 was a very important milestone for astronomy. By the middle of the 1800s, telescopes were good enough for other galaxies to be seen. The modern optical (uses visible light) telescope is still more advanced. Meanwhile, Isaac Newton improved the ideas of gravity and dynamics (equations) and showed how the Solar System worked.

In the 1900s, better telescopes showed astronomers more of the universe. The Solar System is in a galaxy made of billions of stars, which we call the Milky Way. Other galaxies exist outside it, as far as we can see. This started a new kind of astronomy called cosmology, in which astronomers study what these galaxies are made of and how they are spread out. By measuring the redshift of galaxies, cosmologists soon discovered that the Universe is always expanding (see: Hubble).

The most accepted scientific model of the universe is known as the Big Bang theory, which says the universe  from a single point that held all the matter and energy of the universe. There are many kinds of scientific evidence that support the Big Bang idea. Astronomers think that the Big Bang happened around 13.73 billion years ago. this would make the universe 13.73 billion years old. Since then, the universe has expanded to be at least 93 billion light years, or 8.80  meters, in diameter. It is still expanding right now, at a faster rate eveey moment.

Astronomers are not sure what causes the universe to expand. Because of this, they call the mysterious energy causing the expansion dark energy. By studying the expansion of the universe, astronomers have also realized most of the matter in the universe may be in a form which cannot be observed by any scientific equipment we have. This matter has been named dark matter. Note that dark matter and energy have not been observed directly (that is why they are called 'dark'). However, many astronomers think they must exist: many astronomical observations would be hard to explain if they didn't.

Some parts of the universe are expanding even faster than the speed of light. This means the light will never be able to reach us here on Earth, so we will never be able to see these parts of the universe. We call the part of the universe we can see the observable universe.

The word universe comes from the Old French word universe, which comes from the Latin word universe. The Latin word was used by Cicero and later Latin authors in many of the same senses as the modern English word is used.

A different theory is an early Greek model of the universe. In that model, all matter was in rotating spheres centered on the Earth; according to Aristotle, the rotation of the outermost sphere was  for the motion and change of everything within. It was natural for the Greeks to assume that the Earth was stationary and that the heavens rotated about the Earth, because careful astronomical and physical measurements are needed to prove otherwise.

The most common term for "universe" among the ancient Greek philosophers from Pythagoras onwards was το παν (The All), defined as all matter (το ολον) and all space (το κενον).

The broadest word meaning of the universe is found in De division naturae by the medieval philosopher Johannes Scotus Erigena, who defined it as simply everything: everything that exists and everything that does not exist.

Usually, the universe is thought to be everything that exists, has existed, and ever will exist. This definition says that the universe is made of two elements: space and time, together known as space-time or the vacuum; and matter and different forms of energy and momentum  space-time. The two kinds of elements behave according to physical laws, in which we describe how the elements interact.

A similar definition of the term universe is everything that exists at a single moment of time, such as the present or the beginning of time.

In Aristotle's book The Physics, Aristotle divided το παν (everything) into three roughly analogous elements: matter (the stuff of which the universe is made), form (the arrangement of that matter in space) and change (how matter is created, destroyed or altered in its properties, and similarly, how form is altered). Physical laws were the rules governing the properties of matter, form and their changes. Later philosophers such as Lucretius, Averroes, Avicenna and Baruch Spinoza altered or refined these divisions. For example, Averroes and Spinoza have active principles governing the universe which act on passive elements.

It is possible to form space-times, each existing but not able to touch, move, or change ( with each other. The entire collection of these separate space-times is denoted as the multiverse. In principle, the other unconnected universes may have different dimensionalities and topologies of space-time, different forms of matter and energy, and different physical laws and physical constants, although such possibilities are speculations.

According to a still-more-restrictive definition, the Universe is everything within our connected space-time that could have a chance to interact with us and vice versa.

According to the general idea of relativity, some regions of space may never interact with ours even in the lifetime of the Universe, due to the finite speed of light and the ongoing expansion of space. For example, radio messages sent from Earth may never reach some regions of space, even if the Universe would exist forever; space may expand faster than light can traverse it.

It is worth emphasizing that those distant regions of space are taken to exist and be part of reality as much as we are; yet we can never interact with them, even in principle. Even with most of the visible universe, we cannot interact with it in practice. A relatively simple task, so it might seem, would be to communicate within our galaxy. Even if we knew how to send a message successfully, it would be well over 200,000 years before a reply could come back from the far end of the Milky Way, whose diameter is 100,000 light years. galaxy. The spatial region which we can see is called the observable universe.

The Universe is huge. The matter which can be seen is spread over a space at least 93 billion light years across.

For comparison, the diameter of a typical galaxy is only 30,000 light-years, and the typical distance between two neighboring galaxies is only 3 million light-years. As an example, our Milky Way Galaxy is roughly 100,000 light years in diameter, and our nearest sister galaxy, the Andromeda Galaxy, is roughly 2.5 million light years away. The observable Universe contains more than 2 trillion (1012) galaxies and, overall, as many as an estimated  stars (more stars than all the grains of sand on planet Earth).

Typical galaxies range from dwarf galaxies with as few as ten million (107) stars up to giants with one trillion (1012) stars, all orbiting the galaxy's center of mass. Thus, a rough estimate from these numbers would suggest there are around one sextillion (1021) stars in the observable Universe; though a 2003 study by Australian National University astronomers resulted in a figure of 70 sextillion (7 x 1022).

The matter that can be seen is spread throughout the Universe when averaged over distances longer than 300 million light-years. However, on smaller length-scales, matter is observed to form 'clumps', many atoms are condensed into stars, most stars into galaxies, most galaxies into galaxy groups and clusters and, lastly, the largest-scale structures such as the Great Wall of galaxies.

The present overall density of the Universe is very low, roughly 9.9 × 10−30 grams per cubic centimetre. This mass-energy appears to consist of 73% dark energy, 23% cold dark matter and 4% ordinary matter. The density of atoms is about a single hydrogen atom for every four cubic meters of volume. The properties of dark energy and dark matter are not known. Dark matter slows the expansion of the universe. Dark energy makes its expansion faster.

The Universe is old, and changing. The best good guess of the Universe's age is 13.798±0.037 billion years old, based on the cosmic microwave background radiation. Independent estimates (based on measurements such as radioactive dating) agree, although they are less precise, ranging from 11 to 20 billion years.

The Universe has not been the same at all times in its history. Its getting bigger accounts for how Earth-bound people can see the light from a galaxy 30 billion light-years away, even if that light has traveled for only 13 billion years; the very space between them has expanded. This expansion is consistent with the observation that the light from distant galaxies has been redshifted; the photons emitted have been stretched to longer wavelengths and lower frequency during their journey. The rate of this spatial expansion is accelerating, based on studies of Type Ia supernovae and other data.

The relative amounts of different chemical elements — especially the lightest atoms such as hydrogen, deuterium and helium — seem to be identical in all of the Universe and throughout all of the history of it that we know of. The Universe seems to have much more matter than antimatter. The Universe appears to have no net electric charge. Gravity is the dominant interaction at cosmological distances. The Universe also seems to have no net momentum or angular momentum. The absence of net charge and momentum is expected if the Universe is finite.

The Universe appears to have a smooth space-time continuum made of three spatial dimensions and one temporal (time) dimension. On the average, space is very nearly flat (close to zero curvature), meaning that Euclidean geometry is experimentally true with high accuracy throughout most of the Universe. However, the Universe may have more dimensions, and its spacetime may have a multiply connected global topology.

As far as we can tell, the Universe has the same physical laws and physical constants throughout. According to the prevailing Standard Model of physics, all matter is composed of three generations of leptons and quarks, both of which are fermions. These elementary particles interact via at most three fundamental interactions: the electroweak interaction which includes electromagnetism and the weak nuclear force; the strong nuclear force described by quantum chromodynamics; and gravity, which is best described at present by general relativity.

Special relativity holds in all the universe in local space and time. Otherwise, general relativity holds. There is no explanation for the particular values that physical constants appear to have throughout our universe, such as Planck's constant h or the gravitational constant G. Several conservation laws have been identified, such as the conservation of charge, conservation of momentum, conservation of angular momentum and conservation of energy.

Accurate predictions of the universe's past and future require an accurate theory of gravitation. The best theory available is Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity, which has passed all experimental tests so far. However, since rigorous experiments have not been carried out on cosmological length scales, general relativity could conceivably be inaccurate. Nevertheless, its predictions appear to be consistent with observations, so there is no reason to adopt another theory.

General relativity provides of a set of ten nonlinear partial differential equations for the spacetime metric (Einstein's field equations) that must be solved from the distribution of mass-energy and momentum throughout the universe. Since these are unknown in exact detail, cosmological models have been based on the cosmological principle, which states that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic. In effect, this principle asserts that the gravitational effects of the various galaxies making up the universe are equivalent to those of a fine dust distributed uniformly throughout the universe with the same average density. The assumption of a uniform dust makes it easy to solve Einstein's field equations and predict the past and future of the universe on cosmological time scales.

Einstein's field equations include a cosmological constant (Lamda: Λ), that is related to an energy density of empty space. Depending on its sign, the cosmological constant can either slow (negative Λ) or accelerate (positive Λ) the expansion of the Universe. Although many scientists, including Einstein, had speculated that Λ was zero, recent astronomical observations of type Ia supernovae have detected a large amount of dark energy that is accelerating the Universe's expansion. Preliminary studies suggest that this dark energy is related to a positive Λ, although alternative theories cannot be ruled out as yet.

The prevailing Big Bang model accounts for many of the experimental observations described above, such as the correlation of distance and redshift of galaxies, the universal ratio of hydrogen:helium atoms, and the ubiquitous, isotropic microwave radiation background. As noted above, the redshift arises from the metric expansion of space; as the space itself expands, the wavelength of a photon traveling through space likewise increases, decreasing its energy. The longer a photon has been traveling, the more expansion it has undergone; hence, older photons from more distant galaxies are the most red-shifted. Determining the correlation between distance and redshift is an important problem in experimental physical cosmology.

Other experimental observations can be explained by combining the overall expansion of space with nuclear physics and atomic physics. As the Universe expands, the energy density of the electromagnetic radiation decreases more quickly than does that of matter, since the energy of a photon decreases with its wavelength. Thus, although the energy density of the Universe is now dominated by matter, it was once dominated by radiation; poetically speaking, all was light. As the Universe expanded, its energy density decreased and it became cooler; as it did so, the elementary particles of matter could associate stably into ever larger combinations. Thus, in the early part of the matter-dominated era, stable protons and neutrons formed, which then associated into atomic nuclei. At this stage, the matter in the Universe was mainly a hot, dense plasma of negative electrons, neutral neutrinos and positive nuclei. Nuclear reactions among the nuclei led to the present abundances of the lighter nuclei, particularly hydrogen, deuterium, and helium. Eventually, the electrons and nuclei combined to form stable atoms, which are transparent to most wavelengths of radiation; at this point, the radiation decoupled from the matter, forming the ubiquitous, isotropic background of microwave radiation observed today.

Other observations are not clearly answered by known physics. According to the prevailing theory, a slight imbalance of matter over antimatter was present in the universe's creation, or developed very shortly thereafter. Although the matter and antimatter mostly annihilated one another, producing photons, a small residue of matter survived, giving the present matter-dominated universe.

Several lines of evidence also suggest that a rapid cosmic inflation of the universe occurred very early in its history (roughly 10−35 seconds after its creation). Recent observations also suggest that the cosmological constant (Λ) is not zero, and that the net mass-energy content of the universe is dominated by a dark energy and dark matter that have not been characterized scientifically. They differ in their gravitational effects. Dark matter gravitates as ordinary matter does, and thus slows the expansion of the universe; by contrast, dark energy serves to accelerate the universe's expansion.

Some people think that there is more than one universe. They think that there is a set of universes called the multiverse.

By definition, there is no way for anything in one universe to affect something in another. The multiverse is not yet a scientific idea because there is no way to test it. An idea that cannot be tested or is not based on logic is not science. It is not known if the multiverse is a scientific idea.

This is a scientific topic called "the ultimate fate of the universe". It is a topic in cosmology. There are possible scenarios for its evolution. The basic issue is whether its existence is finite or infinite.

The future of the universe is a mystery. However, there are a couple of theories based on the possible shapes of the universe:

There is a consensus among cosmologists that the shape of the universe is considered "flat" (parallel lines stay parallel) and will continue to expand forever.

Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun in our Solar System. Like Neptune, it is an ice giant. It is the third largest planet in the solar system.

The planet is made of ice, gases and liquid metal. Its atmosphere has hydrogen, helium and methane. The temperature on Uranus is  near the top of its atmosphere. Its small solid core (about 55% the mass of Earth) is probably about .

The planet is tilted on its axis so much that it is sideways. Nobody knows why exactly it is. It has five big moons, many small ones, and a small system of 13 planetary rings.

The distance between Uranus and the Sun is about 2.8 billion km. Uranus completes its orbit around the Sun in 84 earth years. It completes a spin around its axis in 17 hours and 14 minutes. This means there are about 43,000 days in a year on Uranus.

Uranus was discovered in 1781. This planet can be seen with the naked eye under perfect conditions. John Flamsteed saw it decades before but thought it was a star (34 Tauri).

Near the solstice, one pole faces the Sun continuously and the other faces away. Only a narrow strip around the equator has a rapid day–night cycle, with the Sun low over the horizon. Each pole gets around 42 years of continuous sunlight, followed by 42 years of darkness.

Uranus is named after Uranus, the Greek mythology version of the Sumerian god Anu, who was a god of the sky.

Uranus has been seen many times through a telescope, and even sometimes without any, but people thought it was a star due to its slow orbit. Sir William Herschel observed Uranus on March 13, 1781 from the garden of his house at 19 New King Street in Bath, Somerset, England (now the Herschel Museum of Astronomy), and first said it was a comet (on April 26, 1781). With a homemade 6.2-inch reflecting telescope, Herschel "engaged in a series of observations on the parallax of the fixed stars."

Herschel wrote in his journal: "In the quartile near ζ Tauri... either [a] Nebulous star or perhaps a comet." On March 17 he noted: "I looked for the Comet or Nebulous Star and found that it is a Comet, for it has changed its place." When he presented his discovery to the Royal Society, he continued to assert that he had found a comet, but also implicitly compared it to a planet:

Herschel notified the Astronomer Royal Nevil Maskelyne of his discovery and received this reply from him on April 23, 1781: "I don't know what to call it. It is as likely to be a regular planet moving in an orbit nearly circular to the sun as a Comet moving in a very eccentric ellipsis. I have not yet seen any coma or tail to it."

Although Herschel continued to say this new object was a comet, other astronomers had already begun to think otherwise. Finnish-Swedish astronomer Anders Johan Lexell, working in Russia, was the first to calculate the orbit of the new object. Its nearly circular orbit showed him that it was a planet rather than a comet. Berlin astronomer Johann Elert Bode described Herschel's discovery as "a moving star that can be deemed a hitherto unknown planet-like object circulating beyond the orbit of Saturn". Bode concluded that its near-circular orbit was more like a planet's than a comet's.

The object was soon widely accepted as a new planet. By 1783, Herschel acknowledged this to Royal Society president Joseph Banks: "By the observation of the most eminent Astronomers in Europe it appears that the new star, which I had the honor of pointing out to them in March 1781, is a Primary Planet of our Solar System." In recognition of his achievement, King George III gave Herschel £200 per year on condition that he move to Windsor so that the Royal Family could look through his telescopes ().

In 1986, NASA's Voyager 2 visited Uranus. This is the only space probe that tried to see the planet from a short distance. The spacecraft studied the atmosphere of the planet.

Uranus has 27 known moons. They are named for characters from the works of Shakespeare and Alexander Pope. The five biggest moons are Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania and Oberon. It is likely that more moons will be found.

Uranus is covered in blue clouds. The top clouds, made of methane, are hard to see. Lower clouds are thought to be frozen water. There are also violent storms. Wind speeds can reach . Scientists are studying the clouds to try to understand the storms on the planet.

The planet Uranus has a system made of 13 rings, which is far fewer than the rings of Saturn but more than those around Jupiter and Neptune. The rings of Uranus were discovered in 1977. More than 200 years ago, William Herschel also said he saw rings, but today astronomers do not believe that he saw them, because they are very dark and hard to see. Two inner rings were discovered in 1986 in images taken by Voyager 2, and two outer rings were found in 2003–2005 by the Hubble Space Telescope. The rings are probably made of ice.

A lot of people think the rings of Uranus are quite new. They say that the rings are less than 600 million years old. The planet's ring system probably came from when some of its moons crashed together. After crashing, the moons probably broke up into many small pieces of rock and ice, which orbited Uranus and turned into rings.

The ring system of Uranus has thirteen rings. In order of how close they are to Uranus, the rings are 1986U2R/ζ, 6, 5, 4, α, β, η, γ, δ, λ, ε, ν, μ rings. There are three groups: nine small main rings (6, 5, 4, α, β, η, γ, δ, ε), two dusty rings (1986U2R/ζ, λ) and two outer rings (μ, ν). The rings of Uranus consist mainly of macroscopic (or visible) particles and less dust, although people know dust is in 1986U2R/ζ, η, δ, λ, ν and μ rings.

There also may be a lot of thin dust bands and faint rings between them. These faint rings and dust bands may stay for only a short time. Some of them became visible during a series of ring events in 2007 when the rings were at different angles. Many dust bands between the rings were seen by Voyager 2. All rings of Uranus have different brightnesses.

The rings are made of somethng that is super dark. The rings are slightly red in the ultraviolet and visible parts of the spectrum and grey in near-infrared. The chemical composition of the ring particles is not known. However, they cannot be made of pure water ice like the rings of Saturn because they are too dark, darker than the inner moons of Uranus. So they are probably a mixture of ice and a dark material. It is hard to know what this material is, but scientists think it may be organic compounds that were darkened by charged particle irradiation from the planet's magnetosphere. The rings' particles may by made of a crushed material, which the inner moons used to be made of.

The ring system of Uranus is not like the faint dusty rings of Jupiter or the big rings of Saturn, some that are very bright because of water ice. However, some parts of their ring systems are close to being the same. The Saturnian F ring and the ε ring are both thin, dark and are shepherded by a pair of moons. The newly discovered outer rings of Uranus are similar to the outer G and E rings of Saturn. Smaller rings existing in the wide Saturnian rings also look like the thin rings of Uranus. Also, dust bands seen between the main rings of Uranus may be like the rings of Jupiter. The Neptunian ring system is a little bit like Uranus's one, although it is smaller, darker and contains more dust. The Neptunian rings are also further from their planet.

Uranus goes around the Sun completely every 84 Earth years. Its normal distance from the Sun is around 3 billion km (about 20 AU). The amount of sunlight on Uranus is about 1/400, or 0.25% of that on Earth. Its orbital elements were first calculated in 1783 by Pierre-Simon Laplace. With time, changes began to appear between the predicted and observed orbits, and in 1841, John Couch Adams first said that the differences might be because of the gravity of another planet. In 1845, Urbain Le Verrier began his own independent research into Uranus's orbit. On September 23, 1846, Johann Gottfried Galle found a new planet, later called Neptune, close to the area Le Verrier said it would be.

The time it takes for the inside of Uranus to spin around itself is 17 hours and 14 minutes, clockwise (retrograde). Like all giant planets, its upper atmosphere has very strong winds in the direction that the planet rotates. At some latitudes, such as about two-thirds between the equator and the south pole, the parts of the atmosphere we can see move much faster, making a full rotation in just 14 hours.

Venus is the second planet from the Sun. Venus is the only planet in the Solar System that has a day longer than a year. The year length of Venus is 225 Earth days. The day length of Venus is 243 Earth days.

Venus is a terrestrial planet because it has a solid, rocky surface like other planets in the inner Solar System. Astronomers have known Venus for thousands of years. The ancient Romans named it after their goddess Venus, goddess of love and beauty.

Venus is the brightest thing in the night sky except for the Moon. It is sometimes called the morning star or the evening star as at some elongations it is easily seen just before the Sun comes up in the morning. At other times, it can be seen just after the sun goes down in the evening. Venus comes closer to the Earth than any other planet does.

Venus is sometimes called the sister planet of Earth as they are quite similar in size and gravity. In other ways the planets are very different. Venus' atmosphere is mostly carbon dioxide (CO2) with clouds of sulphuric acid (H2SO4). H2SO4 is a chemical that is poisonous to life. For this it is sometimes known as the Earth's "evil twin".

The thick atmosphere makes it hard to see the surface. Until the late twentieth century many thought there might be life there. The pressure on Venus' surface is 92 times that of Earth. Venus is one of only two planets in the Solar System (the other being Mercury) that has no moons.  Venus spins very slowly on its axis and it spins in the opposite direction to the other planets.

Venus is a terrestrial planet so, like the Earth, its surface is made of rock. Venus is much hotter than Earth. All the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere acts like a blanket, trapping heat from the Sun. This effect is called the greenhouse effect and it is very strong on Venus. This makes the surface of Venus the hottest of any planet's surface in the Solar System with an estimated average temperature of . This is hot enough to melt lead or zinc.

Venus has no oceans because it is much too hot for water. Venus' surface is a dry desert. Because of the clouds, only radar can map the surface. It is about 80% smooth, rocky plains, made mostly of basalt. Two higher areas called continents make up the north and south of the planet. The north is called Ishtar Terra and the south is called Aphrodite Terra. They are named after the Babylonian and Greek goddesses of love.

The surface of Venus looks like it has been shaped by volcanic activity. Venus has a lot of volcanoes. The surface of Venus is estimated to be 300–600 million years old.

Unlike Earth or Mars, Venus does not have defined highlands or lowlands, and it does not have tectonic plates.

Venus' atmosphere is mostly carbon dioxide and nitrogen gas with clouds of sulphuric acid. Because the atmosphere is so thick or dense the pressure is very high. The pressure is 92 times the pressure on Earth, enough to crush many things.

It is impossible to see the planet's surface from space as the thick cloud layer reflects 60% of the light that hits it. The only way scientists are able to see it is by using infrared and ultraviolet cameras and radar.

Scientists believe that billions of years ago, the atmosphere of Venus could have been like Earth's atmosphere. There may have been lots of water on the surface of Venus. But after 600 million to several billion years, the evaporation of the water put greenhouse gases into its atmosphere.

In 1967, Venera 4 found that the magnetic field of Venus was much weaker than that of Earth. This magnetic field is induced by an interaction between the ionosphere and the solar wind. Venus' magnetosphere is not strong enough to protect the atmosphere from cosmic rays.

Venus can sometimes be seen passing between the Sun and Earth. Venus looks like a black dot when seen through a special telescope. These passages are called "transits". These "transits" happen in pairs eight years apart. Then it is more than a hundred years to the next pair.

Venus orbits the Sun at an average distance of about 108 million km (68~ million mi). It completes an orbit every 224.7 days. The rotation of Venus is slow. A Venusian sidereal day is “..NOT..” longer than a Venusian year.::.

Many man-made satellites have been sent to Venus to study it. They are:

Vatican City (; officially Vatican City State, ) (also sometimes referred to as the Vatican) is the smallest country in the world by size, at , and the smallest by population. It is also one of the world's three city-states.

Its territory is completely surrounded by Italy and it is only one of three countries in the world that are enclaves of another country (the others being San Marino, also in Italy, and Lesotho in southern Africa). Also, it is the only country in the world that is an enclave of a city, as all of the land around it is part of Rome, the capital of Italy. The Vatican City is a city-state, because all its territory is urban and built-up.

The Vatican City is the headquarters of the Roman Catholic Church, and the religion's and country's government Holy See. Its head of state or sovereign is the Pope which is, in religious contexts, the Bishop of Rome and head of the Roman Catholic Church.

The Vatican City is also important for its culture and art. The Vatican's masterpieces are very well known in the world: St. Peter's Square, St. Peter's Basilica, the Sistine Chapel, the Vatican Museums and the Apostolic Palace, where the Pope lives. There are also hundreds of other sculptures and pictures.

The Pope used to rule the Papal States, which included most of Italy. Catholic popes had generally tried to stop Italy from becoming one country because they feared they would lose their control of at least one of the Papal States. In 1861 Italy was unified under the King of Savoy, but Rome and Latium remained unconquered. On September 20, 1870 Italian troops invaded. Rome became capital of the new kingdom.

The Pope claimed he was a prisoner of the Italian state and excommunicated all the people who helped invade the Papal state. This stopped Catholics from taking part in public life under Catholic government.

In 1929 Benito Mussolini, decided to sign an agreement with Pope Pius XI, called the Lateran Treaty, which gave the territory of the Vatican to the Pope. Another treaty gave the Vatican money each year to compensate for the lost territories.

The government structure is a theocracy (a country governed by a religion particularly by the Holy See) with the Pope as the head. The pope is elected by the College of Cardinals which are bishops and archbishops of the Roman Catholic Church, allowing one to lead both the religion and city-state. The Pope also holds the title of "Bishop of Rome".

The Pope is the head of state or sovereign of the Vatican and holds the office until death or resignation therefore his title is officially "the Sovereign". The government and legislature is the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State.

Vatican City has a population of 526. The citizens of the Vatican include the Pope, cardinals who live in the Vatican City or in Rome, all the nuncios (who is the  of an ambassador) and diplomats, all the Swiss Guards, and other important people. Also, there are 372 Vatican citizens who live in other countries, including nuncios and diplomats. Vatican citizenship cannot be passed to children and spouses; and, except for the Pope, Vatican citizenship is lost when the term of office comes to an end, for the Swiss Guards, nuncios and diplomats, and other people working for the Holy See; and if the cardinals no longer live in the Vatican City or in Rome.

The Vatican does have a law declaring an official language. Italian is the most used language, and the only official language in Vatican City. The Holy See's official language is Latin, but its working language is Italian.

The official religion of the Vatican is Roman Catholic Christianity, and because the country is governed by the Holy See, it is a theocracy.

Velocity is a measure of how fast something moves in a particular direction. To define it needs both magnitude and direction. If an object moves east at 9 metres per second (9 m/s), then its velocity is 9 m/s to the east.

The idea behind this is that speed does not tell us in which direction the object moves in a given frame of reference. Speed is one part of velocity, direction is the other part. Depending on the frame of reference, the velocity can be defined with many mathematical concepts required for making the correct analysis.

To calculate the average velocity of an object, we divide its displacement (its change of position) by the time it took to change position.

For example, if an object moves 20 meters (m) to the left in 1 seconds (s), its velocity (v) would be equal to:

Unlike average velocity, the instantaneous velocity tells us how fast something is moving at only one time, because velocity can only change with time.

The concept of velocity allows us to consider two different means of calculating the velocity. Two-dimensional motion requires us to use vector notation to define the physical quantities found throughout the kinematics.

To calculate the average velocity of an object, we divide its displacement (its change of position) by the time it took to change position.

where: is the total distance traveled in a given time interval . Each of these quantities can be calculated by subtracting two different values intertwined within the given quantity, hence give the desired .

Contrary to average velocity, the instantaneous velocity tells us the rate of change at which a given object is moving along a certain path at a given instance of time, which usually tends to be infinitesimally small.

When , we can see that . Taking that into consideration we can conceptualize this rate of change between displacement vector and interval of time using mathematical analysis (most notably- Calculus)

Velocity can also be measured by comparing the motion of two objects. This is called relative velocity. The second object is called the reference frame. To find the relative velocity, subtract the velocity of the reference frame from the velocity of the first object. For example, Earth moves at 67,000 miles per hour around the Sun. Usually, we do not care about this motion. So we subtract the vector that represents Earth's motion from the total motion.

Wine is an alcoholic drink. It is made from the juice of grape.

If alcoholic drinks are made from the juice of other fruits (such as plums or blackberries) they may be called "wine". This article only deals with wine made from grapes.

There are two main types of wine, red wine and white wine. Red wine is made using the skins of the grapes. The skins give the wine a dark color, and chemicals called tannins that taste slightly bitter. Red wine can be sweet or dry. "Dry" means low in sugar.

White wine is made without the grape skins at all, so it is usually less bitter and more acidic. Like red wines, they can be sweet or dry.

Rosé wine (a French word meaning "pink") is in between: it has some flavor and color from the skins, but not as much as a red wine.

Wine with bubbles in it, called sparkling wine. Sparkling wine can be red, white, or rosé, but is usually white. It can be made in any country, but the best-known sparkling wines are champagne, which comes from France and (recently) southern England, Prosecco, from Italy.

Fortified wine is made by mixing liquor into the wine while it ferments.

Wine making begins with growing red or white grapes. Wine grapes have thicker skins and bigger seeds compared to grapes for eating. After the grapes are ripe, they are picked off the plants. There are different ways of picking (for example, using machines, or picking by hand, in the day, or at night).

After harvest, the grapes are crushed to release their juice, which is very sugary. Before, this was done by people stomping on grapes with their bare feet. Today, machines are used, but people sometimes use their bare feet in festivals. The person making the wine also decides now if the wine will be red, white, or rose:

Next, the sweet grape juice is fermented, by adding yeast. In a few days, the yeast turns the sugar into alcohol, and also releases carbon dioxide.

After fermenting, the wine is stored for a while (called "aging"). The person making the wine can make different choices, which will change the flavor of the wine. They can choose to store the wine in a steel container, or a barrel made of oak wood. If they choose wood, the wine will absorb some of the wood flavor, which wine drinkers call "oakiness". This process can take only a couple of weeks, up to several years, depending on what kind of flavor the wine maker wants.

Lastly, the wine is bottled and sent to a customer, restaurant or store to be enjoyed.

People have been making wine for at least 5000 years. The oldest evidence of ancient wine production has been found in Georgia from  BC (the earliest known traces of grape wine),

The United States dollar (or American dollar) is the official currency (money) of the United States of America. It is also used in some other countries outside the US. It is the standard currency for international markets selling goods such as gold and oil (petrol). When writing, the symbol for the American dollar is the dollar sign ($). Dollars can also be known as USD (standing for 'U.S. dollar').

All U.S. dollar currency has been the same size, shape and general design since 1928. This is unlike some countries where bank notes with different values have different sizes.

The U.S. also has dollar coins. Some are silver colored and some are gold colored. Vending machines often give dollar coins as change, since it is easier for the machines to give out coins than paper money. Some of the more advanced vending machines give out paper money as change. Paper dollars are much more common than dollar coins.

The US dollar in subdivided into cents. 100 cents equals 1 US dollar. One cent can be written as either $0.01 or 1¢. The cent or "penny" (not to be confused with the English penny sterling) is the least worth coin used in the U.S.. There are several different coins with different cent values of different materials and sizes. There is the penny (1¢ or $0.01), nickel (5¢ or $0.05), dime (10¢ or $0.10), quarter (25¢ or $0.25), and the much rarer half-dollar (50¢ or $0.50). All coins and paper bills have the faces of famous Americans on the front side.

The paper "dollar bill" is legally called a "Federal Reserve Note".  Federal Reserve notes are legal tender currency notes. The twelve Federal Reserve Banks issue them into circulation under the Federal Reserve Act of 1913. A commercial bank belonging to the Federal Reserve System can obtain Federal Reserve notes from the Federal Reserve Bank in its district whenever it wishes by paying for them in full, dollar for dollar, from its account with Federal Reserve Bank.

Federal Reserve Banks get the notes from the U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing (BEP). It pays the BEP for the cost of producing the notes.

Congress has specified that a Federal Reserve Bank must hold collateral equal in value to the Federal Reserve notes that the Bank receives. This collateral is chiefly gold certificates and United States securities. This provides backing for the note issue.

Federal Reserve notes are not redeemable in gold, silver or any other commodity, and receive no backing by anything. This has been the case since 1933. The notes have no value for themselves, but for what they will buy.

The Coinage Act of 1965 titled "Legal tender" states: "United States coins and currency (including Federal reserve notes and circulating notes of Federal reserve banks and national banks) are legal tender for all debts, public charges, taxes, and dues".

This law means that all United States money as identified above are a valid and legal offer of payment for debts. There is no Federal statute saying a person or organization must accept currency or coins as payment for goods and/or services. Private businesses are free to develop their own policies on whether or not to accept cash. But there might be a State law which says otherwise. For example, a bus line may prohibit payment of fares in pennies or dollar bills. Businesses may refuse to accept large denomination currency (usually notes above $20) as a matter of policy.

People get cash from banks using  automated teller machines (ATMs) or by cashing cheques. The amount of cash that the public holds varies seasonally, by the day of the month, and even by the day of the week. For example, people demand a large amount of cash for shopping and vacations during the year-end holiday season. Also, people typically withdraw cash at ATMs over the weekend, so there is more cash in circulation on Monday than on Friday.

To meet the demands of their customers, banks get cash from Federal Reserve Banks. Most medium- and large-sized banks have reserve accounts at one of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Banks, and they pay for the cash they get from them by having those accounts debited. Some smaller banks maintain their required reserves at larger, "correspondent," banks. The smaller banks get cash through the correspondent banks, which charge a fee for the service. The larger banks get currency from the Fed and pass it on to the smaller banks.

When the public's demand for cash declines—after the holiday season, for example—banks find they have more cash than they need and they deposit the excess at the Fed. Because banks pay the Fed for cash by having their reserve accounts debited, the level of reserves in the banking system drops when the public's demand for cash rises; similarly, the level rises again when the public's demand for cash subsides and banks ship cash back to the Fed.

The popularization of the ATM in recent years has increased the public's demand for currency and, in turn, the amount of currency that banks order from the Fed. Interestingly, the advent of the ATM has led some banks to request used, fit bills, rather than new bills, because the used bills often work better in the ATMs.

Each of the 12 Federal Reserve Banks keeps enough cash to meet the needs of the depository institutions in its District. Extended custodial inventory sites in several continents promote the use of U.S. currency internationally, improve the collection of information on currency flows, and help local banks meet the public's demand for U.S. currency. Additions to that supply come directly from the two divisions of the Treasury Department that produce the cash: the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, which prints currency, and the United States Mint, which makes coins. Most of the inventory consists of deposits by banks that had more cash than they needed to serve their customers and deposited the excess at the Fed to help meet their reserve requirements.

When a Federal Reserve Bank receives a cash deposit from a bank, it checks the individual notes to determine whether they are fit for future circulation. About one-third of the notes that the Fed receives are not fit, and the Fed destroys them. As shown in the table below, the life of a note varies according to its denomination. For example, a $1 bill, which gets the greatest use, remains in circulation an average of 5.9 years; a $100 bill lasts about 15 years.

Turkey, officially the Republic of Türkiye, is a transcontinental country located mainly on the Anatolian Peninsula in Western Asia, with a small portion on the Balkan Peninsula in Southeast Europe. It shares borders with the Black Sea to the north; Georgia to the northeast; Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Iran to the east; Iraq to the southeast; Syria and the Mediterranean Sea to the south; the Aegean Sea to the west; and Greece and Bulgaria to the northwest. It also shares a maritime border with Cyprus to the south.

Turkey is a republic. There are 81 provinces in Turkey. The money of Turkey is called the Turkish Lira. The capital city is Ankara, a city in the central region, called Anatolia. The cultural and economic centre is in the European side of Istanbul. In the past Istanbul was called Constantinople. The republic was founded in 1923, after World War I and a war of independence (Kurtuluş Savaşı). Before that, Turkey was the core of the Ottoman Empire.

Many civilisations were in the area that is now Turkey, like the Hittites, the Roman Empire and the Byzantine Empire. Many important events in the history of Christianity happened in places that are now in Turkey. Because it lies in both Europe and Asia, some people see Turkey as the "door" between them. The vast majority of the Turkish population believes in the religion of Islam.

Modern Turkey's varied climate lets many kinds of food crops grow, and livestock and forestry are important industries. Turkey makes enough food to feed itself. Turkish manufactures include aeroplanes, electronics, cars, clothing and textiles for home and for other countries.

Turkey is a popular place for tourists to visit. It has hundreds of kilometres of beaches on its Aegean and Mediterranean coasts, and many important historical places.

The first major empire in the area was the Hittites (from the 18th century to the 13th century BCE). The Hittites, who spoke one of the Indo-European languages, developed a high culture in Central Anatolia. Their kingdom was destroyed by the Sea People in the 11th century BCE and the successor states were Lydia, Caria and Lycia.

From 1950 BCE, Armenians and Assyrians inhabited parts of southeastern Turkey. The Assyrian capital was named Tushhan (900-600 BCE). The Assyrians ruled over southeastern Turkey until their empire was conquered by Babylonia in 612 BCE. Then Anatolia became home for various kingdoms including the Achaemenid Empire, Hellenistic kingdoms, Roman Empire, Byzantine Empire (Eastern Roman Empire), Seljuk Empire, and Mongol Empire.

During the 14th century, after the fall of the Mongol Empire, Gazi Osman built a new empire named after himself: the Ottoman Empire. It became one of the longest existing empires of all time. The Empire also stretched across the Balkans, (Yugoslavia and Bulgaria) in Europe. The Empire was ruled by Islamic law, but other religions had certain minority rights.

In World War I the Ottoman Empire was one of the Central Powers. During the war, 500,000 Armenians in the Ottoman Empire were massacred in the Armenian genocide. Turkey denies that the event was genocide. The Central Powers lost the war and the Ottoman Empire was destroyed, but after that Atatürk led the newly formed Turkish army to get rid of foreign enemies, like the Greeks and ousted the imperial Ottoman family from Anatolia.

Mustafa Kemal Atatürk was the first President of Turkey. He made many changes that made Turkey more modern. But some people did not like some of the changes that made life in Turkey more secular. Religious secondary schools were gotten rid of, for example. The opponents to Atatürk felt that he weakened Islam in the country. Later political disputes led to Coup d'état in 1960, 1971, and 1980, and several failed attempts.

In 1974, Turkey launched an invasion of Cyprus and later established the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, Rauf Denktaş became the first Turkish Cypriot president.

In 2022, the government of Turkey started to use the Turkish spelling of Türkiye in both Turkish and English. However, Turkey remains the more common name.

About 80 million people live in Turkey. Most of them are ethnic Turks. About 15% are ethnic Kurds. Many refugees from Syria (over 3 million) live in Turkey because they have run away from the Syrian civil war. Many Romani people in Turkey live in Istanbul and Edirne (European part of Turkey).

The biggest city in Turkey is Istanbul which has the biggest population of any city in Europe. Much of the population in Turkey is made up of young adults and adults.

According to religiosity poll conducted in Turkey in 2019 by OPTİMAR, 89.5% of the population identifies as Muslim, 4.5% believed in God but did not belong to an organized religion, 2.7% were agnostic, 1.7% were atheist, 0.5% were belonged to the other religions, and 1.1% did not answer. Another poll conducted by Gezici Araştırma in 2020 interviewed 1,062 people in 12 provinces and found that 28.5% of the Generation Z in Turkey identify as irreligious.

Turkish people have many ethnic and famous foods, such as mantı (Turkish ravioli), döner, kebap, Turkish delight (lokum), baklava, lahmacun, börek, köfte, and other foods.

According to a study, Anatolia is genetically more closely related to the Balkan populations than to the Central Asian populations. The Turks of Anatolia (Asian part of Turkey) have only 13% of genes from populations from Central Asia.

Most people in Turkey are Turks. The largest minority is Kurds. Kurds live mostly in Southeastern and Eastern Turkey. The second largest minority are the Romani people in Turkey, mostly live in Istanbul and East Thrace, the European side of Turkey. Before World War I, Armenians, Greeks and Assyrians were also significant minorities.

Turkey is in the OECD and the G-20 and is one of the 20 largest economies. The Turkish currency is called the Lira. The first coins were made in Turkey.

In the 1970s, many Turks moved to other countries, like Germany, to escape the bad economy at the time and to get better jobs. They often come back to Turkey for summer holidays. Today, many of the people who left in the 1970s want to move back to Turkey.

Until the 1980s the government owned most companies, but then Prime Minister Turgut Özal sold them. Before, foreigners were usually not allowed to buy companies, land or property. Turkey's international trade is mostly with the EU, the United States, the Russian Federation, and Japan. Turkey and the EU agreed not to put a lot of tax on what they buy and sell to each other. After that it was easier for Turkish factories to sell products to the EU and for business people in the EU to buy companies in Turkey.

Turkey's exports in 2010 were worth 117 billion United States dollars.

Earthquakes in 1994, 1999, and 2001 slowed economic growth a bit. Turkey has no petroleum and not much natural gas so it buys them from other countries, like Russia. In 2010, oil was found in the Turkish City of Diyarbakir, but there was not enough oil to extract. Turkey is searching for natural gas in Turkish Northern Cyprus.

Rich cities in Turkey include Istanbul, Ankara, İzmir, Edirne, Konya, Mersin (also known as İçel), and Antalya.

Most people in Turkey speak Turkish. It is written in Latin script and it belongs to the Turkic language group, which also includes many other languages spoken across Asia, such as Azerbaijani and Tatar. The Turkish language came from Central Asia, but now it is a bit different from the languages spoken in Central Asia. Turks living by the Mediterranean have southern, much thicker, and more masculine accents than western Turkey. Northerners, by the Black Sea have softer accents.

In Turkey there are also minorities who speak languages such as Kurdish, Arabic, Armenian, Greek or Ladino, Romani and many others.

Many of the young adults can also speak English, which is taught throughout Primary, Middle and High school.

Turkish culture is a diverse culture, with some European influence.

Different parts of Turkey have similar but not exactly the same lifestyles. Central Turkey and Northern Turkey are somewhat more conservative and religious. Western Turkey and Southern Turkey, especially coastal cities are more liberal and secular. Eastern Turkey and Southeastern Turkey are made up of mostly Kurds–most of them are conservative and religious. Cosmopolitan neighbourhoods in major cities of Turkey are overwhelmingly liberal and secular. Cities like Hatay and Mardin, where different religions coexist, and Eskişehir, which is the prominent college town of the country, also have cosmopolitan characteristics.

Collectivism is dominant in society rather than individualism. This is seen in everything from a civilian's worldview to the socio-political and socio-economic order of the country. People care a lot about what others think of them or their related ones. Sociologist Şerif Mardin, who argues that there is neighborhood watch in Turkish society, states that "There is no tolerance for deviations from norms in the Turkish tradition, a watching oppression is applied against individuals in this situation and this is not new."

The circumcision of boys in Turkey is very common, with over 98% of men being circumcised. This is due to religious and cultural traditions and the circumcisions are celebrated with ceremonies known as Sünnet Düğünü or at a Mevlüd ceremony. Anyway today enough Turkish Muslim men against it.

The capital and second-largest city of Turkey is Ankara. The largest and the most crowded city is Istanbul which is the only city in the world that has land on two different continents. The third largest city is the coastal city of İzmir which is the main port of the country. Turkey is divided into 81 provinces. Each province has its own little government but they can only make decisions about small things: the government in Ankara decides important issues. The provinces are in 7 regions. Each province is divided into districts. There are 973 districts altogether. The biggest Main City at the European Side of Turkey is Edirne in East Thrace.

Turkey's literacy rate is currently 98.3%. People in Turkey have to go to school for 12 years.

Istanbul University was the first university in Turkey. It was established in 1453. Ankara University was the first university that was started after Turkey became a republic. It was established in 1946.

There were 6065 high schools in Turkey in 2002 according to Ministry of National Education. In 2022, there were 208 universities in Turkey.

The 1999 İzmit earthquake was an approximately 7.4 magnitude earthquake that struck northwestern Turkey on 17 August 1999, at about 3:02 am local time. 18.000 people died in the earthquake.

The New York Times estimated that over 570 people died in the Erzincan earthquake of 13 March 1992. The earthquake was a 6.8 on the Richter Scale.

Some people have wanted Turkey to join the European Union (EU) since the 1990s. Negotiations to join began in 2005.


It is in the east of the country on the River Danube. More than 1,800,000 people live there (2016). It is an administrative district (Bundesland) of its own.

Before World War I, it was the capital of the Austra-Hungary. The city  centre is a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

In regard to the etymology of the city's name, scholars do not agreem. Some claim that the name comes from vedunia, meaning "forest stream"; From that word, came the Old High German word uuenia (wenia in modern writing), and the New High German word wien and its dialectal variant wean.

The history of the city goes back to the Roman Empire. The Romans started a military camp called Vindobona. The camp was in today's first district on the Danube river. The name came from the Celts, so there was probably a Celtic settlement before the Roman invasion. The Romans stayed until the 5th century. In the Middle Ages, the settlement was still in use. The present name was mentioned in 881 in the Salzburger Annalen, where a battle ad weniam is mentioned.

In 976, the House of Babenberg became the rulers of the area. They made Vienna their capital in 1155. Vienna was already an important city. In 1156, Austria became a duchy, and the duke who ruled the Duchy lived in Vienna. In 1221, Vienna got municipal rights. It Is the second-oldest city in Austria (Enns, in Upper Austria, is the oldest).

In 1278, the Duchy came to the Habsburg family. Rudolf IV started the university in 1365 and while he was duke the nave of the Gothic St. Stephan's Cathedral was built. Quarrels within the Hapsburg family caused an economic decline in Vienna. In 1438, Vienna became the residence of the Holy Roman Emperor.

The Reformation turned Vienna into a Protestant city, but during the Counter-Reformation, Vienna and the rest of Austria mostly returned to being Roman Catholic.

In 1529, Vienna was first besieged by the army of the Ottoman Empire, which had a border only 150 km east of Vienna. Thay hurt Vienna economically but led to people fortifying the city (improving its defences). After a second siege, the Ottoman Empire could not take Vienna, and the city started getting larger.

During the Baroque era, Vienna was rebuilt. Many residences for the nobility were built. Johann Bernhard Fischer von Erlach was an important architect in Vienna.

In the late 18th and the early 19th centuries, Vienna was the home of important composers like Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven and Schubert.

After the revolution in 1848 Franz Joseph I. became emperor of the Austrian Empire, which was founded in 1806 after the liquidation of the Holy Roman Empire. He ruled until 1916, and Vienna became a center of arts, culture and architecture. The city grew because the suburbs became part of the city. After 1858, the walls of the city were destroyedm, and the Ringstraße replaced them. Along that street houses of the rich citizens were built, as were public buildings like the city hall and the Burg theatre. Industrialisation started at the beginning of the 19th century and made more people live there. In 1870, Vienna had one million people, and in 1910, two million people. With the creation of a large working class and the poverty in Vienna, the Labour Party (Sozialdemokratische Arbeiterpartei) became stronger.

Karl Lueger was the most important mayor in the time of Emperor Franz Josef. During his time important community plans were realised and  made Vienna a modern city. However, Lueger was a radical anti-Semite. He was admired by the young Adolf Hitler, who spent some years before the First World War in Vienna. At the time, Vienna was an important place for the arts. Composers like Arnold Schönberg, Anton Webern, Alban Berg and Ernst Krenek were important for the development of modern music. Also, psychoanalysis was founded in Vienna by Sigmund Freud. The so-called Jugendstil in arts was part of Vienna's modern arts scene. Founding fathers of modern architecture lived and worked also in Vienna at the time (Otto Wagner and Adolf Loos)

After the end of the First World War, Austria-Hungary was dissolved, and Vienna became capital of the Republic of Austria. In 1938, Austria was occupied by Germany. In Vienna the suffering of the Jewish inhabitants began. Many their properties was given to Austrians (Arisierung).

After the Second World War, which destroyed 20% of Vienna's buildings, Vienna was divided into four parts. The city was controlled by the Allies like the rest of Austria. In 1955 the Austrian State Treaty between the Allies and Austria was signed in Vienna's Belvedere. The country's neutrality helped Vienna become an important city for international organisations. The first was 1957 the International Atomic Energy Organisation (IAEO) and 1965 the OPEC followed. 1980 the Vienna International Center was opened and Vienna is now the third UN-city together with New York and Geneva.

There are many old buildings, churches and museums in the city centre. Classical music and opera are popular in Vienna. The composers Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Ludwig van Beethoven and Brahms all worked in Vienna. Vivaldi also died in Vienna. The city has two world-famous orchestras: the Vienna Philharmonic and the Vienna Symphony.

Vienna is also the name of a song about the city, by the British group Ultravox.

Vienna is the home of the nationally successful soccer clubs SK Rapid Wien and FK Austria Wien.

A weapon is an  that can be used to attack or injure a person or animal. People have used weapons since  times. While other animals use weapons, in most cases they are ed to the animal (teeth, claws, tusks, etc.). In man's case they are detached and constantly selected for the  at hand. Man has been constantly ing newer and better weapons ever since he picked up the first rock.

Some of the oldest remains that we have of ancient people are weapons made of stone. Ancient people also used spears. Bows and arrows were in use by about 20,000 BC. During the Bronze age people learned to make things of metal, many people used swords. People also built huge machines which could throw rocks to destroy the defensive walls of enemy cities. Some of these machines were called catapults or siege engines. Later, gunpowder was invented in China and the Europeans began using it to make guns and cannons. These weapons were much better than the older weapons, and helped the Europeans to conquer people in many parts of the world. People in many parts of the world used guns such as rifles and shotguns for hunting animals, and handguns for shooting other people.

People continued to invent new weapons. In 1884 the machine gun was invented, which could shoot many bullets very fast. Soldiers began to use land mines, a bomb hidden in the ground, which explodes when someone walks on it.  Small submarines were able to use torpedos to attack bigger ships and hide under the ocean.  When airplanes were invented, people began to use them to shoot enemies and to drop bombs on them. They built tanks which had big guns and strong armor.  Poison gas was used in World War I but was outlawed and rarely used afterwards.

In World War II, cities were heavily bombed from the air and Nazi Germany used V-2 missiles to carry bombs to England. Both sides used many firebombs. At the end of World War II, the United States used atomic bombs (nuclear bombs) to destroy the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

After World War II, people continued to develop new weapons, including intercontinental ballistic missiles. People became concerned about weapons of mass destruction, weapons that can kill many people very fast, and are usually cheap and easy to make and use. One kind of weapon of mass destruction is poison gas. New kinds of poison gas, such as nerve gas, are much more powerful than the old kinds. Another kind of weapon of mass destruction is disease germs, which could be used to make many people sick and maybe kill them.

Old-fashioned weapons still kill many people in wars and fighting. In wars in Africa in the 1990s and early 21st century, many people were killed with machetes (big knives). People sometimes try to make laws, treaties, and international agreements to try to control weapons because they are worried about all the killing done with them. Laws vary from country to country, for example, in the United States, the "right to keep and bear arms" is guaranteed to all citizens by the Constitution. A country may say that people in that country cannot keep or use guns, or only when the government allows it. The laws of war forbid certain weapons, and countries may agree with each other that they should not use certain weapons against each other, or should not have more than a certain number of particular kinds of weapons.

Things specifically made as weapons that most ordinary people can carry, include non lethal:

Weapons that the defense people of a national government have, include:

Ukraine (,  is a country in Eastern Europe. It borders Russia, Belarus, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Moldova. To the south is the Black Sea and to the south-west is the self-proclaimed Transnistria. Its capital and largest city is Kyiv.

Ukraine was a part of the Soviet Union as the Ukrainian SSR from 1922 until its collapse in 1991. Since 1991, Ukraine has been its own independent country and is now a unitary semi-presidential republic.

The official language of Ukraine is Ukrainian (, [ukrajin’s’ka mova]). Crimean Tatar is said to be a minority language.

Ukraine is divided into 24 oblasts and one autonomous republic, with Kyiv City and Sevastopol having special status.

The name "Ukraine" (u-krayina) has usually been interpreted as "edge" or "borderland", but this an alternative interpretation as "territory" has been proposed. Language specialists are still searching for evidence of the history of the meaning of the word.

It was first used in reference to a core part of the territory of Kyivan Rus in the 12th century. In English, the historical region was usually known as "the Ukraine". Since independence in 1991, adding "the" is no longer proper style for referring to the country.

Many different tribes lived on the territory of modern Ukraine since pre-historical times. Most historians believe that the Great Steppe at the North of the Black Sea was a homeland of all Indo-European and Indo-Iranian languages. Some believe it was also the birthplace of the whole European population. Wends, Goths, Huns, Sclaveni, Avars, and other tribes and tribal groups fought among themselves, joined unions, terminated, and assimilated each other.

By the middle of the 4th century AD, Antes joined other tribes and established a state under their rule. Their state fell under the pressure of Avars in 602 AD and their name was longer mentioned. Since the 7th century over 10 tribal groups joined under the name "Slavs" and made their own state named Rus. The chronicles mention three centers that formed this state: Kuyavia (Kyiv land with Kyiv itself), Slavia (Novgorod land), and Artania (exact location unknown).

Historians still argue about whether Kyiv was founded by Slavs themselves, or they just captured the Roman Empire which took control of  Crimea, but since the 10th century, it became the capital of the largest and most powerful state in Eastern Europe.

Kyivan Rus, is the medieval state of Eastern Slavs. Established by the Slavic with the help of the Varangian squads whose force was used to integrate separate tribes and their lands into one powerful state. Varangian princes, who ruled Rus from its first years were gradually assimilated by natives, but the dynasty started by semy-legendary Rurik survived and continued to govern their separate principalities even after the collapse of Rus.

At an early stage of its existence Rus destroyed such powerful states as the Khazar Khaganate and Old Great Bulgaria. Rus princes successfully fought against the Byzantine Empire, whose emperors had to pay tribute to them. Rus' finally disintegrated into separate principalities.

In the reign of Volodymyr the Great (980-1015) the Kyivan State almost finished its expansion. It occupied the territory from Peipus, Ladoga and Onega lakes in the north to the River Don, Ros, Sula, Southern Bug in the south, from the Dniester, the Carpathians, the Neman, Western Dvina River in the west to the Volga and the Oka River in the east, its area became about 800,000 km2. Although some of his predecessors already accepted Christianity for themselves, Volodymyr decided to convert the entire population of the state to the new religion. Partly with the help of Byzantine missionary preachers, partly by brutal violence, he finally made all the Kyiv population be baptized. For this action, the Ukrainian, and later the Russian Orthodox Churches canonized him under the name of Vladimir the Baptist.

During the reign of Yaroslav the Wise, (1019–1054), Rus reached the zenith of its cultural development and military power. Rus raised the prestige of Eastern Slavs in Europe, improved the international significance of Kyiv. Rus influenced the political relations in all of Europe, Western Asia, and the Middle East. Kyivan princes supported the political, economic, dynastic relations with France, Sweden, England, Poland, Hungary, Norway, Byzantium.

The Rus state also ruled non-Slavic people (Finno-Ugric population of the North, Turkic of the East and South, Balts of the West, etc.). Those people gradually assimilated with the Slavs, and with each other, establishing a framework for the future emergence of three new Eastern-Slavic peoples.

The Kyivan State was an eastern outpost of European Christendom, it kept the movement of nomad hordes to the West, and reduced their onslaught against Byzantium and Central European countries.

After the death of Mstyslav Volodymyrovych (1132), Rus lost its political unity and finally was divided into 15 principalities and lands. Among them, Kyiv, Chernygiv, Volodymyr-Suzdal, Novgorod, Smolensk, Polotsk, and Halycian lands and principalities were most large and powerful.

While Kyiv was the center of all social, economic, political, cultural, and ideological life in the country for a long time before, other centers have competed with it since the mid-12th century. There were old powers (Novgorod, Smolensk, Polotsk), as well as new ones...

Numerous princely feuds, large and small wars between different lords, were tearing Rus. However, the ancient Ukrainian state did not fall apart. It only changed the form of its government: The personal monarchy was replaced by the federal one, Rus came to be co-ruled by the group of the most influential and powerful princes. Historians call this way of governing "the collective suzerainty." The Principality of Kyiv remained a national center and the residence of bishops.

In 1206 the new powerful military-feudal Mongolian state headed by Genghis Khan started the war of conquest against his neighbors. In 1223 in the battle near the Kalka River, 25,000 Tatar-Mongols won a crushing victory over the squads of Southern Rus Princes, who were unable to come together even in the face of grave danger. Under the leadership of Batu, Genghis Khan's grandson, from 1237 to 1238, they conquered Riazan, Volodymir, Suzdal, and Yaroslavl lands.

In 1240, they attacked Kyiv. The city was plundered and destroyed. According to the legend, the enemy saved governor Dimitri's life for his personal courage in the battle. Then Kamenetz, Iziaslav, Volodymyr, and Halych lost against invaders. Batu was able to attach most of Rus to his empire, the Golden Horde, which covered the whole territory from the Urals to the Black Sea,

After the fall of Kyivan State, the political, economic, and cultural center of Ukrainian lands was transferred to the Halycian-Volyn Land. In 1245 Prince Danylo of Halych had to admit his dependence on the Golden Horde. Hoping to get help from Catholic Europe in his struggle for independence, he also made a secret alliance with Poland, Hungary, Masovia, and the Teutonic Knights. In 1253 he received the crown from Pope Innocent IV and became a King of Rus. In 1259, due to the lack of military aid from the West, the king was forced to re-recognize the supremacy of the Horde. His successor, Lev I had to take part in the Tartar campaigns against Poland and Lithuania.

In 1308 the government moved to Danylo's grandchildren - Andrew and Lev II, who started the new struggle against the Golden Horde allied with the Teutonic knights and princes of Mazowia. However, after their death the last monarch Yuri II again had to claim himself as the Golden Horde vassal. He was murdered in 1340 and his death gave the rise to Poland and Lithuania (the neighbors who had a dynastic right for the throne of Rus) to start a war for the Halycian-Volyn heritage. In 1392 Galicia, with Belz and Chelm Lands were finally incorporated to the Kingdom of Poland and Volhynia to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.

At the end of the 14th century, Ukrainian territories were divided between different states. Lithuania seized Kyiv, Chernihiv, and Volyn Lands. Poland ruled in Halycian and Podolian. Southern Ukraine was under the rule of the Crimean Khanate (formed in 1447) and the Eastern under the power of Muscovy. In 1569 Lithuania and Poland merged to the united state called Commonwealth (Polish: Rzeczpospolita) to deal with neighbors, as a result, the central Ukrainian lands of Lithuania came under Polish control.

Rus, or The Kyivan State, , ; often misspelled as "Kievan State" or even "Kievan Rus", using Russian spelling of its capital Kyiv ( [ˈkiɛf]).

As for the origin and definition of the name "Rus", there is no consensus among researchers. Several versions exist:

Ukrainian historians generally adhere to anti-Norman opinion, while not denying the contribution Varangians in the process of formation of the Rus state system. Russ, or The Rus Land in their opinion means:

At the end of the 15th century, the groups of warriors who called themselves Cossacks appeared on the territory between the borders of Lithuania, Muscovy, and the Crimea, in the "wild steppes" of Zaporizhia. From the 16th century, the Sich became their military center. Zaporizhian Cossacks participated in the wars on the side of the Commonwealth: the Livonian War (1558-1583), the Polish-Muscovite War (1605-1618), Khotyn war (1620-1621), and Smolensk war (1632-1634). Cossacks also organized their own campaigns in Moldavia, Muscovy, and Crimea, on the Black Sea coast of Bulgaria and in Asia Minor for looting. They willingly became mercenaries, particularly during the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648).

Due to the legal and social oppression of the nobility Cossacks repeatedly revolted. The largest rebellions were raised under the guidance of Kosynskiy (1591-1593), Nalyvaiko (1594-1596), Zhmaylo (1625), Fedorovych (1630), Sulima (1635), Pavlyuk (1637), and Ostryanin (1638). Cossacks, again and again, defended the rights of the Ukrainian population in the Commonwealth who experienced religious and national oppression regularly.

In 1917 an independent Ukrainian People's Republic was established. The Red Army captured it and made it into the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

Soviet Russia in the 1920s encouraged the Ukrainian language and Ukrainian culture. In the 1930s this policy changed to making the Ukrainians into Russians. There were mass repressions of Ukrainian poets, historians, and linguists. As in other parts of the Soviet Union, although mostly in Ukraine, millions of people starved to death in 1932 and 1933.

During the first years of World War II, Ukrainian nationalists collaborated with Nazis against Soviet Union hoping to reestablish Ukrainian independence or to get autonomy under the authority of Germany. Nationalists took part in mass murders of Jews, Roma people, and other victims of the Nazi regime. However, hopes of independence were ruined and Ukrainian nationalists created Ukrainian Insurgent Army which fought against Nazi Germany but against the Soviet Union (mainly Soviet partisans) for the most part. They failed to get independence. Most Ukrainians fought on the side of the Soviet Union and participated in the liberation of Ukraine from Nazi Germany.

In 1986, the fourth reactor at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant exploded as a result of an improper test. The accident contaminated large portions of northern Ukraine and southern Belarus with uranium, plutonium, and radioactive isotopes. It was one of only two INES level 7 accidents (the worst level) in the history of nuclear power, the other being the Fukushima nuclear disaster in Japan.

In October 1990 students held a demonstration called the Revolution on Granite. This was remarkable because it happened before Ukraine declared independence in August 1991, and more than a year before the Soviet Union collapsed.

Dozens "of students [... made a]  tent camp in ... Kyiv", according to media; Furthermore, they "held a hunger strike until Soviet Ukrainian authorities [gave up] and met most of ... demands", of the students; Furthermore, students "even forced the resignation of Ukraine’s Soviet-era prime minister".

Under the second Soviet occupation repressions against Ukrainian nationalists continued and lasted till c. the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991.

In the Soviet epoch, Ukraine was renamed to so-called a "Soviet Socialist Republic" incorporated into Soviet Union.

President elections: 1 December 1991, July 1994, October-November 1999, October-December 2004, January 2010

Parliament elections: March 1994, March 1998, March 2002, March 2006, September 2007 (prematurely), October 2012

Constitution of Ukraine was adopted by Parliament (Verkhovna Rada) 28 July 1996 with changes 8 December 2004.

The political demonstrations in autumn-winter 2004 after the Presidential elections gathered millions of people all over the country. On November 26, 2004, Victor Yuschenko lost the Ukrainian presidential election (Viktor Yanukovych was declared the winner). However, Yuschenko and his followers argued that the election had been corrupted. They argued that the election results had been falsified by the Ukrainian government, in support of the opposing candidate Victor Yanukovych. They organized political demonstrations in autumn-winter 2004 that gathered millions of people all over the country. They called the demonstrations The Orange Revolution (). Former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko was an important ally of Victor Yuschenko during the demonstrations. The Constitutional Court of Ukraine ordered the second round of elections, which Yuschenko won.

Big pro-European Union protests called Euromaidan () began in November 2013 and made the President go away in February.

In March 2014, Russia invaded Crimea, holding a referendum in which the people voted overwhelmingly to become independent from Ukraine and join the Russian Federation. Despite the criticisms from certain countries, the majority of Crimean residents welcomed the return to their Russian roots.

After some conflicts, the eastern Donbas regions of Donetsk and Luhansk declared independence from Ukraine; they are known as the Donetsk People's Republic, and Luhansk People's Republic. Neither of them are recognized internationally (Aside from Russia and it's puppet states, North Korea, and Syria. )

In 2016, the New Safe Confinement was built to cover the remains of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant and prevent radiation from escaping.

On 24 February 2022, Russian President Vladimir Putin announced an invasion of Ukraine with the goal to "protect Russian citizens" and "denazify" Ukraine. The invasion and the Russo-Ukrainian War, are ongoing (as of 2026' first quarter).

"Real GDP in 2024 stood at [77% or] 77.4% of the level of 2021, the last year before russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine. Nominal GDP is estimated at UAH 7,659bn", according to media in 2025.

Earlier (and as of 2023), "Ukraine’s defense industry [... had] 300,000 workers within about 500 different companies, of which almost 400 are private companies", according to media; More production of "electronic warfare weapons, unmanned aerial, naval, and ground vehicles, howitzers, ammunition, armored vehicles, bullets, mines" (weapon), happened in 2024. "The total volume of weapons production in Ukraine [... was] $10 billion" (year 2024), according to media.

In 2023, media said that "Ukraine’s top ten manufacturing [companies or] leaders earned a total" of ($8.3 billion, or) Hr.317.53 billion "in profits in 2023, according to Opendatabot".

In regard to minerals that have not been taken out of the ground:

"Ukraine holds the largest titanium reserves in Europe ... 7 percent of the world’s reserves" and lithium reserves, almost 500,000 tons.

In regard to inflation: yearly inflation is at [c. 9% or] 9.3% as of November 2025.

About extra spending on defense:  $10 billion is what parliament decided (July 31, 2025), to add to how much money should be spent on defense; That money is made up, of "$2.76 billion ... for all Defense Forces personnel salaries ... $5.18 billion ... for .... weapons, military equipment, and drones", and  "$1.9 billion... for other military needs", according to media. Earlier, the budget for defense spending had been set at $53.7 billion.

In regard to the United States-Ukraine Reconstruction Investment Fund: creation of bank accounts has been authorized (September 3); More work in regard to choosing "[test project or] pilot investment projects for the fund", is supposed to continue, later that month.

In regard to gambling: "the industry [made or was] generating Hr. 17.2 billion ($409 million) in [ tax income or] legal tax income in 2024", according to media.

The "final vote due [of the budget, is supposed to happen] on December 1", according to media.

Earlier (and as of September 2025), "The Ukrainian government is set to receive $37.4 billion in international financing" over a two-year period", according to media; Some of Ukraine's budget for 2026, will come from money that is going to be borrowed from IMF.

A wheel is a disc or circle-shaped mechanical device. Its main purpose is to allow things to roll; in other words, the wheel spins, and object on the wheels moves more easily along the ground.  It is a simple machine. The principle behind the wheel is that of mechanical advantage.

Most land vehicles roll on wheels. Wheels are often used in pairs, connected by a rod of wood or metal known as an axle. The wheel and axle turn together. The part of the wheel that attaches to the axle is called the hub.

The wheel with an axle is the basis of many machines, not just vehicles.  The potter's wheel, the lathe and the windlass are examples. Many machines have wheels with teeth, known as gears.

Most experts believe that  the ancient Mesopotamians invented the wheel about 4000 BC.

People in Asia also discovered it on their own around 3500 BC.  The Inca and Maya had wheels on children's toys around 1500 BC, but they did not use wheels for work.  Africa south of the Sahara desert and Australia did not have the wheel until people there met people from Europe.  Early wheels were solid disks; the spoked wheel was invented around 2000 BC. The earliest documentation of a vehicle with wheels is a painting dated between 33503500 BC.

Today, wheels are used in cars, carts, airplanes, wheelchairs, bicycles, trains, and skateboards, in addition to many more devices.

Publius Vergilius Maro (; traditional dates 15 October 70 BC21 September 19 BC), usually called Virgil or Vergil ( ) in English, was a poet in the Latin language. His poems are about gods and their mythology.  Virgil's most famous epic poem is called the Aeneid.

Tradition is that Virgil was born in the village of Andes, near Mantua in Cisalpine Gaul. Scholars looking at the way he used words think that he may have Etruscan, Umbrian or even a Celtic background. Study of his name has led to beliefs that his family may have been earlier Roman settlers. These modern beliefs are not supported by evidence from his own writings or from writers of his biographies. Some scholars have noted that his nickname, MARO, is an anagram of the two main themes in the Aeneid: AMOR (love) and ROMA (Rome).

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (January 27, 1756 – December 5, 1791; pronounced MOHT-sart) was a composer, instrumentalist, and music teacher. His full baptised name was Johannes Chrysostomus Wolfgangus Theophilus Mozart. He was born in Salzburg (then a free archbishopric city within the Holy Roman Empire, now Austria). He was the youngest child of Leopold and Anna Maria Mozart. From a very early age, the young Mozart showed great musical talent. He toured Europe with his parents and older sister "Nannerl" for several years. In these tours, he performed for royalty and the aristocratic elite.

As a young man, Mozart worked in Paris, Mannheim and Munich. He returned to Salzburg. In Salzburg, he worked for the court of the Archbishop of Salzburg. He was restless, aware of his genius, and thought Salzburg too small for his talent. He moved to Vienna where he had some success. In Vienna, he married Constanze Weber. They had two sons. He died in Vienna after a brief but unknown illness.

Mozart wrote more than 800 musical works. Many have the highest musical quality. His works include the operas The Marriage of Figaro, Don Giovanni, Così fan tutte and The Magic Flute; the symphonies in E-flat major, G minor, and C major ("Jupiter"). He wrote concertos for piano, violin, and different wind instruments. He also wrote many chamber pieces, church music, minuets, dances, songs, and a Requiem. Along with Bach and Beethoven, Mozart is viewed as one of the greatest composers who ever lived.

Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart ("Wolfi" or Wolferl") was born in Salzburg to Leopold and Anna Maria Mozart. Leopold was a violinist in the orchestra of the archbishop of Salzburg. He was the author of a best-selling introduction to playing the violin.

Young Mozart had great musical talent at a very early age. He was playing the harpsichord and the violin at the age of five. He was also writing little pieces of music.

Mozart's sister Maria Anna ("Nannerl") was a talented girl. The two children received their musical and academic education from their father. The family toured Europe for a few years. They performed for royals and aristocrats.

Mozart performed in Munich, Prague, Paris, The Hague and London. In London, he performed for King George III. He met the composer Johann Christian Bach, one of the sons of Johann Sebastian Bach. He sat on the knee of Johann Christian Bach (1735–1782) and improvised a fugue. And here, at the age of eight, he heard his ﬁrst two symphonies performed.

Eventually, the Mozarts made their way back to Salzburg. But in 1768, they were off again to Vienna. In Vienna, the now twelve-year-old Wolfgang staged a production of his ﬁrst opera, Bastien und Bastienne. And he got sick and had smallpox. He recovered but his face was pock-marked for life. He went to Italy. In Italy, he heard music by many famous Italian composers. Mozart heard a piece called Miserere by Gregorio Allegri. This piece had been written for the Pope for the choir of the Vatican to sing. No one was allowed to see the written music. The reason was so that no one else could copy and sing it. But, Mozart heard the piece once and then wrote it all down from memory. He met the Pope and was given a knighthood (Order of the Golden Spur).

In 1777, he went on a journey with his mother. In Mannheim, he fell in love with Aloysia Weber. She was 16 years old and studying singing. Mozart wanted to take her to Italy to make her famous, but his father stopped these plans. By 1778, Mozart and his mother were in Paris. His mother died there.

Mozart wrote some small operas when he was young, but his first really important opera was Idomeneo. It was first performed in Munich in 1780. The next year he went to Vienna. By this time he was working, like his father, for the Archbishop of Salzburg. When he went back to Salzburg he argued with the Archbishop. The Archbishop kicked him out for this. Mozart went off to Vienna. He would spend the rest of his life there.

In 1782, he married Constanze Weber. She was one of the three younger sisters of Aloysia (who by now was married to someone else). They had seven children, but five of them died in childhood. Mozart’s father did not approve of the marriage. Constanze was a loving wife, but, like Mozart, she was not good at looking after money so they were often very poor.

In that same year, 1782, Mozart wrote another very successful opera: Die Entführung aus dem Serail ("The Abduction from the Seraglio"). There is a famous story about the first performance of the opera. The story is about a short conversation between emperor Joseph II and Mozart. After the emperor heard the opera, he said to Mozart: “too many notes, dear Mozart, too many notes.” Mozart answered: “Just as many as are necessary, Your Majesty.”

Mozart started many concerts in which he played his own piano concertos. He composed these concertos himself and conducted from the keyboard. Mozart's piano concertos are still very popular today. He wrote 27 piano concertos. All the concertos have a number to know which is which. Popular piano concertos are numbers (Nos.) 20, 21, 23, 24 and 27. Many of the concertos are some of Mozart's best works.

He met the composer Joseph Haydn and the two men became great friends. They often played together in a string quartet. Haydn said to Leopold Mozart one day: "Before God and as an honest man I tell you that your son is the greatest composer known to me either in person or by name. He has taste, and what is more, the most profound knowledge of composition." Mozart was in the same Masonic Lodge as Haydn. This meant the two were part of a group with similar interests. Mozart dedicated six string quartets to Haydn. They are called the "Haydn" Quartets. There are two famous "Haydn" Quartets. One of them is called the "Hunt" and the other is called "Dissonance."

In his later years, Mozart was earning less money than before. Aristocrats could not support him with money. The reason was because there was a war. The audiences in Vienna did not give Mozart much support after a few years. That is why he often went to Prague where the audiences loved him. His opera The Marriage of Figaro was very popular. In 1787, he gave the first performance there of his opera Don Giovanni.

There are several stories about Mozart’s last illness and death, and it is not easy to be sure what happened. He was working on an opera The Magic Flute. It is one of his best works and a very popular opera today. It is written in German, not Italian, like most of his other operas. In some ways, it is like an English pantomime. At the same time that he was working on this, a stranger asked him to compose a requiem. The stranger told him to write it in secret. Mozart also had to write an Italian opera La Clemenza di Tito. The opera was first performed in Prague during September 1791. At the end of September, The Magic Flute  was first performed. Mozart then worked very hard at the Requiem. He must have realized that he was already very ill, and that in a way the requiem (a mass for the dead) was for himself. He died in Vienna before he could finish it. Constanze asked another composer, a man called Franz Xaver Süssmayr, to finish the work. Mozart was buried in the St. Marx Cemetery. Mozart had a very simple funeral, even though he was popular. We do not really know exactly why he died, but that it was some disease or illness.

Mozart's music, like that of Haydn, is the very best of what we call the Classical style. At the time Mozart started to compose, the Baroque period was just coming to an end. Tastes were changing in music. Form, balance and elegance were thought of as more important than counterpoint. Form is about rhythm, melody, harmony (how the notes fit together), repetition and variation. Mozart was the first great composer to write music for the piano, an instrument which had only just become popular. He wrote almost every kind of music: symphonies, operas, solo concertos, chamber music, especially string quartets and string quintets, and the piano sonata. He also wrote a lot of religious music, including masses. He composed popular music like dances, divertimenti and serenades.

When Mozart was young, a symphony was usually a short, simple piece for entertainment. Mozart made the symphony into a carefully worked-out piece lasting up to half an hour. His last three symphonies are especially fine masterpieces. They are Symphonies number (shortened as Nos.) 39, 40 and 41. Other popular symphonies are numbers 25, 29, 35, 36 and 38. His concertos, especially his piano concertos, are far more advanced than anything that had been written before. There are many recordings of these concertos, because they are so popular.

Although Mozart behaved in truly childish ways at times, he was good at understanding human character. This is clear in his operas, where he introduced many subtle effects to describe the characters in the story. Several of his operas were very complex for the time. Many people did not understand them. Mozart's operas are among his greatest works. He understood people's characters very well. He was able to write music which tells us everything about the personalities in the operas. All the operas have a text called a libretto. Usually, the composer writes the music and someone else writes the text. Lorenzo Da Ponte wrote the words and text for three famous operas in Italian. These three Italian operas are: Don Giovanni, Le Nozze di Figaro (The Marriage of Figaro) and Cosi fan tutte. Mozart was very good at combining voices. In these operas, there are clever ensembles and several characters sing at the same time. Mozart creates beautiful symmetry and harmony with these combined voices.

As well as many great masterpieces, Mozart wrote many pieces in a more popular style, including some tunes that everybody knows today. Famous pieces include his serenade Eine kleine Nachtmusik K525, the Turkish Rondo from his Piano Sonata in A K331, the opening of the Symphony No. 40 in G minor K550, and the birdcatcher’s song from The Magic Flute K620.

Mozart used many instruments for composing and performing. In his early years, he got to know pianos made by Franz Jakob Späth from Regensburg. Later in Augsburg Mozart got impressed by pianos from Stein. After moving to Vienna the composer purchased an instrument by Walter. Mozart also had his own special violin. It is called the "Klotz" violin. The violin still exists today and is in a museum called the Salzburg Mozarteum.

Some time after Mozart’s death a man called Köchel studied all Mozart’s music. Köchel tried to put them in chronological order, and gave them a number. The lower numbers are music pieces that Mozart composed when he was young. The higher numbers are for later works. The number helps us to know exactly which work is meant, for example Symphony in G minor K183 is not the same piece as Symphony in G minor K550 (K stands for Köchel. Sometimes it is written "KV550" standing for "Köchel Verzeichnis" i.e. "Köchel Catalogue"). The highest Köchel number is 626, his requiem mass.

The Vietnam War (also known as the Second Indochina War, Vietnamese-American War or the American War in Vietnam) lasted from 1 November 1955 to 30 April 1975. It was fought between North Vietnam and South Vietnam. North Vietnam was supported by the Soviet Union, China, and North Korea, and South Vietnam was set up by the United States and supported by South Korea, Thailand, Australia, New Zealand, and the Philippines. People from other countries also went to fight but not in their own national armies. The conflict between communist and capitalist countries was part of the Cold War.

The Viet Cong, also known as the National Liberation Front or NLF, was a South Vietnamese communist force that was helped by North Vietnam. It fought a guerrilla war against non-communist South Vietnamese forces. The People's Army of Vietnam (also known as the North Vietnamese Army) engaged in a more conventional war by at times putting large forces to battle.

The Vietnam War was very controversial, especially in the United States. It was the first war to feature live television coverage and the first major armed conflict that the United States lost. The war became so unpopular in the United States that President Richard Nixon eventually agreed to send American soldiers home in 1973.

France began to colonize Vietnam between 1859 and 1862, when it took control of Saigon. By 1864, it had controlled all of Cochinchina, in the south of Vietnam. France took control of Annam, the large central part of Vietnam, in 1874. After France defeated China during the Sino-French War (1884–1885), it took over Tonkin, the north of Vietnam. French Indochina was formed in October 1887 from these three areas of Vietnam (Cochinchina, Annam and Tonkin), as well as Cambodia. Laos was added after a war against Thailand, the Franco-Siamese War, in 1893.

During World War II, after Nazi Germany had defeated France in 1940, French Indochina was controlled by the Vichy French government, a puppet government recognized by Germany. In March 1945, the Japanese Empire launched the Second French Indochina Campaign. Japan occupied Indochina but surrendered in August 1945.

After the defeat of Nazi Germany, the Vichy government was no longer in control of France or its territories. The newly formed Provisional Government of the French Republic attempted to take back control of its former colonies in Indochina by force, if necessary, but France's efforts at regaining its colony in Vietnam were opposed by a communist Vietnamese army, the Viet Minh.

The Viet Minh had been founded in 1941 by the Vietnamese Communist Party and was led by Hồ Chí Minh. That led to the First Indochina War between France and the Viet Minh. Fighting started with the French bombardment of Haiphong Harbor in November 1946 and ended with a triumph of the Viet Minh at Dien Bien Phu.

In July 1954, France and the Viet Minh signed the Geneva Peace Accord, which resulted in dividing Vietnam along the 17th parallel into a northern section, under the control of the communists, led by Ho Chi Minh, and a southern section, led by the Catholic anticommunist Ngo Dinh Diem who is backed by the United States. The partition was to be temporary until elections in 1956. However, Diem started arresting suspected communist sympathizers that year and wanted to keep power for himself. The elections were never held, and in 1957, North Vietnam began guerrilla warfare against the south.

The United States began to send military advisors to help train and support the non-communist South Vietnamese Army. It was fighting against the Viet Cong, also known as the National Liberation Front, a communist party from South Vietnam that was controlled with North Vietnam. The Viet Cong began a campaign of assassination in 1957. In 1959, North Vietnam dramatically increased its military assistance to the Viet Cong, which then began attacking anticommunist South Vietnamese military units. Because of domino theory, the US feared that if communism took hold in Vietnam, it would then spread to other countries nearby.

On August 2, 1964, the destroyer USS Maddox was in the Gulf of Tonkin, on an intelligence mission along North Vietnam's coast. The US said that three North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked the destroyer. The Maddox fired back and damaged the three torpedo boats. The US later claimed that two days later, the torpedo boats again attacked the Maddox and the destroyer USS Turner Joy. In the second attack, the US ships did not actually see the torpedo boats, but it was said that they had been found by using the ship's radar.

After the alleged second attack, the US launched air strikes against North Vietnam. The Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Joint Resolution (H.J. RES 1145) on 7 August 1964 and so gave the president the power to run large-scale military operations in Southeast Asia without declaring war. There was little to no proof of the attacks, and it was believed by some that they had been an excuse for expanded US involvement in Indochina.

The communists were supplied by a vast network of hidden trails, known as the Ho Chi Minh Trail. It was very well hidden although many attempts were made by the US to bomb and destroy it. Supplies and soldiers from North Vietnam were sent through Laos to communists forces in South Vietnam. American planes heavily bombed the Ho Chi Minh Trail, and  of bombs were dropped on Laos. That slowed down but did not stop the trail system.

Severe communist losses during the 1968 Tet Offensive made it possible for the US to withdraw many soldiers. As part of a policy called "Vietnamization," non-communist South Vietnamese troops were trained and equipped to replace the Americans who had left. By 1973, 95% of the American troops had left.

All of the parties signed a peace treaty in Paris in January 1973, but the fighting continued until 1975, when the non-communist South Vietnamese government surrendered after its capital, Saigon, had fallen.

There were some large-scale battles during the Vietnam War, but most of the fighting was guerilla warfare, which is different from the large-scale battles fought between armies like those during World War II.

In guerilla warfare, small units fight limited battles against an enemy force, set up ambushes, make surprise attacks, and then retreat to the countryside or blend into the local population. That also includes making it difficult for the enemy to operate by engaging in sabotage and harassing the enemy with lethal means such as the land mine and the booby trap. The communist troops more often engaged in guerilla warfare against American and non-communist South Vietnamese troops than the reverse because the communists knew of their weakness in conventional (large-scale) warfare.

Although few of the traps were explosive, all of the explosive traps used grenades. A tripwire was placed, and if a soldier tripped over the wire, a grenade pin was pulled out, the grenade would blow, and the soldier would usually be killed.

Another style of trap was nicknamed the Venus flytrap. It had about eight barbs attached to a rectangular frame sitting on a small hole. The barbs faced down so that when the soldier’s leg got caught in it, it would not hurt until he pulled his leg out, when the barbs would rip through his leg.

Another North Vietnamese and Viet Cong trap was the Punji trap. Two wooden platforms were placed and covered with leaves to camouflage it. There were spikes on the inside of the wood. When a soldier came along and walked on the wood, it caved in, and the spikes would go through the soldier’s foot. That trap was the most common because it was the cheapest one and was very effective. It was also often , often with feces, so that the soldier would also become infected.

Besides hurting or killing people, the traps caused fear and lowered morale.

The Fall of Saigon was the capture of Saigon, the capital of South Vietnam, by the People's Army of Vietnam and the National Liberation Front on April 30, 1975. That marked the end of the Vietnam War and the beginning of the formal reunification of Vietnam into a communist state.

Before the city fell, the few American civilian and military personnel had left Vietnam, and tens of thousands of non-communist South Vietnamese soldiers and civilians had also fled.

The North Vietnamese commanded by General Văn Tiến Dũng and began their final attack on Saigon, whose defence was commanded by General Nguyen Van Toan on April 29. A heavy artillery bombardment of Tân Sơn Nhứt Airport killed the last two American servicemen who died in Vietnam: Charles McMahon and Darwin Judge.

By the afternoon of the next day, North Vietnamese troops had occupied the important points within the city and raised their flag over the South Vietnamese presidential palace. The government of South Vietnam soon formally surrendered.

The Americans still in Saigon were evacuated by helicopter or fixed-wing aircraft. The surrender of Saigon was given in person by anticommunist South Vietnamese President General Duong Van Minh: "We are here to hand over to you the power in order to avoid bloodshed." He was president for two days as his country crumbled.

Saigon was renamed Ho Chi Minh City after the communist leader Ho Chi Minh.

War crimes took place, by both sides. Things that happened, were rape, massacres of civilians, bombings of civilian targets, terrorism, torture, and murder of prisoners of war. In regard to common crimes including theft, arson, and the destruction of property: These things happened sometimes, without [having a military reason, or] being warranted by military necessity.

South Vietnamese, Korean and American: [South Vietnamese soldiers and Korean soldiers] and American soldiers, also did war crimes.

Notable VC [war crimes or] atrocities include the massacre of over 3,000 unarmed civilians at Huế and killing 252 civilians during the Đắk Sơn massacre. 155,000 refugees fleeing the North Vietnamese Spring Offensive were reported to have been killed, or abducted, on the road to Tuy Hòa in 1975. PAVN/VC troops killed 164,000 civilians in democide between 1954-75 in South Vietnam. North Vietnam was known for its abusive treatment of American POWs, most notably in Hỏa Lò Prison (the Hanoi Hilton), where torture was done to (get confessions or) extract confessions.

The war made potential farmland useless, as it was bombed and affected by Agent Orange. The economy crashed because inflation was high and so unemployment was common, and there was poor health care. Many people fled Vietnam because of these conditions.

The Đổi Mới reforms helped to improve many of the problems that had been caused by the war. Although there are still many situations with serious economic issues, Vietnam now has a fairly successful economy. The income and the standard of living of the average Vietnamese people have kept improving since the 1990s.

The war also had lasting effects on the US. It led to divisions in American society that are still seen today, and many Americans became more wary of their government. Many veterans came back with PTSD and were not treated well; people who opposed the war saw them as war criminals, and people who supported the war saw them as losers.

The war later led to the Third Indochina War, when Vietnam entered Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge regime (specifically under Pol Pot's leadership) after numerous mass murders in the Vietnamese–Cambodian border. China then invaded Vietnam in an attempt to disrupt them from Cambodia. The war involves Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand (border dispute) and China.

The United Nations (UN) is an organization between countries established on 24 October 1945 to promote international cooperation. It was founded to replace the League of Nations following World War II and to prevent another conflict. When it was founded, the UN had 51 members. Now there are 193. Most nations are members of the UN and send diplomats to the headquarters to hold meetings and make decisions about global issues.

After World War I, the nations of the world formed the League of Nations. The organization was a place where nations could talk through their differences calmly. However, some countries like Germany, Italy, and Japan ignored the League. They tried to solve their problems through war. Members of the League of Nations did not want to go to war to protect other members and so it failed. World War II soon started.::.

The Allies of World War II often called themselves "the United Nations" since they were united against the Axis Powers.  After the war, the winners formed a new organization for world peace. On 25 April 1945 in San Francisco, they decided on the name '"United Nations". In June, they signed the United Nations Charter and decided how the organization would work. The United Nations was created on 24 October 1945, and its first meeting was held in January 1946. Since 1947 24 October has been called “United Nations Day”. The only country whose flag is modeled after the United Nations is Argentina, Democratic Republic of Congo, Bosnia and Herzegovina; Sierra Leone;  Somalia; and Federated States of Micronesia.::.

The United Nations is based in New York City, United States, except for the International Court of Justice, which is in The Hague, Netherlands. The leader of the United Nations is called United Nations Secretary-General.:.

The UN's main buildings are in New York City. The UN also has offices in Geneva, Switzerland, Kenya, and Austria. The UN tries to be peaceful but it has been involved in armed conflicts. In the 1950s during the Soviet boycott of United Nations Security Council, the UN supported South Korea in a war against North Korea. In the 1990s, the United Nations helped to force Iraqi soldiers out of Kuwait. At other times, the UN has built peacekeeping forces.  They travel to conflicted places in the world to keep the peace. In the 2020s there have been UN peacekeepers working in Cyprus, Lebanon, the DRC, Central African Republic, Afghanistan and Pakistan, and several other countries.::.

Through a series of goals, resolutions and declarations the United Nations has a set of commitments, actions, and goals to stop and reverse the spread of HIV and scale up towards universal access to HIV prevention, treatment, care, and support services.::.

Some of the UN's main work involves the Sustainable Development Goals. These goals, sometimes called the Global Goals, were adopted by the General Assembly in 2015. These 17 goals are based around ending poverty and hunger, making people more equal, and taking action to stop climate change. UN agencies such as UNHCR, WFP, UNICEF, IOM and others are essential in delivering humanitarian assistance.::.

There are special agencies of the United Nations. They are independent of the UN secretariat, with their own budgets and memberships. Some of them are older than the United Nations. Here are a few of them:

The United Nations also has funds and programmes. Unlike specialized agencies, these are reliant on voluntary contributions, or money that countries can choose whether or not to give to.

Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria. In the past, people called it consumption or the white death.

TB is caused by several types of mycobacteria, usually Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The disease usually attacks the lungs, but it can also affect other parts of the body.

The bacteria can travel through the air and spread from one person to the next. This happens when infected people cough, sneeze, or spit.

Of every 100 people with TB, between five and ten people show symptoms. In these people, the disease is called active. Tuberculosis kills more than half of the people who are infected if they do not get treatment. TB affects a lot of people globally, but many do not show any symptoms.

Diagnosis of active TB relies on radiology. Doctors often look at an X-ray of the chest. In addition, they check body fluids. These fluids have microbes in them, which are grown in a cell culture. The cell cultures are then analysed to see if the person is infected with TB.

If the patient has TB, but does not show symptoms, the disease is 'latent'. Doctors use a skin test, called the Mantoux test, to detect latent TB. They often do blood tests too.

There is a vaccine against some forms of tuberculosis. It is called the Bacillus Calmette Guérin vaccine.

TB used to be easily treated and cured with antibiotics. However, the bacterium is now highly resistant to most antibiotics. This resistance makes treatment difficult. Many different kinds of antibiotics need to be given over a long period of time. There is a form of tuberculosis that is resistant to all drugs.

Experts believe that one third of the world population is infected with M. tuberculosis.

New infections occur at a rate of one per second. In 2007, about 13.7 million chronic cases were active globally. In 2010, about 8.8 million new cases developed and nearly 1.5 million people died from the disease, most of them in developing countries. The number of tuberculosis cases has been decreasing since 2006, and new cases have decreased since 2002.

Tuberculosis does not happen at the same rate around the world. About eighty percent of the population in many Asian and African countries test positive for TB, but only five to ten percent of people in the United States do.

People usually get tuberculosis because of a weakened immune system. Many people with HIV and AIDS can also get tuberculosis because it causes the person to become immunocompromised.

Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov (22 April 1870 – 21 January 1924), better known as Vladimir Lenin, was a Russian revolutionary, politician, and political theorist. He was the first leader of the Soviet Union, starting when the country was created in 1922. He was also the first premier of the Soviet Union until his death.

Under Lenin's administration, Russia (and later the Soviet Union) became a one-party socialist state governed by the Communist Party. He was a Marxist, and his developments to Marxism are called Leninism.

Vladimir Ulyanov was born on 22 April 1870 in the town of Simbirsk, in the Russian Empire. His mother was a schoolteacher, and his father was an education official. Technically, his father's job made the family noblemen.

Lenin began studying politics in gymnasium (an elite high school). In 1886, the year that Lenin was doing his final exams, his father died; his brother Alexander was hanged for his part in a bomb plot to kill Tsar Alexander III, and their sister Anna was sent to Tatarstan. That made Lenin furious, and he promised to get revenge for his brother's death. Still, he completed his exams and got the second-highest grade in his class.

Lenin excelled in school and learned Latin and Greek. However, in 1887, he was thrown out of Kazan State University because he protested against the Tsar. Lenin continued to read books and study ideas by himself, and in 1891 he got a license to become a lawyer.

While he studied law in St. Petersburg, Lenin learned about the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, who were philosophers from Germany.

Marx's thoughts were called Marxism. It was illegal in Russia to talk or write about Marxism positively. Lenin was arrested for doing so and was sent to prison in Siberia. That was a harsh punishment because Siberia is very cold and isolated and almost impossible to escape.

In July 1898, while still in Siberia, Lenin married Nadezhda Krupskaya. In 1899, Lenin wrote a book, The Development of Capitalism in Russia. In 1900, Lenin was set free from prison and allowed to go back home.

After he was set free, Lenin traveled around Europe. He started a Marxist newspaper called Iskra (the Russian word for "spark" or "lightning"). He also became an important member of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party, or RSDLP. In 1901, he began calling himself "Lenin."

In 1903, Lenin had a major argument with another leader of the party, Julius Martov, which divided the party into two. Lenin wanted to establish socialism right away, rather than establishing capitalism first and then changing to socialism. Martov disagreed and believed the Classical Marxist idea that capitalism must come before socialism. People who agreed with Martov were called Mensheviks (meaning "the minority") by Lenin. The people who agreed with Lenin were called Bolsheviks ("the majority") even though they were smaller in number.

In 1907, Lenin traveled around Europe again and visited many socialist meetings and events. During World War I, he lived in big European cities like London, Paris, and Geneva.

At the beginning of the war, a big left-wing meeting, called the Second International, included the Bolsheviks. The meeting shut down when many of its groups argued on whether or not to support the war. Lenin's Bolsheviks were one of only a few groups to be against the war because of their Marxist ideas.

After Tsar Nicholas II abdicated (gave up his throne) during the February Revolution, Lenin went back to Russia, where he was still a very important Bolshevik leader. He wrote that he wanted a revolution in which ordinary workers would overthrow the new republican government.

In 1917, the Kadets (a moderate party) and parts of the Okhrana (the Russian secret police) started rumors that Lenin had gotten money from the Germans, who had sent him through Germany in a special train to reach Russia. That made him look bad because many Russians had died fighting Germany during the war.

After the July Days, a popular uprising in Petrograd, the Russian capital, was crushed by the Russian Provisional Government. Lenin left Russia and went to Finland, where he could hide and carry on with his work on communism.

In November 1917, Lenin and Leon Trotsky led the Bolsheviks, including soviets from all over Russia, in a revolution against the Russian government led by Alexander Kerensky.  The Bolshevik October Revolution announced that Russia was a socialist country.  In November, Lenin was chosen as its leader.

Lenin wanted an end to the war Russia. In February 1918, he signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany, which ended the Germans' attack on Russia.but made Russia lose a large amount of land that it used for farming.

The treaty also made Germany's other enemies angry. They attacked Russia, together with the Russians who supported Kerensky or the tsar.

Lenin ruled that as much food as possible was to be given to Bolshevik soldiers in Russia's new Red Army. That helped the Bolsheviks win the war, but many ordinary people starved or died of disease.

After the war, Lenin brought in the New Economic Policy (NEP) to try to make things better for the country and move from capitalism towards socialism. A small amount of private enterprise was still allowed. Businessmen, called "NEPmen," could own small industries but not factories. Large industry and factories became public property, to be owned by the workers.

A woman, Fanny Kaplan, shot Lenin while he was making an official visit. She missed his head, and the bullet lodged in his neck. Lenin feared that he would be killed by political enemies, and he refused to have the bullet removed until a guaranteed communist doctor could be found. As a result, the bullet was never removed.

Lenin had strokes in May and December 1922, possibly because of the bullet in his neck. He recovered from both, but in March 1923, he had a third stroke, which paralyzed him and left him unable to speak.

Lenin died on January 24, 1924, of another stroke. Just before he died, Lenin had wanted to get rid of Stalin, who Lenin thought he was dangerous to the country and the government. Lenin thought that Trotsky was the most capable of being the Soviets' new leader.

The city of Saint Petersburg had been renamed Petrograd by the tsar in 1914. In 1921, it was renamed Leningrad in Lenin's memory. When the Soviet Union ended in 1991, Leningrad was again named Saint Petersburg.

Lenin had said before his death that he wished to be buried beside his mother. However, when he died, Stalin let the people in Russia come look at his body, and people kept coming. The govermant decided not to bury him but preserved his body. A building called the Lenin Mausoleum was built in Moscow's Red Square over the body so that people could see it. Many Russian people and foreign tourists still go there to see his body.

After Lenin died, Stalin used him to justify his own rule by making it look as if he had been Lenin's chosen successor, instead of Trotsky.

Some historians argue that Lenin laid the groundwork for totalitarian regimes that developed later, like Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler, Fascist Italy under Benito Mussolini, and North Korea under the Kim family. Lenin accomplished that by his consolidation of power, one-party rule, and suppression of those who disagreed with him.

The Socialist Republic of Vietnam (or just Vietnam) () is a country in Southeast Asia. The neighboring countries are Cambodia, China, and Laos. The capital is Hanoi. The most populous city is Ho Chi Minh City. There are about 99,497,680 people living in Vietnam. Vietnam was united under a communist government. In 1986, the government made economic and political changes that began Vietnam's path to be a part of the world economy. Since 2000, Vietnam's economic growth has been among "the highest in the world", and in 2011 it had the highest global growth generator index among 11 "major" economies.

The length of the country, from North to South, is 1,650 kilometers (1,025 miles). "At its narrowest point, Vietnam is only 30 miles (48 kilometers) wide". Northern Vietnam offers a "humid" subtropical climate with 4 seasons (winter, spring, summer, and fall) while Southern Vietnam is "hot year-round".

In A.D. 40, the Trưng Sisters Trưng Trắc and Trưng Nhị led a rebellion to get rid of Tô Định, the Chinese governor occupying Vietnam. They were daughters of a Lạc lord in Giao Chỉ (now Northern Vietnam) and widows of aristocrats. They successfully formed their own kingdom in Mê Linh, where Trưng Trắc was proclaimed queen, and a capital was built for her". While ruling in Mê Linh, the sisters abolished taxes. They were defeated in A.D. 43 by Ma Yuan, a Chinese general, and are regarded as female military heroes and national heroines.

After Ma Yuan’s defeat of the Trưng sisters, the Chinese maintained domination over Vietnam for more than a thousand years. They established a bureaucracy that emphasized Confucianism, and they focused on educating Vietnam’s ruling class with Chinese literature and ideas.

The kings of Champa (Chiêm Thành in Vietnamese) started construction of Hindu temples at Mỹ Sơn in the 4th century AD.

France desired trading freedom in Vietnam. They wanted to bring more missionaries into the country. The Nguyen dynasty disliked French involvement in Vietnam, and executed missionaries and Vietnamese coverts. This spurred the French Emperor, Napoleon III, to attack Vietnam and attempt to force the court to accept the title of "French protectorate." By the 1880s Vietnam was officially a French protectorate.

The nation was divided into North Vietnam and South Vietnam. After independence was achieved, the French gave the land of the Mekong delta that was part of Cambodia to South Vietnam. The United States had influence in the South, and the Việt Minh controlled the North. Hồ Chí Minh became President of the Democratic Republic of (North) Việt Nam. It was agreed that the nation would be reunited by elections in 1956. The Americans and the Southern government stopped the elections from happening because they expected Hồ Chí Minh to win because North Vietnam refused to hold free elections. The president of the United States Dwight Eisenhower said he thought Hồ would win with around 80% of the vote if elections were held because of the majority of the population being in the north added with Hồ's supporters in the South.

In Vietnam, the approximate population is around 99,298,522 to 101,531,681 people. The Vietnamese male population is 50,205,096 and the female population is 51,326,584. 25.2% of these people are aged between 0-14, with 13,365,800 being male and 12,161,135 being female. 69.3% of the population are between the ages of 15-64. The male-to-female ratio is 35,024,433 being male and 35,156,146 being female. 5.5% are 65 and over, with 2,149,957 being male and 3,459,991 being female. So within the older 2 categories, there are more women than men.

Media said in 2011 that investment in science and technology was 2% of GDP.

"Vietnam provides no incentives for students to return to Vietnam from their foreign graduate programmes" was the opinion (in 2011) of French physicist Pierre Darriulat.

A woman is an adult female human. The plural of "woman" is "women". Young human females are called "girls". The word "women" is sometimes used to refer to females of any age (as in the phrase "Women's rights").

Women usually have less hair on their faces and bodies than men. After they finished puberty, and before menopause, women are usually able to get pregnant and give birth to babies.

Women have historically been treated differently from men. They have also been expected to act differently. In many places, the treatment of and expectations for women have changed with the spread of women's rights in the 20th century. Transgender women are women who were assigned male at birth and may have undergone hormonal therapy and surgeries to transition their sex. They have gained more attention in the late 20th to early 21st century.

Women have sex organs including a vagina, uterus, and ovaries from birth. After they become adults, women also have breasts to make milk for babies.

Women's bodies are usually different than men's bodies in some other ways, including:

Women are usually shorter than men. In 1996, the average height of women around the world was 159 cm.

Between the end of  puberty and  menopause, a woman can become pregnant. Women go through puberty usually when they are between ten and sixteen years old. The menopause usually starts in the late forties, and ends in the early fifties. Between these ages, women go through a menstrual cycle, once a month. If such a woman has sex with a man, at the right time of the month, and no contraception is used, the woman may get pregnant.

A woman who has sex with a man, at the right time, may get pregnant, if no contraception is used. Contraception will stop a pregnancy. When she gets pregnant, the ovum of her menstrual cycle will be fertilized, and attach itself to the wall of the uterus. In humans, a pregnancy usually takes about 38 weeks. After this time, a child is born. For childbirth, a woman usually gets help from specially-trained people, called midwives. During the pregnancy, the woman should regularly see a doctor. Very often, these doctors are specialized, and are called gynecologists or obstetricians.

After the child is born, the woman will breast-feed her child for some time.

Sometimes women who are very young get pregnant. These pregnancies are known as teenage pregnancies; very often, they are more difficult than normal ones.

If a woman had sex with a man, and no contraception was used, there's the risk of her getting pregnant. If she does not want to get pegnant, she has some time to take what is called emergency contraception. Emergency contraception protects against unwanted pregnancies, as it keeps the pregnancy from starting. It does not protect against sexually-transmitted diseases. Also, it will not work all the time. Very often, women who want to get emergency contaception also need to spend some time with a professional in a counselling session. Depending on the country, emergency contraception may not be available, or it may not be legal.

Humans also have the possibility to stop a pregnancy, when it has started. Stopping a pregnancy is called abortion. When people do it on purpose, it is called induced abortion. Pregnancies that stop on their own are called spontaneous abortion, miscarriage, or stillbirth. Depending on the country or region, a pregnancy can be stopped at any time, or there are limits, for how long it can be stopped. Pregnancies that have gone on longer are generally more difficult to stop.

Many countries have laws that say for what reasons, a pregnancy can be stopped. One of a common set of reasons is that continuing the pregnancy would be dangerous to the woman. Another common reason is that the pregnancy was the result of a rape (the woman did not want to have sex with a person). Still another would be that the child would be born with certain birth defects. All of these reasons vary by country. In some countries, they also vary by area. Some countries are very liberal, others are more restrictive. Some countries or territories do not allow abortion at all.

During the pregnancy, the woman will change too. There are many things  a woman should no longer do. Many drugs have a bad effect on the child growing inside her. The woman therefore needs to watch the drugs that she takes, and she needs to tell the people who give her the drugs (at the pharmacy) that she is pregnant. Note that drinking alcohol, or smoking cigarettes also has a bad effect on the unborn.

In humans, a pregnancy lasts 266 days, on average. Most children are born within two weeks of the calculated date. Only four percent of the children are born on the calculated date. With birth, the unborn child leaves the womb. There are certain signs that a birth is about to occur:

A woman giving birth will feel pain, much more pain than other animals (such as the Great Apes). This is mainly due to the fact that the head is big, and the pelvis is rather small.

In many countries, hospitals are specially equipped to handle births. Giving birth at a hospital has the benefit that the woman can get help faster, if anything goes wrong. For this reason, most births happen at a hospital.

Some countries allow a woman to give birth anoymously. That way, the woman does not have to give her name, or much other personal information. The baby will then be given up for adoption, so that another couple can raise the child.

In many countries there are hospitals with baby hatches. A woman can put her child in such a hatch. The baby will be raised and cared for, and it will be given up for adoption. Many women who are unable to raise the child use baby hatches.

Women have historically had less control over their lives than men. They have often been forbidden to own land, vote, hold political office, or choose whom they marry and discouraged from voicing political opinions or attending school. Since the beginning of the 20th century women have gained many rights in most of the developed world.

Women have also historically faced a lot of sexual violence, harassment, and discrimination. The amount of sexual violence, harassment, and discrimination has decreased with the spread of women's rights, but many women still face these problems.

Women have historically been expected to bear and raise children, limit their public lives, and allow their male relatives to make decisions for them. These expectations have changed with the spread of women's rights.

Before modern societies, education of women was limited. In developed countries, most women have access to education, and even perform better than men at many levels. In the United States in 2005 and 2006, women have earned 62% of associate degrees, 58% of bachelor's degrees, 60% of master's degrees, and 50% of doctorates.

Education, especially for women, has become more common in most countries in the 20th and 21st centuries than it was previously.

In most countries, women work, like men. Their jobs are sometimes different, and sometimes their work is what society expects. In jobs, that have ot do wirth education, or with healthcare, there are generally more women than men. If women and men do the same job, women often earn less for their work. This is known as gender pay gap. Also, there are fewer women in leading roles of companies.

Some women have become successful politicians. In 2019, about a quarter of all politicians were female. Nordic countries were in the lead, with over 42%. The fewest female politicians can be found in Oceania, with just over 16%, Middle East and North Africa, with 19%, and Asiatic countries with just under 20%.

In most countries, women have the same rights to vote, and to get elected than men. This has not always been the case. The question, whether women should be able to vote is called women's suffrage. Only very few countries in the world do not allow women to vote or to get elected.

Throughout history, women have made contributions to science, literature, and art. There were many female writers, but many published their work under a male name. In music, women have been composers, songwriters, performers, singers, conductors, scholars, teachers, critics, and more.

In the 18th century, biologists began using the symbol for the goddess Venus (♀️) as indicating a female plant or animal. It is often used for women.

Femininity (also called womanliness or girlishness) is a set of attributes, behaviors, and roles generally associated with women and girls. Feminity is a social construct, which is different in different societies. Some behaviors considered feminine are biologically influenced.  People do not agree about the extent in which femininity is sociallly or biologically influenced. It is distinct from the definition of the biological female sex, as both men and women can have feminine traits.

Wind is the flow of gases. On Earth, wind is mostly the movement of air. In outer space, solar wind is the movement of gases or particles from the sun through space. The strongest winds seen on a planet in our solar system are on Neptune and Saturn.

Short bursts of fast winds are called gusts. Strong winds that go on for about one minute are called squalls. Winds that go on for a long time are called many different things, such as breeze, gale, hurricane, and typhoon.

Wind can move land, especially in deserts. Cold wind can sometimes have a bad effect on livestock. Wind also affects animals' food stores, their hunting and the way they protect themselves.

Sunlight drives the Earth's atmospheric circulation. The resulting winds blow over land and sea, producing weather.

A high pressure area (that makes an anticyclone) near a low pressure system (that makes a cyclone), makes air move from the high pressure to the low pressure to try to even out the pressures. The Coriolis effect causes the winds to spiral around. A big difference in pressure can make high winds.  In some storms, such as hurricanes, typhoons, cyclones, or tornadoes, it can cause winds faster than 200 mph (320 kilometres per hour). This can damage houses and other buildings, and can kill people.

Wind can also be caused by the rising of hot air, or the falling of cool air. When hot air rises, it creates a low pressure underneath it, and air moves in to equalize the pressure. When cold air drops (because it is denser or heavier than warm air), it creates a high pressure and flows out to even out the pressure with the low pressure around it.

The wind is usually invisible, but rain, dust, or snow can show how it is blowing. A weathervane can also show you where the wind is coming from. The Beaufort scale is a way to tell how strong the wind is. It is used at sea when no land can be seen. The direction of the wind is a compass point. For example, a north wind is from the north. A north to northwest wind is from a direction somewhere between north and northwest.

The increase in wind causes an increase in the rate of evaporation.

High winds can cause damage depending on how strong they are. Sometimes gusts of wind can make poorly made bridges move or be destroyed, like the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in 1940. Electric power distribution can fail because of wind, even if its speed is as low as . This happens when tree branches damage power lines. No kind of tree can resist hurricane-force winds, but trees with roots that are not very deep can be blown over more easily.  Trees such as eucalyptus, sea hibiscus, and avocado are brittle (easy to break) and are damaged more easily.

The trade winds  are  the prevailing pattern of easterly surface winds found in the tropics, within the lower portion of the Earth's atmosphere. They occur in the lower section of the troposphere near the Earth's equator. The trade winds blow predominantly from the northeast in the Northern Hemisphere. They blow from the southeast in the Southern Hemisphere. They are stronger during the winter and when the Arctic oscillation is in its warm phase. Trade winds have been used by captains of sailing ships to cross the world's oceans for centuries. They enabled European empire expansion into the Americas. They also allowed trade routes to become established across the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.

The doldrums are in the equatorial region. It is a wind belt where air is warm, with little pressure variations. Winds are light there. Another name for doldrums is Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)

Wind in outer space, called solar wind, is very different from a wind on earth.  This wind is caused by the sun, or other stars, and it is made up of particles that came out of the star's atmosphere.  Like solar wind, the planetary wind is made up of light gases that have come out of planets' atmospheres.

Wood is what keeps trees and shrubs upright, and what transports water from the roots to the leaves. The two main chemical substances in wood are cellulose and lignin.

Wood is formed in trees and shrubs by the cambium, a cell layer between bark and wood. The result is that wood is formed in circular rings, which are called growth rings.

The wood in the centre of the tree or shrub may have a different color from that on the outside. In that case, the wood on the outside is light in color, and is called "sapwood"; the wood in the centre is darker in color, and is called "heartwood". Most often, heartwood is more resistant to rot than sapwood. Not all trees and shrubs form heartwood, and it is also possible that heartwood differs very little in color from the sapwood, or not at all.

Wood is used to make buildings and furniture, and also for art. Firewood is a fuel. Paper is made from wood fibres. Wood is a renewable resource although it has become scarcer in recent centuries. Its origin is about 425 million years ago.

Wood is hard to cut, but it is also strong. A lumberjack is a person who cuts down trees. After a tree falls, the wood in it can be cut into long, straight pieces called lumber. Lumber can then be used to make , or put together with nails, screws, or even glue to make wooden frames for other shapes.

Wood comes in many different kinds. Oak, maple (hardwood) and pine and redwood (softwood) are widely used types of wood. Woods are usually divided into softwood (from conifers) and hardwood from flowering plants.

For a long time and even today, many buildings, mostly houses, have been made of wood. To build a house with wood, lumber is put together into frames that are the shape of each wall, floor, and roof of the house. Then the frames are placed into the shape of a house. Then the frames can be covered to make solid walls. Sometimes the walls are made of more wood.

When the outside of a house or building is covered in wood, the wooden pieces are usually flat and stacked. These pieces are called shingles. Wood is also sometimes used in other parts of the house, like doors and staircases. Wood is also used to make fences.

Carpenters make houses of mostly soft wood such as pine. For many kinds of furniture they use harder wood such as maple or oak. When someone builds something with wood, they often paint it. Paint protects and beautifies the wood. Some people like the look of wood, so they put clear paint called varnish on it. This helps to protect the wood and gives it a shiny finish.

Some people make art with wood. Sometimes sculptures are built with wood: see Grinling Gibbons.

Regular pencils are made of wood. Inside is the "lead", which is not actually lead. Clay or wax and graphite form the "lead" in a pencil.

Wood is turned into paper in large factories called paper mills.  Heat, chemicals and machines separate the cellulose fibers from other parts and press the fibers into paper.

Venezuela, officially the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, is a country in northern South America. The official language is Spanish, and the capital city is Caracas.

Other languages spoken in Venezuela include Carib, Guahibo, Warao, Wayuu, Pemon, and Piaroa.

In January 2026, the U.S. military took the president of Venezuela out of the country;  He gave answers in a U.S. court (January 5).

Delcy Rodríguez is in power; She is interim president (or acting president).

The geography includes the islands in the Caribbean Sea, coastal areas, highlands, and parts of the Andes Mountains. Angel Falls is the world's tallest waterfall. It is in the Bolivar state.

Venezuela's economy is based on oil, cotton, cocoa, sugar, coffee, and tobacco.

Venezuela has one of the largest oil supplies in the world, and it produces a large amount of oil. It also has a very large supply of fossil fuels, gasoline, and minerals.

The government's main source of income in foreign currencies, has been coming "for a while" (as of 2026's first quarter), from export of oil.

There are shortages in the country; About "80% of [the people or] residents ... live in poverty", according to estimates (2025).

There are economic sanctions against Venezuela [as of 2026's first quarter]; The sanctions are coming from the United States [and some other countries]. The sanctions are costing Venezuela, billions of euro, every year.

In regard to inflation: It is between "20% and 30% a month", according to an estimate quoted (November 2025) by a media outlet; The estimate is for the capital city.

In regard to (relatives sending money from abroad, or) remittances: About 8 million Venezuelans have moved to other countries, according to media (in 2026); Many of those Venezuelans send money to relatives (back home).

Ancient Venezuelans came from the east, west, south, and north. Christopher Columbus was the first European to enter Venezuela, but there had been indigenous people living there for a long time.

When white Europeans (like the British, Spanish, and French colonial empires) conquered territory in the Americas, they took their black African slaves to America to work. The Spanish Empire conquered Venezuela and brought in slaves from Africa.

At this time, black people had no rights; they just worked for food. Because of the colonial period, Venezuela's population today is very racially mixed.

The Spanish taught Roman Catholicism, and many native people converted. Today, almost all Venezuelans (96%) are Catholics; just 2% are Protestant.

For a long time, society was headed by white creoles: people in Venezuela who were descended from Spaniards, but considered Venezuela home. Other Venezuelans did not like that, and they started thinking about independence.

On July 24, 1823 Venezuela won its independence, led by Simón Bolívar.

Venezuela's modern history was shaped by a number of people, including President Romulo Betancourt, who replaced a military dictatorship with a democracy.

By the 1970s, Venezuela had become rich from oil revenue, but it had problems in the 1980s and 1990s. In 1999 Hugo Chávez became president and tried to remake Venezuela into a socialist state. While popular at first, the economic changes made by Chavez and the next president, Nicolás Maduro, caused a massive economic depression in the mid-2010s. The current president is disputed.

The Crisis in Venezuela started in 2010 (and has been ongoing for .)

The 2026 United States strikes in Venezuela, happened; An invasion lasted for two hours and twenty minutes (January 3). That U.S. force left Venezuela, later that day.

The government has interior minister, foreign minister and defense minister; The oil minister's post (or job) is held by the acting president (as of 2026's second quarter).

On January 5, 2026, the Rodríguez cabinet (or government) held its first official meeting.

The population of Venezuela is about 28,000,000 people. The ethnicities of the population are:

United States–Venezuela relations. The U.S. secretary-of-state and Venezuela's acting president talked [on the phone], on January 3, 2026. Earlier that day, the U.S. military did an invasion, that ended the same day. Earlier (2025), the U.S. started attacks from the air, against what was thought to be drug boats. The attacks were part of a military buildup in the Caribbean Sea. Earlier that year, the US government said that gangs such as  Cartel of the Suns, and Tren de Aragua, are terrorist organizations. Earlier (2019), the U.S.  took away its diplomats from the U.S. embassy in Caracas. Earlier that year, Venezuela's president said that the Venezuelan embassy "and all consulates in the U.S. would be closed", according to media.

Vasco da Gama (  December 24, 1506) was a Portuguese sailor. He was the first European who went to India through the Cape of Good Hope at the southern end of Africa. He went to India three times by ship.

Vasco Da Gama was born in Sines, Portugal. His birthday was June 5th. According to some people's accounts, he was a knight in the 1490s in Sines.

On the 4 July 1497, da Gama left Lisbon with four ships: the São Gabriel, the São Rafael, the Berrio, and a storage ship of unknown name. He intended to sail to India. No European explorer before him had sailed further than the place that is now called South Africa. Vasco da Gama sailed around the bottom of the African continent. Da Gama's crew gave the South African coast they were passing the name Natal, which means "Christmas" in Portuguese. They did this because they sailed by it at Christmas. The coast is still called Natal.

By January, da Gama's crew reached modern-day Mozambique, on the East African coast. Mozambique was controlled by Arabs because it was part of the Indian Ocean's network of trade. An angry crowd discovered that da Gama's men were not Muslims, so the crew continued north to Kenya. There, at Malindi, da Gama hired a pilot from India.

The pilot brought the Portuguese men to the city of Calicut on the southwest coast of India on May 20, 1498. Vasco da Gama was in danger because of a conflict with the ruler of Calicut. However, he escaped and returned to Portugal in September 1499. A few of his Portuguese sailors stayed in Calicut.

Vasco da Gama went on his next trip in 1502. He found out that the people of Calicut killed the Portuguese he had left behind. During this trip, he attacked and stole from all the Arab and Indian ships he found in the Indian Ocean. Then, he went on to Calicut and took over that city, capturing a lot of wealth, pleasing the King of Portugal.

Vasco da Gama went on one last trip in 1504 to be the viceroy (governor) of Calicut, which was by that time a Portuguese colony. He died soon after he got there on Christmas Eve. He was not a pirate, but he looted and killed many men only to take revenge.

Washington, D.C. (also known as simply Washington or D.C., and officially as the District of Columbia) is the capital city of the United States of America. It is a federal district. The President of the United States, the United States Congress, the United States Supreme Court and many major national government offices are in the territory. This makes it the political center of the United States.

Washington was named after the first U.S. President George Washington. "D.C." stands for "District of Columbia". At first, it was made up of a piece from Virginia south of the Potomac River and a piece from Maryland north of the Potomac River. In 1847, Virginia's piece was returned to it, and is now Arlington County and part of the city of Alexandria. Since 1847, all of the District of Columbia is on the north side of the Potomac River. The District of Columbia used to have other small towns which used "D.C.".

Since 1800, the District of Columbia has been the home of all three branches of the U.S. government: Congress, the President, and the Supreme Court. All of the major political parties are based here. It is also the headquarters of the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Organization of American States (OAS). Because it is the home of the President and is important to American politics, many groups often hold large demonstrations and protests here. These are often at the National Mall, a large open park which has many monuments and museums. The District of Columbia’s many museums and monuments make it a popular place for tourists to visit.

In 2020, the United States Census Bureau said that 689,545 people lived within the District of Columbia.

When English people first came to the area, there was a Native American village on the spot called Nakochtank. This name survives in the name of the Anacostia River. This river was known for the healing properties of its pure water and it is recorded that the Emperor Powhatan, who lived in what is now Richmond, Virginia, made the trip all the way to Nakochtank once for this reason.

The 1789 United States Constitution said that a capital city would be created in a district, but did not say where it should be. James Madison and others thought it should be far away from other states and cities. This way, it would be independent and not controlled by any state. In 1790, a  was reached and capital was placed between Virginia and Maryland. It was a square, ten miles (16 km) long on each side, and split by the Potomac River, which separated the two states. Half of the district was in Maryland and the other half was in Virginia, and the two states gave this land to the government. In 1791, it was named Washington, the District of Columbia to honor George Washington. Columbia was another name for North America. During the War of 1812, the British burned down many government buildings, including the White House.

Washington, D.C. was planned before it was built. Pierre L'Enfant drew a plan for the city that said where all the streets, parks, and important buildings would be. Unlike most cities in the United States, D.C. has many roundabouts or traffic circles. The city was supposed to have long and wide avenues, and many open spaces for monuments and parks. The National Mall is an example of this.

Washington, D.C. is not a state. Its citizens have less control over their city than most Americans, but D.C. has had an elected mayor and a city council since 1973. But Congress can make it so that a local law doesn't happen. The current mayor of Washington, D.C. is Muriel Bowser, a Democrat.

The license plates on the cars in Washington, D.C. say, "Taxation Without Representation." This is a protest from people who live in Washington, D.C. about having to pay taxes to the United States without having a vote in the United States House of Representatives. It resembles the protest made by colonists before the American Revolution about having to pay taxes to Great Britain. Some people are against letting Washington, D.C. have a Congressman or Congresswoman because the Constitution only allows states to have Congressmen or Congresswomen.

Washington, D.C. is the center of the nation for its arts. The National Symphony Orchestra, the Washington National Opera, and the Washington Ballet are all inside the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. The Kennedy Center Honors are given every year to the people who have greatly helped the cultural life of the United States. The President and First Lady usually go to the Honors ceremony.

There are also many museums and memorials in Washington, D.C.. The Smithsonian runs many museums.

Washington D.C. has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfa).

Summers are hot and humid, winters are cool to cold, and spring and fall are mild.

The average yearly precipitation is fairly high at , and is regular throughout the year.

Snow falls a few times each winter, and sometimes in spring and fall, which is usually light and lasts no longer than a few days. Blizzards do occur, but not every winter.

The city gets many summer heat waves that can last for many days, and less commonly winter cold waves that usually last for a few days.

As the national capital of the United States, Washington, D.C. has numerous media outlets in various mediums. Some of these media are known throughout the United States, including The Washington Post and various broadcasting networks headquartered in D.C.

The Washington Post is a daily newspaper in Washington, D.C. The Washington Post was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for its reporting on the Watergate scandal in 1973. The Washington Post Company has multiple media holdings, including a daily free newspaper called the Express, the Washington Post News Service with Bloomberg News, Fashion Washington, El Tiempo Latino (a Spanish-language publication), the Slate Group, The Daily Herald (in Washington state), as well as the education company Kaplan, Inc. The Washington Post emphasizes national and political news coverage but also covers regional and local stories. Headquartered in downtown Washington, the newspaper employs journalists at 11 regional bureaus in Maryland and Virginia and 14 international bureaus. Content is shared across titles within the Washington Post Company, and the Express, in particular, often reprints content from the Associated Press, Getty Images, and other wire sources.

Washington Times and Washington City Paper also have substantial readership in the District. On February 1, 2005, the free daily tabloid Washington Examiner debuted, having been formed from a chain of suburban newspapers known as the Journal Newspapers.

Washington Blade and Metro Weekly focus on gay issues and the Washington Sun, the Washington Informer, and also Washington Afro on African American issues. Bi-weekly Street Sense focuses on issues of homelessness poverty, and life on the streets. Other special-interest papers include Roll Call, a daily paper focused on politics.

Many neighborhoods in the District have their own community newspapers. Some of these include The Current Newspapers, which has editions serving Dupont Circle, Foggy Bottom, Georgetown, Chevy Chase and Upper Northwest, and a Capitol Hill paper called The Capitol Hill Current/Voice of the Hill. Additional papers include In-Towner (Dupont Circle, Logan Circle and Adams Morgan), Hill Rag (Capitol Hill), East of the River (Anacostia) and D.C. North (Northeast D.C.). In addition, several specialty newspapers serve the U.S. Congress; most notable are Roll Call, The Hill, and Politico.

As of 2008, the Washington Metropolitan Area was the 9th largest designated market area in the United States, with 2,321,610 television homes (2.028% of the U.S. population). The following is a list of television stations serving the metro area: Columbus

Most Baltimore area television stations can be seen in the Washington region. Besides being viewed clearly in the District, they can especially be seen in the suburbs of the Interstate 95 corridor between both cities. They are: WMAR 2 (ABC), WBAL 11 (NBC), WJZ 13 (CBS), WMPT 22 / WMPB 67 (PBS/MPB), WUTB 24 (MyNetwork TV), WBFF 45 (FOX), and WNUV 54 (The CW). A DC-MD-VA regional news station, TBD TV, is carried on Channel 8 on all cable systems in Washington, D.C. and surrounding communities.

Public, educational, and government access (PEG) on cable television is provided by the Public Access Corporation of the District of Columbia on two channels simulcast to both local cable television systems. One channel is devoted to religious programming and the other channel provides a diversity of offerings. The District's two Public, educational, and government access (PEG) Channels are DCTV, a non-profit media outlet that provides training and production opportunities to local residents, and OCT TV-16, which provides information about government programs, services, and related opportunities.

Major national broadcasters and cable outlets including NBC, ABC, CBS, FOX, and CNN maintain a significant presence in Washington, as do those from around the world including the BBC, CBC, and Al Jazeera. The Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) is headquartered in Arlington, Virginia. Also, several cable television networks have their headquarters in the Washington area, including:

As of 2008, the Washington Metropolitan Area was the 9th largest radio market in the United States with a Metro 12+ Population of 4,238,100. The following is a list of radio stations serving the metro area:

According to a 2010 study, Washington-area commuters spent 70 hours a year in traffic delays, which tied with Chicago for having the nation's worst road congestion. However, 37% of Washington-area commuters take public transportation to work, the second-highest rate in the country. An additional 12% of D.C. commuters walked to work, 6% carpooled, and 3% traveled by bicycle in 2010.

Washington has very few freeways. The funds that had been dedicated for freeway construction were instead redirected to the region's public transportation infrastructure. The interstate highways that do continue into Washington, including Interstate 66 and Interstate 395, both terminate shortly upon entering the city.

The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority (WMATA) operates the Washington Metro, the city's rapid transit system, as well as Metrobus. Both systems serve the District and its suburbs. Metro opened on March 27, 1976 and presently consists of 86 stations and  of track. With an average of about one million trips each weekday, Metro is the second-busiest rapid transit system in the country, after the New York City Subway. Metrobus serves over 400,000 riders each weekday, making it the nation's sixth-largest bus system. The city also operates its own DC Circulator bus system, which connects commercial areas within central Washington.

Union Station is the main train station in Washington, D.C., and handles about 70,000 people each day. It is Amtrak's second-busiest station with 4.6 million passengers annually and serves as the southern terminus for the Northeast Corridor and Acela Express routes. Maryland's MARC and Virginia's VRE commuter trains and the Metrorail Red Line also provide service into Union Station. Expansion plans announced in 2011 will make Union Station the city's primary intercity bus transit center. A new streetcar system opened in 2016.

Three major airports serve The District. The Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport is across from downtown Washington in Arlington, Virginia and has its own Metrorail station.  Major international flights arrive and depart from Washington Dulles International Airport,  west of the District in Fairfax and Loudoun counties in Virginia. Dulles gained its own Metrorail station in 2016. Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport is  northeast of the District in Anne Arundel County, Maryland.

Vincent Willem van Gogh (30 March 1853 – 29 July 1890) was a Dutch post-impressionist painter. His work had a great influence on modern art because of its striking colours and emotional power. He suffered from delusions and fits of mental illness. When he was 37, he died by committing suicide.

When he was a young man, Van Gogh worked for a company of art dealers. He traveled between The Hague, London and Paris. After that, he taught in England. He then wanted to become a pastor and spread the Gospel, and from 1879 he worked as a missionary in a mining place in Belgium. He began drawing the people there, and in 1885, he painted his first important work, The Potato Eaters. He usually painted in dark colors at this time. In March 1886, he moved to Paris and found out about the French impressionists. Later, he moved to the south of France, and the colors in his art became brighter. His special style of art was developed and later fully grown during the time he stayed in Arles in 1888.

He was born Vincent Willem van Gogh on 30 March 1853 in Groot-Zundert, Netherlands. His father, Theodorus van Gogh, was a pastor. His mother, Anna Cornelia Carbentus, was an artist. Van Gogh was brought up in a religious and cultured family. He was very emotional and he did not have a great deal of self-confidence. He was also a replacement child. He was born a year after the death of his brother, also named Vincent. He even had the same birthday. Living at the church rectory Vincent walked past the grave of his dead brother every day. There has been speculation that van Gogh suffered later psychological trauma as a result, but this cannot be proved.

Between 1860 and 1880, when he finally decided to become an artist, van Gogh had two sad romances. He also had worked unsuccessfully in a bookstore, as an art salesman, and a preacher. He remained in Belgium, where he had preached, to study art. The works of his early Dutch period are sad, sharp, and one of the most famous pictures from here is The Potato Eaters, painted in 1885. In that year, van Gogh went to Antwerp where he found the works of famous artists and bought a lot of Japanese prints.

In 1886 he went to Paris to join his brother Theo, who was the manager of Goupil's gallery. In Paris, van Gogh studied with Cormon. He also met Pissarro, Monet, and Gauguin. This helped the colors of his paintings lighten and be painted in short strokes from the paintbrush. His nervous  made him a difficult companion and night-long discussions combined with painting all day made him very unhealthy. He decided to go south to Arles where he hoped his friends would join him and help found a school of art. Gauguin did join him, but it did not help. Near the end of 1888, Gauguin left Arles. Van Gogh followed him with an open razor, but was stopped by Gauguin. Instead, he cut his own ear lobe off. After that, van Gogh began to get fits of madness and was sent to the asylum in Saint-Remy for medical treatment. He painted over 1,000 portraits.

In May 1890, he regained his health and went to live in Auvers-sur-Oise. However, two months later on 27 July, he shot himself in the chest with a revolver. He died two days later, with Theo at his side. Theo reported his last words as "La tristesse durera toujours", which meant, "The sadness will last forever" in French.

During his brief career he had only sold one painting. After his death, Van Gogh's finest works were all sold in less than three years. His mother threw away a lot of his paintings during his life and even after his death. But she lived long enough to see him become a world-famous painter. He was not well known when he was alive, and most people did not appreciate his art. But he became very famous after his death. Today, many people consider him to be one of the greatest painters in history and an important influence on modern art. Van Gogh did not begin painting until he was almost 30. Most of his famous works were done in his last two years. He made more than 2,000 artworks, with 900 paintings and 1,100 drawings and sketches. Today, many of his pieces  portraits, landscapes and sunflowers  are some of the most famous and costly works of art in the world. Probably the most famous being "The Starry Night" done in 1889, which he is most known for.

The truth is what is true. It may be everything that is true (reality) or just a part of it (a fact). It may also be a statement that is true: a truth. Things or statements that are not true are untrue or false. True things exist (or have existed); false things do not (or never have).

Aristotle said: "To say of what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is, is false, while to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is true." However, a statement may be about how things once were; this would be a true statement if it is clear that it is not a statement about how things are now. Most often, the tense of the verb will indicate this, but there may be other ways in which the statement is qualified: for example, by saying when the statement was true.

Truth is a noun, and the corresponding adjective is true. The word true also functions as a noun, a verb and an adverb. The English word  is from Old English tríewþ, tréowþ, trýwþ, Middle English trewþe.

Something untrue is false. A half truth is something true mixed with something false, or something partly true with key information omitted.

If the things one says are true, then they are speaking the truth, or speaking truly. Saying something that is untrue can be called a lie, if the person who is saying it knows it is untrue. A person who says something untrue is often called a "liar".

True is also one of the two basic values of logic. The other such value is usually called false. In symbols, true is written as, T or 1.

Aristotle was the first to put logic into a formal framework. His version is called propositional logic (see also syllogism and deductive reasoning). Other forms of logic use types of mathematics (mathematical logic) or symbols. Boolean algebra is about things being true and false.

The relationship between verbal claims and external reality is handled by epistemology and the philosophy of science.

Philosophers argue over what makes up truth and how to define and identify truth.

Sir Winston Leonard Spencer-Churchill KG OM CH TD FRS PC (30 November 1874 – 24 January 1965) was an English politician. He was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom twice, once during World War II, and again in the early 1950s.

Churchill was the only person to have been a member of the British Government during both World Wars, and the last commoner (non-royal) to be granted a state funeral.  He was also a soldier, journalist, and writer.  He won the Nobel Prize in literature in 1953.

Churchill featured in two media polls. He was ranked as the greatest British prime minister of the twentieth century by 20 prominent historians, politicians and commentators. They were asked by BBC Radio 4's The Westminster Hour to rank the 19 prime ministers from Lord Salisbury at the turn of the century through to John Major in the 1990s. In a 2002 BBC 2 television poll, Churchill was ranked as the greatest Briton in history. A million votes were cast, and the voting was heavily influenced by public campaigns from various candidates.

He is the only British Prime Minister to have received the Nobel Prize.

Winston Churchill was born on 30 November 1874 at Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, England, the home of the Dukes of Marlborough. His father, Lord Randolph Churchill, was a younger son of the 7th Duke, and a leading Tory politician who in 1886 briefly was Chancellor of the Exchequer, a role equivalent to finance minister. His mother (née Jenny Jerome) was American and daughter of a millionaire.

As a boy, Churchill went to the famous Harrow School. He did not get good results, but said he was good at fighting.

He joined the British Army in 1893. In 1896, he was transferred to Bombay, in what was the Indian Empire (British India). He fought in what is now Pakistan. After this, he fought in a war in Sudan, in 1898 as an officer in the cavalry. In 1899, he went to the Second Boer War in South Africa, to be a newspaper reporter. He was captured by the Boers, but managed to escape.

In 1900, he became a politician in the Conservative Party, and was elected to Parliament. In 1904, he changed parties and joined the Liberal Party, but later returned to the Conservative Party.

He married Clementine Hozier in 1908, and had five children named Diana, Randolph, Sarah, Marigold and Mary.

In 1910 Churchill became Home Secretary, one of the most important members of the government. In 1911 he was made First Lord of the Admiralty, which put him in charge of the Royal Navy. When World War I broke out, he stayed in that job. He organized an invasion in Gallipoli which went wrong, and because of this, he was made to leave the government. He joined the army and was sent to fight in France, although he was still a Member of Parliament. In 1917 he was made minister in charge of military supplies (Minister of Munitions).

After World War I, in 1919, Churchill was made Secretary of State for War, and Secretary of State for Air (aircraft). In 1920, Winston ordered the first air bombing in Africa when he bombed the Darwiish State, (also called Daraawiish State).

In 1921 he was in charge of the colonies as Secretary of State. Soon after, in 1922 he lost in an election. In 1924 he became a member of Parliament again, this time not as a member of any party. In 1925 he joined the Conservative Party again. He became Chancellor of the Exchequer (Minister of Finance) in 1924.

After 1929, Churchill disagreed with many things the Conservative party believed in. He was not given any job in the government. Instead he wrote books. One was called Marlborough: his life and times, about his famous ancestor John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough; another was A History of the English Speaking Peoples, which was not published until after World War 2.

When Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany, Churchill warned that Britain should strengthen its military and oppose Hitler.  However, very few leaders agreed with him.

At the start of World War II, Churchill was again put in charge of the Navy. In 1940 the war was going badly for Britain. Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain resigned on May 10 and Churchill was given the job. Some people thought that Britain could not win the war, and that the British government should make peace with Hitler. Churchill was sure that Britain could win, and promised to continue the fight. He made famous speeches that are still remembered today.

He was friends with the President of the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt. He persuaded Roosevelt to give supplies to Britain, and to help Britain. He had many meetings with Roosevelt and with Joseph Stalin, the leader of the Soviet Union, after they came into the war. They were called the Big Three.

In 1945, his party lost an election, and he stopped being Prime Minister. However, he became Prime Minister again in 1951, which he was until 1955.

He was knighted in 1953, and became Sir Winston, and also won the Nobel Prize in Literature.

In 1955, he retired from being Prime Minister. In 1964, he retired from Parliament.

In 1963, President John F. Kennedy named him 'Honorary Citizen of the United States' but too ill to attend a White House ceremony, his son and grandson accepted the award.

Sir Winston died of a stroke at the age of 90, in 1965. When he died, his wife Lady Clementine Churchill and other members of the family were at his bedside.

A vacuum is a place where there is no matter, not even air. Sound cannot move in a vacuum. No place has a perfect vacuum, because a small number of particles remain, even in outer space.

A space where only some of the air is removed is called a "partial vacuum". The space then has lower pressure, even if most of the air remains.

Vacuum is needed for some kinds of machines used for industrial production.  Vacuum pumps are used to pump air out of a vacuum chamber.  It is not possible to create 100% vacuum, but some vacuum pumps are able to create 99.9999% vacuum.  This is called "hard vacuum".  Most industrial purposes do not need hard vacuum.

Vacuum chambers are also used in many scientific experiments in laboratories.  Some experiments in physics and chemistry need hard vacuum to keep any air or other gases from interfering with delicate surfaces or chemicals that can react.

The violin is a string instrument which has four strings and is played with a bow. The strings are usually tuned to the notes G, D, A, and E.  It is held between the left collar bone (near the shoulder) and the chin. Different notes are made by fingering (pressing on the strings) with the left hand while bowing with the right. Unlike guitar, it has no frets or other markers on the fingerboard.

The violin is the smallest and highest pitched string instrument typically used in western music. A person who plays the violin is called a violinist. A person who makes or repairs violins is called a luthier.

The violin is important in European and Arabian music. No other instrument has played such an important part in Europe. The modern violin is about 400 years old. Similar string instruments have been around for almost 1000 years. By the time the modern orchestras started to form in the 17th century, the violin was nearly fully developed. It became the most important orchestral instrument - in fact, nearly half of the instruments in the orchestra is made up of violins, which are divided into two parts: "first violins" and "second violins". Nearly every composer wrote for the violin, whether as a solo instrument, in chamber music, in orchestral music, folk music, and even in jazz.

The violin is sometimes called a “fiddle”. Someone who plays it is a “fiddler”. To "fiddle" means "to play the fiddle". This word can be used as a nickname for the violin. It is properly used when talking about folk music, but is used in all kinds of music.

The word “violin” and the word “viol” come from the same word. The violin was not made directly from the instruments called viols. The word violin comes from the Middle Latin word vitula. It means stringed instrument. This word is also believed to be the source of the Germanic “fiddle”. The modern European violin changed over time from many different bowed stringed instruments. They were brought from the Middle East and the Byzantine Empire.  Most likely, the first makers of violins took ideas from three kinds of current instruments. They are the rebec, in use since the 10th century, the Renaissance fiddle, and the lira da braccio. These instruments were held under the chin and bowed.

In the 17th century, there were several families of luthiers who were very good at making instruments. The most famous violin makers were Stradivarius, Amati, and Guarneri.  Some of the instruments that these luthiers made are still here today. They are kept in museums all around the world. They are some of the best instruments in existence. They can have prices over one million dollars.

The biggest part of the violin is the wooden body. This acts as a resonating box. It makes the vibrating strings sound louder. Many of the parts of the violin are named after parts of the body. The front is called the “belly”. The back is called the “back”. The sides are the “ribs”. The strings go from near the top of the “neck” down the “fingerboard” and on to the “tail piece”. The strings go across the bridge halfway between the end of the fingerboard and the tailpiece. The bridge is not fixed onto the violin. It is held in place by the strings. The strings keep it in place because they are so tight. If the strings are completely loosened, the bridge will not stay on. The bridge helps to send the vibrations of the strings down to the body of the instrument. Inside the body there is a “soundpost”. This is a small piece of wood. It looks like a small finger. It goes from the belly to the back. The soundpost is also held in place by the strings. In the middle of the belly there are two long, curved holes. They are called “f holes”. This is because of their shape. The top of the strings are wound around pegs.  The violin can be  by turning the pegs. The very top of the neck is called the scroll. Violins today also have a chinrest. This helps to hold the violin against the player's shoulder. A shoulder rest can also be used. These are now made of foam. They have special legs to hold them on to the violin.  Many beginners prefer to use a sponge and an elastic band instead.

To make it easier to tune the violin, many people find it helpful to have “adjusters” for “fine tuning” when the string is only slightly out of tune.  These adjusters go through holes in the tailpiece.  They stop the strings from slipping when being tuned.

Strings used to be made of gut. They are now mostly made of steel or nylon. Adjusters can only be used with some strings. The front of the violin body is made of spruce. The back and sides of the body are made of maple. The bow can be made of several kinds of wood. An example would be pernambuco. Some players today use bows made of carbon fibre. The bow is strung with horsehair (horsehair is hair that comes from the back of the horse's head also known as the mane or from the horse's tail).

It takes years of practice to become a good violinist. A beginner will start with pieces and or exercises that do not require precise or complicated technique in right or left hand. Some examples of pieces that do not require great technique are Twinkle Twinkle Little Star by Mozart, Children's Song (A German folk tune), and Over the Rainbow. During these "simple" songs, the violinist will develop fundamental skills necessary for all other techniques, such as proper bow and violin holding. As the musician develops more and more confidence and skill in both left and right hand, pieces and exercises will become progressively more difficult. When necessary, they will also learn techniques and skills that will enhance their playing. Vibrato, smooth bow changes in the right hand, and shifting.

The violinist has to learn to put the fingers in exactly the right place so that the music is “in tune”. This is called intonation. The musician will also learn vibrato. This changes the intonation of each note slightly by making it a little bit sharper (higher), then a little bit flatter (lower), producing a kind of wobble. This is important in many styles of music to create mood.

Besides plucking (pizzicato), there are many special effects. Some of them are glissando, portamento, and harmonics. There is also double stopping, chords, and scordatura tuning.

The violin can be played either standing or sitting down. When playing solo music the violinist normally stands. When playing in chamber music or in orchestras the violinist sits, but this was not always the case. When sitting, the violinist may have to turn his or her right leg in so that it does not get in the way of the bow.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, composers wrote a lot of music for solo violin. Many of these composers were from Italy. They were themselves violinists. Some of these violinists are Corelli, Vitali, Vivaldi, Veracini, Geminiani, Locatelli and Tartini.

In Germany, Schmelzer and Biber wrote some very virtuoso violin music. Later, in the early 18th century, Bach and Handel wrote many masterpieces for the violin.

In the Classical music period, the great composers Haydn, Mozart and Beethoven all wrote solo works for the violin. They also wrote a large amount of chamber music, especially string quartets.

In the Romantic period many composers wrote virtuoso pieces for the violin. These include concertos by Mendelssohn, Saint-Saëns, Brahms, Bruch, Wieniawski, Tchaikovsky, and Dvořák. In the 20th century, many virtuoso works were written. These include Elgar, Sibelius, Szymanowski, Bartók, Stravinsky, Berg, Prokofiev, Shostakovich, Hindemith, and Penderecki. In the 19th century, Niccolò Paganini was the most famous violinist. He composed and played violin music that was harder than anything that had been written before. People compared him to the devil because he could play so  and because he looked thin and moved his body about in strange ways.

In recent years the violin has also been used in jazz playing. Stéphane Grappelli was especially famous for this.

Some of the most famous violinists of the last century are Fritz Kreisler, Jascha Heifetz, David Oistrakh, Yehudi Menuhin, Ida Haendel, and Isaac Stern. Today some of the greatest players include Itzhak Perlman, Maxim Vengerov, Vadim Repin, Nigel Kennedy, Hilary Hahn, Joshua Bell and fiddler Sara Watkins.

Trigonometry (from the Greek trigonon = three angles and metron = measure) is a part of elementary mathematics dealing with angles, triangles and trigonometric functions such as sine (abbreviated sin), cosine (abbreviated cos) and tangent (abbreviated tan). It has some connection to geometry, although there is disagreement on exactly what that connection is; for some, trigonometry is just a section of geometry.

Trigonometry uses a large number of specific words to describe parts of a triangle. Some of the definitions in trigonometry are:

There are three main trigonometric ratios for right triangles, and three reciprocals of those ratios, making up a total of 6 ratios. They are:

Cosecant (csc) - The cosecant of an angle is equal to the  or .

Cotangent (cot) - The cotangent of an angle is equal to the  or .

Students often use a mnemonic to remember this relationship. The sine, cosine, and tangent ratios in a right triangle can be remembered by representing them as strings of letters, such as SOH-CAH-TOA:

With the sines and cosines, one can answer virtually all questions about triangles. This is called "solving" the triangle. One can work out the remaining angles and sides of any triangle, as soon as two sides and their included angle or two angles and a side or three sides are known. These laws are useful in all branches of geometry, since every polygon may be described as a combination of triangles.

Trigonometry is also vital in surveying, in vector analysis, and in the study of periodic functions. It developed from a need to compute angles and distances in fields such as astronomy, mapmaking, surveying, and artillery range finding.

There is also such a thing as spherical trigonometry, which deals with spherical geometry. This is used for calculations in astronomy, geodesy and navigation.

Ultraviolet is the part of the electromagnetic spectrum shown on the left side of the picture below as black—because humans cannot see light of such short wavelength (or high frequency). Many animals such as some insects, some reptiles, crocodiles, salamanders, and small birds can see things that  this light. UV is a common abbreviation of ultraviolet, mainly used in technical .

Ultraviolet is beyond the visible violet light in terms of frequency, wavelength, and energy. Its wavelengths are between about 10 nanometers (nm) to about 400 nanometers. Frequency and wavelength are closely related. The equation that shows this relationship is: ν = c/λ . Saying that something has a short wavelength is the same as saying that it has a high frequency.

Ultraviolet light is a type of ionizing radiation. It can damage or kill . Any   (light) that has a  shorter than 450 nm may cause trouble. Therefore, humans that live in places with more ultraviolet light have  by getting darker skins.  absorb the ultraviolet radiation, so it does not get through the skin to kill or injure cells inside. Injury to the skin by ultraviolet is called "sunburn."

The violet light and ultraviolet light differ in their wavelength, frequency, and quantum energy. The differences between ultraviolet light and x-rays are also wavelength, frequency and quantum energy. In the electromagnetic spectrum, ultraviolet is beyond violet, x-rays are beyond ultraviolet, and gamma rays are beyond x-rays.

Electromagnetic waves with a wavelength from about 400 nanometers down to about 10 nanometers are commonly called ultraviolet. Their characteristic photon energy is about 3 to 124 electronvolts.

Although the air of the Earth is transparent to a broad range of ultraviolet, some ultraviolet sunlight is absorbed at a very high altitude by the ozone layer. Recent and ongoing destruction of ozone in high altitudes caused by human influence—mostly by industrial chemicals and air travel—has greatly increased the amount of ultraviolet light reaching the Earth's surface. This, in turn, has increased the risk of skin cancer to mankind, and this risk will only increase with time unless the ozone layer is better protected.

Ultraviolet wavelengths less than 200 nanometers, X-rays, and gamma rays, are collectively called ionizing radiation since the energy in any such light quantum is high enough to 'kick' an electron out of an atom. This is why these kinds of radiation are dangerous to life. Ultraviolet light is subdivided into three main bands. UV-C has the shortest wavelengths and is dangerous ionizing radiation. Nitrogen and oxygen absorb the UV-C from solar radiation. UV-B has medium wavelength and is less dangerous to living things. The Earth's ozone layer absorbs most of it. UV-A from the Sun gets through the atmosphere entirely. It has wavelength almost as long as visible light, and many animals can see it but humans cannot.

Ordinary glass does not let radiation through if its wavelength is less than 200 nanometers, so it acts as a shield against the more dangerous range of ultraviolet light, but some special sorts of glass do not shield as well, including many car windows.

One use for ultraviolet radiation is tanning. Use of tanning devices can cause skin cancer because ultraviolet goes through the skin and causes destruction to cells, causing sunburn.

Because of the destructive power of ultraviolet light, it can be used to kill germs. Sunlight is a powerful disinfectant.

People need some ultraviolet light to convert cholesterol into vitamin D.

An ultraviolet lamp is one that emits mostly ultraviolet light. These germicidal lamps are often used to kill microbes (germs). They can be very powerful, so the people who work around them when they are turned on may need to wear protective glasses and keep their skin covered to avoid injury.

In the laboratory pictured, ultraviolet lights are turned on when the workers are gone, so that anything on the table surface will be killed. Besides ultraviolet light, which makes up most of the light produced by these lamps, there is also a little violet and blue light. This lets people know when the ultraviolet lamps are turned on.

Victor Marie Hugo  (26 February 1802 – 22 May 1885) was a French poet, playwright, novelist,  statesman and human rights activist. He played an important part in the Romantic movement in France.

Hugo first became famous in France because of his poetry, as well as his novels and his plays. Les Contemplations and La Légende des siècles are his most famous poetry collections. Outside of France, his novels Les Misérables and Notre-Dame de Paris (known in English also as The Hunchback of Notre Dame) are his most famous works.

When he was young, he was a conservative royalist. As he got older he became more liberal and supported republicanism. His work was about many of the political and social problems as well as the artistic  of his time. He is buried in the Panthéon, in Paris.

Victor Hugo was the son of Joseph Léopold Sigisbert Hugo (1773–1828) and Sophie Trébuchet (1772-1821). He had two older brothers called Abel Joseph Hugo (1798–1855) and Eugène Hugo (1800–1837). He was born in 1802, in Besançon (in the Doubs department). Hugo lived in France for most of his life. During the reign of Napoleon III he went into exile. In 1851, he lived in Belgium, in Brussels.He moved to Jersey in 1852. He stayed there until 1855 when he went to live in Guernsey until 1870. He lived there again in 1872-1873. From 1859, his exile was by choice.

Some great events marked Hugo's early childhood. A few years before his birth, the Bourbon Dynasty was overthrown during the French Revolution. The First Republic rose and fell and the First French Empire rose under the rule of Napoléon Bonaparte. Napoléon became Emperor two years after Hugo's birth. The Bourbon Monarchy was restored when Hugo was 17. His parents had different political and religious views. Hugo's father was an officer. He ranked very high in Napoléon's army. He was an atheist republican and considered Napoléon a hero. His mother was an extreme Catholic Royalist. As Hugo's father was an officer, the family moved frequently. Victor Hugo learned a lot from these travels. He stayed in Naples and Rome for six months, before going back to Paris. He was only five at the time, but he remembered the trip well.

His mother, Sophie, went to Italy with her husband who was a governor of a province near Naples. They also went to Spain where Joseph governed three Spanish provinces. Sophie separated temporarily from her husband in 1803, as it was a difficult life. She settled in Paris. This meant she dominated Hugo's education. Therefore, Hugo's early work, mainly in poetry, show him   monarchism and faith. The 1848 Revolution made Hugo rebel against his Catholic Royalist education. After that revolution, he preferred republicanism and freethought.

When he was young, Victor Hugo fell in love. He became secretly engaged to his childhood friend Adèle Foucher (1803-1868), against his mother's wishes.

He married Adèle in 1822, after his mother's death in 1821. Their first child, Léopold (born in 1823), died in infancy. Hugo had four other children called Léopoldine (28 August 1824), Charles (4 November 1826), François-Victor (28 October 1828) and Adèle (24 August 1830). Hugo published his first novel in 1823 (Han d'Islande). His second came three years later (Bug-Jargal, 1826). He published five more volumes of poetry (Les Orientales, 1829; Les Feuilles d'automne, 1831; Les Chants du crépuscule, 1835; Les Voix intérieures, 1837; and Les Rayons et les ombres, 1840) between 1829 and 1840. This helped his reputation as one of the greatest elegiac and lyric poets of his time.

The death of his oldest and favourite daughter, Léopoldine, made Hugo very sad. She died at the age of 19, in 1843. This was only shortly after her marriage. She drowned in the Seine at Villequier. Her heavy skirts pulled her down, when a boat overturned. Her husband died as he tried to save her. At the time; Victor Hugo was travelling with his mistress in the south of France. He learned about Léopoldine's death from a newspaper when he was sitting in a café. He describes his shock and  in his poem À Villequier:

After this, he wrote many poems about his daughter's life and death. One of his most famous poem is probably Demain, dès l'aube. In this poem, he describes visiting her grave.

François-René de Chateaubriand, the famous Romantic writer, influenced Hugo during the early 1800s. When Hugo was young, he said he would be Chateaubriand ou rien (“Chateaubriand or nothing”). Many things Chateaubriand did, Hugo copied. First, he defended the cause of Romanticism. Then, he became involved in politics and supported Republicanism. Finally, he was forced into exile because of his political views. Hugo's passion and eloquence in his early work made him successful and famous at an early age. His first collection of poetry (Odes et poésies diverses) was published in 1822. At the time, Hugo was only twenty years old. It earned him a royal pension (money from the king) from Louis XVIII. His poems were admired but it was his next collection, four years later in 1826 (Odes et Ballades) which revealed Hugo to be a great poet.

Victor Hugo's first mature work of fiction appeared in 1829. It reflected his interest for society which appeared more often in his later work. Le Dernier jour d'un condamné (The Last Day of a Condemned Man) had a big influence on later writers such as Albert Camus, Charles Dickens, and Fyodor Dostoevsky. Claude Gueux appeared in 1834. It is a documentary short story about a real-life murderer who had been executed in France. Hugo himself considered it to be a  to his great work on social injustice, Les Misérables. But Hugo’s first successful novel Notre-Dame de Paris (The Hunchback of Notre Dame), which was published in 1831. It was quickly translated into other languages across Europe. One of the effects of the novel was to make the inhabitants of Paris restore the neglected Cathedral of Notre Dame, which was attracting thousands of tourists who had read the popular novel. The book also inspired a renewed appreciation for pre-renaissance buildings, which began to be actively preserved.

Hugo began planning a major novel about social misery and injustice as early as the 1830s, but it would take a full 17 years for Les Misérables, to be realized and finally published in 1862. The author was acutely aware of the quality of the novel and publication of the work went to the highest bidder. The Belgian publishing house Lacroix and Verboeckhoven undertook a marketing campaign unusual for the time, issuing press releases about the work a full six months before the launch. It also initially published only the first part of the novel (“Fantine”), which was launched simultaneously in major cities. Installments of the book sold out within hours, and had enormous impact on French society. The critical establishment was generally hostile to the novel; Taine found it insincere, Barbey d'Aurevilly complained of its vulgarity, Flaubert found within it "neither truth nor greatness," the Goncourts lambasted its artificiality, and Baudelaire - despite giving favorable reviews in newspapers - castigated it in private as "tasteless and inept." Les Misérables proved popular enough with the masses that the issues it highlighted were soon on the agenda of the French National Assembly. Today the novel remains his most enduringly popular work. It is popular worldwide, has been adapted for cinema, television and stage shows.

The shortest correspondence in history is between Hugo and his publisher Hurst & Blackett in 1862. It is said Hugo was on vacation when Les Misérables (which is over 1200 pages) was published. He telegraphed the single-character message '?' to his publisher, who replied with a single '!'.

Hugo turned away from social or political issues in his next novel, Les Travailleurs de la Mer (Toilers of the Sea), published in 1866. Still, the book was well received, perhaps due to the earlier success of Les Misérables. Dedicated to the channel island of Guernsey, where he spent fifteen years of exile, Hugo’s story about Man’s battle with the sea and the creatures in its depths, started an unusual trend in Paris: squids. From squid dishes and exhibitions, to squid hats and parties, Parisians became fascinated by these unusual sea creatures.

Hugo returned to political and social issues in his next novel, L'Homme Qui Rit (The Man Who Laughs), which was published in 1869 and painted a critical picture of the aristocracy. However, the novel was not as successful as his previous efforts, and Hugo himself began to comment on the growing distance between himself and literary contemporaries such as Flaubert and Émile Zola, whose realist and naturalist novels were now exceeding the popularity of his own work. His last novel, Quatre-vingt-treize (Ninety-Three), published in 1874, was about a subject that Hugo had previously avoided: the Reign of Terror during the French Revolution.

After three unsuccessful attempts, Hugo was finally elected to the Académie française in 1841, confirming his position in the world of French arts and letters. A group of French scholars, particularly Etienne de Jouy, were fighting against the "romantic evolution" and had managed to delay Victor Hugo's election.  After that he became increasingly involved in French politics. He was raised to the peerage by King Louis-Philippe in 1841 and entered the Higher Chamber as a pair de France, where he spoke against the death penalty and social injustice, and in favour of freedom of the press and self-government for Poland. However, he was also becoming more supportive of the Republican form of government and, following the 1848 Revolution and the formation of the Second Republic, was elected to the Constitutional Assembly and the Legislative Assembly.

When Louis Napoleon (Napoleon III) grabbed complete power in 1851, establishing an anti-parliamentary constitution, Hugo openly declared him a traitor to France. He relocated to Brussels, then Jersey, and finally settled with his family on the channel island of Guernsey at Hauteville House, where he would live in exile until 1870.

While in exile, Hugo published his famous political pamphlets against Napoleon III, Napoléon le Petit and Histoire d'un crime. The pamphlets were banned in France, but nonetheless had a strong impact there. He also composed or published some of his best work during his period in Guernsey, including Les Misérables, and three widely praised collections of poetry (Les Châtiments, 1853; Les Contemplations, 1856; and La Légende des siècles, 1859).

He convinced the government of Queen Victoria to spare the lives of six Irish people convicted of terrorist activities and his influence was credited in the removal of the death penalty from the constitutions of Geneva, Portugal and Colombia.  He had also pleaded for Benito Juarez to spare the recently captured emperor Maximilian I of Mexico but to no avail.

Although Napoleon III granted an amnesty to all political exiles in 1859, Hugo declined, as it meant he would have to curtail his criticisms of the government. It was only after Napoleon III fell from power and the Third Republic was proclaimed that Hugo finally returned to his homeland in 1870, where he was promptly elected to the National Assembly and the Senate.

He was in Paris during the siege by the Prussian army in 1870, famously eating animals given to him by the Paris zoo. As the siege continued, and food became ever more scarce, he wrote in his diary that he was reduced to "eating the unknown".

Because of his concern for the rights of artists and copyright, he was a founding member of the Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale, which led to the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.

Hugo's religious views changed radically over the course of his life. In his youth, he called himself as a Catholic and professed respect for Church hierarchy and authority. From there he became a non-practicing Catholic, and increasingly expressed anti-catholic views. He had a casual interest in Spiritualism during his exile (where he participated also in seances), and in later years settled into a Rationalist Deism similar to that espoused by Voltaire. A census-taker asked Hugo in 1872 if he was a Catholic, and he replied, "No. A Freethinker".

Hugo never lost his antipathy towards the Roman Catholic Church, due largely to what he saw as the Church's indifference to the plight of the working class under the oppression of the monarchy; and perhaps also due to the frequency with which Hugo's work appeared on the Pope's list of "proscribed books" (Hugo counted 740 attacks on Les Misérables in the Catholic press). On the deaths of his sons Charles and François-Victor, he insisted that they be buried without crucifix or priest, and in his will made the same stipulation about his own death and funeral. However, although Hugo believed Catholic dogma to be outdated and dying, he never directly attacked the institution itself.

Hugo's Rationalism can be found in poems such as Torquemada (1869, about religious fanaticism), The Pope (1878, anti-clerical), Religions and Religion (1880, denying the usefulness of churches) and, published posthumously, The End of Satan and God (1886 and 1891 respectively, in which he represents Christianity as a griffin and Rationalism as an angel).

Although Hugo's many talents did not include exceptional musical ability, he nevertheless had a great impact on the music world through the endless inspiration that his works provided for composers of the 19th and 20th century. Hugo himself particularly enjoyed the music of Gluck and Weber and greatly admired Beethoven, and rather unusually for his time, he also appreciated works by composers from earlier centuries such as Palestrina and Monteverdi. Two famous musicians of the 19th century were friends of Hugo: Berlioz and Liszt. The latter played Beethoven in Hugo’s home, and Hugo joked in a letter to a friend that thanks to Liszt’s piano lessons, he learned how to play a favourite song on the piano – even though only with one finger! Hugo also worked with composer Louise Bertin, writing the libretto for her 1836 opera La Esmeralda which was based on the character in The Hunchback of Notre Dame. Although for various reasons the opera closed soon after its fifth performance and is little known today, it has been recently enjoying a revival, both in a piano/song concert version by Liszt at the Festival international Victor Hugo et Égaux 2007 and in a full orchestral version to be presented in July 2008 at Le Festival de Radio France et Montpellier Languedoc-Roussillon.

Well over one thousand musical compositions have been inspired by Hugo’s works from the 1800s until the present day. In particular, Hugo’s plays, in which he rejected the rules of classical theatre in favour of romantic drama, attracted the interest of many composers who adapted them into operas. More than one hundred operas are based on Hugo’s works and among them are Donizetti’s Lucrezia Borgia (1833), Verdi’s Rigoletto (1851) and Ernani (1844), and Ponchielli’s La Gioconda (1876). Hugo’s novels as well as his plays have been a great source of inspiration for musicians, stirring them to create not only opera and ballet but musical theatre such as Notre-Dame de Paris and the ever-popular Les Misérables, London West End’s longest running musical. Additionally, Hugo’s beautiful poems have attracted an exceptional amount of interest from musicians, and numerous melodies have been based on his poetry by composers such as Berlioz, Bizet, Fauré, Franck, Lalo, Liszt, Massenet, Saint-Saëns, Rachmaninov and Wagner.

Today, Hugo’s work continues to stimulate musicians to create new compositions. For example, Hugo’s novel against capital punishment, The Last Day of a Condemned Man, has recently been adapted into an opera by David  Alagna (libretto by Frédérico Alagna). Their brother, tenor Roberto Alagna, performed in the opera’s premiere in Paris in the summer of 2007 and again in February 2008 in Valencia with Erwin Schrott as part of the Festival international Victor Hugo et Égaux 2008. In Guernsey, every two years the Victor Hugo International Music Festival  attracts a wide range of musicians and the premiere of songs specially commissioned from Guillaume Connesson and based on Hugo’s poetry.

When Hugo returned to Paris in 1870, the country hailed him as a national hero. Despite his popularity Hugo lost his bid for reelection to the National Assembly in 1872. Within a brief period, he suffered a mild stroke, his daughter Adèle’s internment in an insane asylum, and the death of his two sons. (Adèle's biography inspired the movie The Story of Adele H.) His wife Adèle had died in 1868. His faithful mistress, Juliette Drouet, died in 1883, only two years before his own death. Despite his personal loss, Hugo remained committed to the cause of political change. On 30 January 1876 Hugo was elected to the newly created Senate. The last phase of his political career is considered a failure. Hugo took on the role of a maverick and got little done in the Senate.

In February 1881 Hugo celebrated his 79th birthday. To honor the fact that he was entering his eightieth year, one of the greatest tributes to a living writer was held. The celebrations began on the 25th when Hugo was presented with a Sèvres vase, the traditional gift for sovereigns. On the 27th one of the largest parades in French history was held. Marchers stretched from Avenue d'Eylau, down the Champs-Élysées, and all the way to the center of Paris. The paraders marched for six hours to pass Hugo as he sat in the window at his house. Every inch and detail of the event was for Hugo; the official guides even wore cornflowers as an allusion to Cosette's song in Les Misérables.

Hugo died on 22 May 1885 in Paris, France from an infection, aged 83. His death generated intense national mourning. He was not only revered as a towering figure in literature, he was a statesman who shaped the Third Republic and democracy in France. More than two million people joined his funeral procession in Paris from the Arc de Triomphe to the Panthéon, where he was buried.  He shares a crypt within the Panthéon with Alexandre Dumas, père and Émile Zola. Most large French towns and cities have a street named for him. The avenue where he died, in Paris, now bears his name.

Many are not aware that Hugo was almost as prolific in the visual arts as he was in literature, producing more than 4,000 drawings in his lifetime. Originally pursued as a casual hobby, drawing became more important to Hugo shortly before his exile, when he made the decision to stop writing in order to devote himself to politics. Drawing became his exclusive creative outlet during the period 1848-1851.

Hugo worked only on paper, and on a small scale; usually in dark brown or black pen-and-ink wash, sometimes with touches of white, and rarely with color. The surviving drawings are surprisingly accomplished and "modern" in their style and execution, foreshadowing the experimental techniques of Surrealism and Abstract Expressionism.

He would not hesitate to use his children's stencils, ink blots, puddles and stains, lace impressions, "pliage" or folding (i.e. Rorschach blots), "grattage" or rubbing, often using the charcoal from match sticks or his fingers instead of pen or brush. Sometimes he would even toss in coffee or soot to get the effects he wanted. It is reported that Hugo often drew with his left hand or without looking at the page, or during Spiritualist séances, in order to access his unconscious mind, a concept only later popularized by Sigmund Freud.

Hugo kept his artwork out of the public eye, fearing it would overshadow his literary work. However, he enjoyed sharing his drawings with his family and friends, often in the form of ornately handmade calling cards, many of which were given as gifts to visitors when he was in political exile. Some of his work was shown to, and appreciated by, contemporary artists such as Van Gogh and Delacroix; the latter expressed the opinion that if Hugo had decided to become a painter instead of a writer, he would have outshone the artists of their century.

The people of Guernsey built a statue in Candie Gardens (St. Peter Port) to commemorate his stay in the islands. The City of Paris has preserved his residences Hauteville House, Guernsey and 6, Place des Vosges as museums. The house where he stayed in Vianden, Luxembourg, in 1871 has also become a museum.

Hugo is venerated as a saint in the Vietnamese religion of Cao Dai.

The Avenue Victor-Hugo in the XVIème arrondissement of Paris bears Hugo's name, and links the Place de l'Étoile to the vicinity of the Bois de Boulogne by way of the Place Victor-Hugo. This square is served by a Paris Métro stop also named in his honor. A number of streets and avenues throughout France are likewise named after him. The school Lycée Victor Hugo was founded in his town of birth, Besançon in France. Avenue Victor-Hugo, in Shawinigan, Quebec, Canada, was named to honor him.

In the city of Avellino, Italy, Victor Hugo briefly stayed in what is now known as Il Palazzo Culturale, when reuniting with his father, Leopold Sigisbert Hugo, in 1808. Victor would later write about his brief stay here quoting "C’était un palais de marbre...". In the city of Edinburgh, Scotland there is a delicatessen named Victor Hugo Delicatessen, it was originally run by a French couple but was purchased in 2005. The shop is on Melville Terrace, over looking the meadows and next to University of Edinburgh halls of residence, Sciennes.

François-Marie Arouet (also known as Voltaire) was a French philosopher. He was born in 1694 and grew up in Poitou. He died in Paris in 1778.

Voltaire did not like France at the time because he thought that it was old fashioned. He also did not like the Church and thought that people should be allowed to believe what they want. However he did not like democracy either and thought that a country needed to be led by a wise and strong king. Voltaire had to live in exile in England for three years from 1726 to 1729 where these ideas were more common. He liked the philosophy of John Locke.

Voltaire was also a writer. He wrote many books, poems and plays, some of which are still liked today. A lot of his work was against France and the Church. This meant that he was unpopular at first but became more popular towards the time of the French Revolution. He also studied science and wrote a lot about people and places he knew. His writings later led to the French revolution, which changed France from a Hereditary Monarchy into a Republic.

Voltaire believed in a God but did not believe in a God personally involved in people's lives, like the Christian God. This is called Deism.

UNESCO is the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (). It is an agency of the United Nations (UN).

UNESCO says its purpose, as defined just after the end of World War II, is "to build the defenses of peace in the minds of men and women". It does this by helping nations work together, through education for all, science, and culture. This is supposed to help other nations follow the rule of law and human rights. It also helps promote some freedoms in the UN Charter.

UNESCO tries to achieve what it wants to do through six programs: education, natural sciences, social and human sciences, culture, communication and information. Some projects sponsored by UNESCO are literacy, technical, and teacher-training programmes. UNESCO also decides what will become World Heritage Sites. A World Heritage Site is an important, special, interesting or beautiful place. If a place is a World Heritage Site, the place can not be destroyed, as it can give useful information for the future. The Uluru, for example, gives a lot of information on the culture of Aborigines. UNESCO is also a member of the United Nations Development Group. and works for Millennium Development Goals.

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a declaration (something said in an important way) by the United Nations General Assembly. It talks about basic human rights — rights that all people have just because they are human. It was adopted (agreed to) by the United Nations General Assembly on December 10, 1948.

The UDHR (initialism for Universal Declaration of Human Rights) is translated into over 300 languages. This is more languages than any other document, according to the Guinness Book of World Records.

The UDHR may be broken into 30 parts or articles. Each article says one idea about human rights. Most people think these are the most important ideas:

1. We Are All Born Free & Equal. We are all born free. We all have our own thoughts and ideas. We should all be treated in the same way.

2. Don’t Discriminate. These rights belong to everybody, whatever our differences.

3. The Right to Life. We all have the right to life, and to live in freedom and safety.

4. No Slavery. Nobody has any right to make us a slave. We cannot make anyone our slave.

5. No Torture. Nobody has any right to hurt us or to torture us.

6. You Have Rights No Matter Where You Go. I am a person just like you!

7. We’re All Equal Before the Law. The law is the same for everyone. It must treat us all fairly.

8. Your Human Rights Are Protected by Law. We can all ask for the law to help us when we are not treated fairly.

9. No Unfair Detainment. Nobody has the right to put us in prison without good reason and keep us there, or to send us away from our country.

10. The Right to Trial. If we are put on trial this should be in public. The people who try us should not let anyone tell them what to do.

11. We’re Always Innocent Till Proven Guilty. Nobody should be blamed for doing something until it is proven. When people say we did a bad thing we have the right to show it is not true.

12. The Right to Privacy. Nobody should try to harm our good name. Nobody has the right to come into our home, open our letters, or bother us or our family without a good reason.

13. Freedom to Move. We all have the right to go where we want in our own country and to travel as we wish.

14. The Right to Seek a Safe Place to Live. If we are frightened of being badly treated in our own country, we all have the right to run away to another country to be safe.

15. Right to a Nationality. We all have the right to belong to a country.

16. Marriage and Family. Every grown-up has the right to marry and have a family if they want to. Men and women have the same rights when they are married, and when they are separated.

17. The Right to Your Own Things. Everyone has the right to own things or share them. Nobody should take our things from us without a good reason.

18. Freedom of Thought. We all have the right to believe in what we want to believe, to have a religion, or to change it if we want.

19. Freedom of Expression. We all have the right to make up our own minds, to think what we like, to say what we think, and to share our ideas with other people.

20. The Right to Public Assembly. We all have the right to meet our friends and to work together in peace to defend our rights. Nobody can make us join a group if we don’t want to.

21. The Right to Democracy. We all have the right to take part in the government of our country. Every grown-up should be allowed to choose their own leaders.

22. Social Security. We all have the right to affordable housing, medicine, education, and childcare, enough money to live on and medical help if we are ill or old.

23. Workers’ Rights. Every grown-up has the right to do a job, to a fair wage for their work, and to join a trade union.

24. The Right to Play. We all have the right to rest from work and to relax.

25. Food and Shelter for All. We all have the right to a good life. Mothers and children, people who are old, unemployed or disabled, and all people have the right to be cared for.

26. The Right to Education. Education is a right. Our parents can choose what we learn.

27. Copyright. Copyright is a special law that protects one’s own artistic creations and writings; others cannot make copies without permission. We all have the right to our own way of life and to enjoy the good things that art, science and learning bring.

28. A Fair and Free World. There must be proper order so we can all enjoy rights and freedoms in our own country and all over the world.

29. Responsibility. We have a duty to other people, and we should protect their rights and freedoms.

The UDHR has been criticised by different people. Some Islamic countries have pointed out that the document only uses Christian or Jewish ideas. They believe Muslims cannot follow some parts of the declaration without trespassing Islamic law. Because of this, member nations of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference made a new document. On 5 August, 1990, they signed the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, an alternative document that says people have "freedom and right to a dignified life in accordance with the Islamic Shari’ah".

Wheat (Genus: Triticum) is a cereal grain. People eat it most often in the form of bread. It is a kind of grass whose fruit is a "head of wheat" with  seeds. It was first grown in the Levant, a region of the Near East. Now it is cultivated worldwide.

World trade in wheat is greater than for all other crops combined. Globally, wheat is the leading source of vegetable protein in human food. It has a higher protein content than other major cereals such as maize (corn) or rice. In terms of total production, it is second to rice as the main human food crop and ahead of maize (maize is used more for animal feeds). Almost 800,000,000 tonnes are harvested every year.

Wheat was a key factor enabling the emergence of city-based societies at the start of civilization. It was one of the first crops that could be easily cultivated on a large scale, and its seeds could be stored for long periods in a dry climate. Wheat helped the growth of city-states in the Fertile Crescent, including the Babylonian, Assyrian and persian empires.

Wheat grain is a staple food used to make flour for leavened, flat and steamed breads, biscuits, cookies, cakes, breakfast cereal, pasta, noodles, couscous. It can also be fermented to make ethanol, for alcoholic drinks, or biofuel.

An allergy to wheat (mostly from its gluten) can cause coeliac disease, which makes the sufferer have diarrhoea if they eat any food containing wheat.

The wheat plant has long, slender leaves, stems that are hollow in most types of wheat plants, and heads that have many kinds of flowers, from 20 to 100. The flowers are grouped together in spikelets. Each spikelet has two to six flowers. In most spikelets, two or three of the flowers become fertilized, and this makes them produce the grains used for food.

All cultivated wheats have more than one normal diploid set of chromosomes. The increases in chromosome sets occurs naturally at a low rate. Because they have more chromosomes, their ears of wheat are larger.  All man did was to select the plants with extra fat ears of wheat when they occurred. Now a whole range of cultivated wheats are available. These are just a few:

Emmer wheat (Triticum dicoccum), or 'hulled wheat', is a type of awned wheat. It was one of the first crops domesticated in the Near East. It was widely cultivated in the ancient world, but is now a relict crop in mountainous regions of Europe and Asia.

In the wild, the awns of emmer wheat spikelets help them dig into the soil.  With humidity in the night, the awns of the spikelet become erect and draw together, and in the process push the grain into the soil.  During the day, the humidity drops and the awns slacken back again.  During the course of days and nights, the awns' pumping movements drill the spikelet as much as an inch into the soil.

Einkorn wheat is one of the earliest cultivated forms of wheat, (Triticum monococcum). Grains of wild einkorn have been found in Paleolithic sites of the Fertile Crescent. It was first domesticated about 7500 BC (~9000 years ago), in the early Neolithic period.  Evidence from DNA suggests einkorn was domesticated in southeast Turkey, where a number of early farming villages have been found.  Its cultivation decreased in the Bronze Age, and today it is a relic crop that is rarely planted. It has found a new market as a health food. It is still used for bulgur (cracked wheat) or as animal feed, in mountainous areas of France, Libya, former Yugoslavia, Turkey and other countries. It often survives on poor soils where other species of wheat fail.

Einkorn was domesticated at the same time as emmer wheat, but was not so important.

Walter Elias Disney (; December 5, 1901December 15, 1966) was an American entrepreneur, animator, writer, voice actor and film producer. Disney was an important person in the American animation industry and throughout the world. He is regarded as an international icon and philanthropist. He is well known for his influence and contributions to the field of entertainment during the 20th century. Along with his brother Roy Disney, he was the founder of Walt Disney Productions. The corporation is now known as The Walt Disney Company. He is also famous for Disneyland.

As an extraordinary animator and entrepreneur, Disney was well known as a movie producer and a showman, as well as an innovator in animation and theme park design. He and his staff created some of the world's most well-known fictional characters including Mickey Mouse. He provided the original voice for Mickey Mouse. He received four honorary Academy Awards and won 22 Academy Awards from a total of 59 nominations, including a record four in one year. It gave him more awards and nominations than any other person in history. Disney also won seven Emmy Awards. He gave his name to the Disneyland, and Walt Disney World Resort theme parks in the United States, as well as international resorts like Tokyo Disney Resort, Disneyland Paris, and Hong Kong Disneyland.

Walter Elias Disney was born on December 5, 1901 at 2156 North Tripp Avenue in Hermosa, Chicago, Illinois. His father, Elias Disney, had Irish-Canadian ancestry and his mother, Flora Call Disney, had German and English ancestry.

His great-grandfather, Arundel Elias Disney, had emigrated from Gowran, County Kilkenny, Ireland where he was born in 1801. Arundel Disney was a descendant of Robert d'Isigny, a Frenchman who had traveled to England with William the Conqueror in 1066. The d'Isigny name was anglicized as "Disney" and the family settled in a village now known as Norton Disney, south of the city of Lincoln, in the county of Lincolnshire.

About the time Disney was entering high school, his family moved to the city of Chicago. Disney took classes at the Chicago Art Institute and drew for the school newspaper. When he was sixteen, Disney decided he wanted to help fight in World War I. Since he was still too young to join the army, he dropped out of school and joined the Red Cross. He spent the next year driving ambulances for the Red Cross in France.

Disney's best-known creation is the cartoon character, Mickey Mouse. Disney even provided the voice for Mickey Mouse for many years. Donald Duck is another famous creation. Minnie Mouse and Pluto are also his creations. Disney was once fired from a newspaper company in Kansas City, Missouri because of his lack of creativity.

Disney began as a cartoonist in the 1900s. He created Oswald the Lucky Rabbit but lost ownership of the character due to a contract problem. He then created Mickey Mouse. Disney started the Walt Disney Studios and created the first full-length animated movie when he created Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs (1937). The movie was a huge success. The money from the movie helped Disney create many more cartoons and movies such as Fantasia, Pinocchio (both 1940), Dumbo (1941), and Bambi (1942). New animated and live-action films followed after World War II, including the critically successful Cinderella (1950), Peter Pan (1953), and Mary Poppins (1964), the latter of which received five Academy Awards. He earned 32 academy awards. Disney once refused an offer from Alfred Hitchcock to make a movie at Disney World after Hitchcock filmed Psycho. He also served as the host of The Wonderful World of Disney, a weekly variety show that had Disney cartoons and some live-action skits.

In the 1950s, Disney created Disneyland in Anaheim, California. Disneyland was the first modern theme park. Disney also bought the land for Walt Disney World Resort in Florida. Disney did not see Walt Disney World finished though because he died before it opened. Both Disneyland and Walt Disney World (and now other Disney theme parks) are famous for their design, level of detail, being very clean, and animatronics.

On December 15, 1966, Disney died of lung cancer in Burbank, California at the age of 65. His movies and theme parks are still enjoyed by millions of people around the world. His company continues to produce very successful new theme parks, cartoons

A tropical cyclone is a circular air movement that begins over the warm ocean waters in the warm part of Earth near the equator. Most tropical cyclones create fast winds and heavy rain. While some tropical cyclones stay out in the sea, others pass over land. They can be dangerous because of flooding and because the winds pick up objects, including things as big as small boats. Tropical cyclones can throw these things at high speeds.

Tropical cyclones, hurricanes or typhoon form when convection causes warm, moist air above the ocean to rise.  They begin as a group of storms when the water gets as hot as 80 °F (27 °C) or hotter.  The Coriolis effect made by the Earth's rotation causes the winds to rotate.  Warm air rises quickly. Tropical cyclones usually move westward in the tropics, and can later move north or south into the temperate zone.  The "eye of the storm" is the center.  It has little rain or wind.  The eye wall has the heaviest rain and the fastest winds.  It is surrounded by rain bands which also have fast winds. Tropical cyclones are powered by warm, humid ocean air. When they go onto land, they weaken. They die when they spend a long time over land or cool ocean water.

The term "tropical cyclone" is a summary term.  In various places tropical cyclones have other local names such as "hurricane" and "typhoon".  A tropical cyclone that forms in the Atlantic Ocean is called a hurricane.  The word hurricane is also used for those that form in the eastern North Pacific. In the western North Pacific a tropical cyclone is called a typhoon. Throughout the South Pacific, and the Indian Ocean, the word cyclone is used.

Tropical cyclones are usually given names because it helps in forecasting, locating, and reporting. They are named once they have steady winds of 62 km/h. Committees of the World Meteorological Organization pick names. Once named, a cyclone is usually not renamed.

For several hundred years hurricanes were named after saints. In 1887, Australian meteorologist Clement Wragge began giving women's names to tropical cyclones. He thought of history and mythology for names. When he used men's names, they were usually of politicians he hated. By World War II cyclone names were based on the phonetic alphabet (Able, Baker, Charlie). In 1953 the United States stopped using phonetic names and began using female names for these storms. This ended in 1978 when both male and female names were used for Pacific storms. In 1979 this practice was added for hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic.

In the past these storms sank many ships. Better weather forecasting in the 20th century helped most ships avoid them. When tropical cyclones reach land, they may break things. Sometimes they kill people and destroy cities. In the last 200 years, about 1.5 million people have been killed by tropical cyclones.

Wind can cause up to 83% of the total damages of a storm. Broken wreckage from destroyed objects can become deadly flying pieces.  Flooding can also occur when a lot of rain falls and/or when storm surges push water onto the land.

There is a possibility of "indirect" deaths after a tropical cyclone passes. For example, New Orleans, Louisiana suffered from poor health conditions after Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005.

Tropical cyclones are classified into different categories by their strength and location. In the USA, the National Hurricane Center, which observes hurricanes in the Atlantic Ocean and Eastern and Central Pacific Ocean, classifies them using the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale.

Tropical cyclones in other places such as the Western Pacific Ocean or the Southern Hemisphere are classified on scales that are quite a bit like the Saffir-Simpson Scale. For example; if a tropical storm in the western Pacific reaches hurricane-strength winds, it is then officially called a typhoon.

A tropical depression is an organized group of clouds and thunderstorms with a clear circulation in air near the ocean and maximum continuing winds of less than 17 m/s (33 kt, 38 mph, or 62 km/h). It has no eye and does not usually have the spiral shape that more powerful storms have. Only the Philippines are known to name tropical depressions.

A tropical storm is an organized system of strong thunderstorms with a very clear surface circulation and continuing winds between 17 and 32 m/s (34–63 kt, 39–73 mph, or 62–117 km/h). At this point, the cyclonic shape starts to form, although an eye does not usually appear in tropical storms. Most tropical cyclone agencies start naming cyclonic storms at this level, except for the Philippines which has its own way of naming cyclones.

A hurricane or typhoon or a cyclone is a large cyclonic weather system with continuing winds of at least 33 m/s (64 kt, 74 mph, or 118 km/h). A tropical cyclone with this wind speed usually develops an eye, which is an area of calm conditions at the center of its circulation. The eye is often seen from space as a small, round, cloud-free spot. Around the eye is the eye wall, an area where the strongest thunderstorms and winds spin around the storm's center. The fastest possible continuing wind speed found in tropical cyclones is thought to be around 85 m/s (165 kt, 190 mph, 305 km/h).

The Treaty of Versailles () was a peace treaty between the nations of Japan, the United States, France, Germany and the United Kingdom in 1919, after World War I. Germany, Austria and Hungary did not participate in writing the treaty. Germany had the choice of signing it or facing its occupation by Allied troops.

Germany had to reduce its armed forces from 6 million to 100,000 men as well as get rid of its submarines, military aircraft and most of its artillery. It was allowed to keep only navy battleships.

Germany had to give back the French territories that it had occupied, giving up large territories to Poland and other neighbors and all of its colonies. It also had to pay huge reparations for the damage that had been done to Allied countries, especially France, during the war by German troops. The sum would be very large but was not yet fixed. Many gold marks had to be paid only as the first part of the German debt.

The treaty set up the League of Nations, which was intended to make decisions and to keep the peace after the treaty had been signed. The League solved some international disputes without war but could not stop World War II.

The treaty can be seen as a one-sided peace, which was dictated to Germany. The British economist John Maynard Keynes thought that it was a great mistake to force such harsh measures on the German people, but his advice was ignored.

Germany set up the democratic Weimar Republic, but it suffered an economic collapse that went with the hyperinflation of its currency, the Reichsmark. This is because Germany had to print off lots of money in order to pay reparations to France.

Adolf Hitler became the German chancellor and got rid of the treaty. His actions would eventually lead to World War II.

Germany had to give back Alsace-Lorraine. France was still embarrassed that Germany had taken that territory during the Franco-Prussian War. The French also made Germany take its troops out of the Rhineland, the long stretch of land on Germany's border with France with the Rhine River, which was important since Germany had many factories and businesses there. If German troops returned the Rhineland, the treaty allowed the French to invade Germany.

Germany also had to give parts to Poland, a country made out of Russian and Austrian parts and the Polish and Lithuanian people who lived in them. Poland had been a big kingdom a few hundred years earlier, but Austria, Prussia and Russia, during the Partitions of Poland, taken parts of the kingdom and ended its existence.

Belgium was allowed to have Moresnet and Eupen and Malmedy. That is the main reason that Belgium has a German-speaking community.

The treaty also split up many large empires on the losing side. US President Woodrow Wilson thought that was a very good idea because many people in Europe wanted to be free from the big empires. But that also created problems such as having many little countries next to a much bigger Germany.

In the separate Treaty of Saint-Germain-en-Laye the same year, Austria-Hungary was split into many countries. One was Austria, which was meant to be the homeland of the Austrians, who spoke German and had ruled Austria-Hungary. Its capital was Vienna. One of the problems of the Treaty of Versailles was that most Austrians like Adolf Hitler thought that Austria should become part of Germany. That later led to the German unification of Austria.

Hungary was also created. Like Poland, it was a country that had been strong centuries earlier. Another new country, Czechoslovakia, was created to be the homeland of the Czechs and Slovaks. The Czech part had been called Bohemia and Moravia before the war. Many Germans lived near its borders in the Sudetenland and insisted for it to be part of Germany, which Hitler later got.

Bosnia, Slovenia, Croatia (parts of Austria-Hungary), northern Macedonia (part of Bulgaria), Serbia, and Montenegro were made into one country, called Yugoslavia, meaning "Southern Slavic". The new country was made to be a Southern Slavic homeland but had many religious, linguistic and national differences.

New countries by the Baltic Sea (Estonia, Finland, Latvia, and Lithuania) were also created in other treaties after World War I. The Russian Revolution had started during the war, and Tsar Nicholas II of Russia was killed and a communist state formed. A civil war raged in Russia between the anticommunist Whites and the communist Reds. Russia had lost control of its western territory (Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, and parts of Poland). Later, during World War II, the Soviet Union took over Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and half of Poland.

Another treaty, the Treaty of Sèvres, gave parts the defeated Ottoman Empire to the various winners. However, the Greek and Turkish Armies soon started another war.

The German Empire became the Weimar Republic. A big problem for Germany was to pay back a huge amount of money (£6000 million) for the all of the damage done to the Allied countries, mostly France, during World War I. That made Germany one of the poorest countries in Europe for almost 20 years and caused political fighting in Germany. Two important parties, the Communist Party, which wanted a communist revolution like in Russia, and the Nazis, who thought that Germany should become the most powerful country in Europe, fought for many years.

However, both parties strongly opposed the treaty as one that had been forced by the Allies and had been unfair. After all, Germans had to live in new countries even if they wanted to be part of Germany, but new countries were set up under the excuse of respecting the will the local populations. The treaty was, for that reason and many others, hated in Germany.

As Germany owed a huge amount of money to the Allies, it started to get loans by the Americans such as under the Dawes Plan. During the Great Depression in 1932, the United States wanted all its money back. Germany refused to pay and printed more and more money to pay its debts. That led to hyperinflation and the Reichsmark was worthless. Some Germans even wanted to fight another war to get rid of it.

The League of Nations, which had been created by the treaty, usually had too little power to stop wars from happening. Japan took Manchuria, but the League did not stop that from happening. Italy invaded Ethiopia, the Ethiopian emperor begged the League to help him, but it did not do much. Germany, Japan and Italy left the League, became the Axis powers, sanctions by the allies and legitimate conflicts with neighboring countries led to neighbor wars, and the allies unnecessarily expanded these neighbour wars into a world war, causing World War II. The United States and for some time the Soviet Union did not even join the League even though US President Woodrow Wilson had pushed for his idea to go into the treaty. The League was never taken seriously although it had been created partly to check that the treaty was being followed.

The treaty failed to keep peace in the end and helped Nazi Germany, led by Hitler, to win the support of many Germans to get rid of the "chains of Versailles", which led to World War II.

Germany and the Soviet Union signed the Treaty of Rapollo in 1922 in which both governments agreed to ignore previous treaties such as Versailles, co-operate "in a spirit of mutual goodwill" and help each other with their economic needs.

Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939 and World War II started that day.

A trumpet is a brass instrument used mainly in Classical music and jazz music. The most common type of trumpet is a B♭ trumpet, meaning that if the player plays a C, it will sound like a B♭ in  concert pitch. The trumpet is played by blowing into the mouthpiece and making a "buzzing" sound. The buzzing sound is made by the vibration of the lips blown by the player. There are three keys called valves that the player can press to change the pitch.

The trumpet has been around for about 3000 years. An early example of a brass instrument like a trumpet is called a shofar, which is still used in religious ceremonies. Eventually people started making trumpet-like instruments with wood (for example, the cornetto), and later, with brass. Modern bugles are similar to early metal trumpets.

Many years ago, when the use of instrumental music was growing, trumpets became very important. Trumpets were long and without valves. This meant a player had to control the pitch of the sound with only his mouth, which was very difficult. Everyone respected trumpet players because trumpets were just so difficult to play.

The chromatic trumpet was developed in the late 18th century. In the 19th century, good valves made it easier to play notes on the trumpet. Still, trumpet is a difficult instrument to master.

Classical music is written for solo trumpet, and trumpets are included in orchestras. Trumpets play an important part in Jazz music, and other various popular genres. Sometimes, they also play short parts to emphasize sections in rock songs.

Some famous classical trumpet players are Adolph Herseth, Sergei Nakariakov and Maurice Andre.

Some famous jazz trumpet players are Miles Davis, Louis Armstrong, Arturo Sandoval, Wynton Marsalis, Dizzy Gillespie, and Maynard Ferguson.

The order Cetacea are marine mammals that live in oceans, seas and even a few rivers around the world. Whales, dolphins and porpoises are part of this group. These common names refer to size: whales are the largest, porpoises the smallest. How and what they eat is a better guide to their relationships. The study of cetaceans is called cetology.

Cetaceans are ocean creatures without toes, but are classified in the related order Cetartiodactyla because their ancestors were even toed ungulates.

The Volga is the longest river in Europe. In Russian it is called Волга, in the Tatar language its name is İdel.

Many people see it as the national river of Russia. It flows through the western part of the country. It is Europe's longest river, with a length of 3,530 kilometres, and forms the core of the largest river system in Europe.

It rises in the Valdai Hills of Russia, 225m above sea level north-west of Moscow. The Kama, Oka, Vetluga and the Sura are its main tributaries. The Volga and its tributaries form the Volga river system, which drains an area of about 1.35 million square kilometres in Russia. The Volga Delta has a length of about 160 kilometres. It includes

555 channels and small streams. It is the largest estuary in Europe. It is the only place in Russia where pelicans, flamingoes, and lotuses may be found. The Volga freezes for most of its length for three months each year. Some of the biggest reservoirs in the world can be found along the river. The Volga is in the Volga region.

Umar ibn al-Khattab (Arabic: عُمَر بْن ٱلْخَطَّاب, romanized: ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb; c. 582/583 – 644), also spelled Omar, was the second Rashidun caliph, ruling from August 634, when he succeeded Abu Bakr (r. 632–634) as the second caliph, until his assassination in 644. Umar was a senior companion and father-in-law of the Islamic prophet Muhammad.

At first, Umar opposed Muhammad and was enemy of Islam. After his conversion to Islam in 616, Umar became the first Muslim to openly pray at the Kaaba. After Muhammad's death in June 632, Umar pledged allegiance to hazrat Abu Bakr rz. () as the first disputed caliph. Umar served as the closest adviser to the Bakr until August 634. It was then that the dying Abu Bakr made Umar his successor.

Under Umar, the caliphate expanded. It ruled the Sasanian Empire and more than two-thirds of the Byzantine Empire. His attacks on the Sasanian Empire resulted in the conquest of Persia in less than two years. Jewish tradition says that Umar set aside the Christian ban on Jews and let them into Jerusalem and to worship. Umar was assassinated by the Persian slave Abu Lu'lu'a Firuz in November 644.

Umar is said to be one of the most powerful Muslim caliphs. He is revered in the Sunni Islamic tradition. More than 50 hadiths speak of how he was the second greatest  Sahabah after Abu Bakr. He is viewed negatively in the Twelver Shia tradition, although Shi'ite figures often married into his family and named their children after him. They view his killer as a martyr although he was not a Muslim.

Weak interaction,  the weak force or weak nuclear force, is one of the four fundamental forces in the universe.

It is carried by particles known as the W and Z bosons, which are gauge bosons. The weak force causes beta decay, a form of radioactivity. At extremely high energy levels, the force of weak interaction and electromagnetism begin to act the same, and this is called electroweak interaction.

Beta decay is what scientists call a neutron breaking down, in contrast with alpha decay where an atom breaks down. These types of breaking down are more commonly known as radioactive decay. In a beta decay a neutron breaks into a proton,  an electron and a neutrino. However, this is not a complete picture; there is an intermediary step. Notice that this process preserves the total charge. Conservation laws are very important when calculating the possible outcomes of these interactions.

With more detail, beta decay begins with a neutron, which is made of one up quark and two down quarks. Since up quarks have a charge of +2/3, and each down quark has a charge of -1/3 this results as giving 2/3 -1/3 -1/3 = 0 charge. Due to weak force, if there are too many neutrons in an atom nucleus, one of the down quarks in one of the neutrons turns into an up quark. This would change the charge of the neutron from 0 to (2/3 +2/3 -1/3) = 1. From this, the neutron is no longer a neutron, but actually a proton ( a particle with a charge of +1).

In a strange quantum effect, this transformation releases a particle called a W boson. This is the gauge boson (force-carrying particle) of weak force. Oddly, the W boson has a mass about 80 times as much as a neutron. This sort of thing actually happens very often in quantum mechanics, but it follows the conservation of energy because it happens so quickly. After 3x10–25 seconds, the W boson breaks into an electron and an electron antineutrino. (The electron antineutrino doesn't really do much). This releases the electron and basically creates a proton from a neutron.

The Vikings were Scandinavian people from Northern Europe who were known as great seamen and warriors. The Scandinavian countries include Norway, Sweden and Denmark. From the 8th to the 11th centuries, they travelled to Europe in their longships. They attacked and later settled in what are now Great Britain, Germany, France, Spain and Italy.

The people of the far north, later called Vikings, were first noticed by the Romans around the year 100 BC, when the Cimbri and the Teutons moved into southern Gaul. The Romans believed these warlike tribes came from Jutland, but the Romans suspected they were only a part of a greater threat farther north. The Roman historian Jordanes described the  Ostrogoths  and Visigoths as coming from Gotland.

The Frankish Empire, which came after the Romans in Gaul, became more and more aware of the northern threat. As the later Carolingian Empire expanded into northern Germany, it came into contact with the Danes. That is when the Vikings appear in written history.

The first recorded raid in Britain was at Lindisfarne in 793. Why the Vikings began raiding is not clear. A popular theory is that the population had grown so much that there was not enough food to feed everyone. The earliest raiders did not seem to want to move out of Scandinavia. They turned to looting and returning home. The raids were possible because the Vikings were master boat builders. They made flat-bottomed boats ideal for journeys up rivers. Many monasteries were on the rivers and were raided.   Raiding was easy and became more and more popular among the Vikings.

Three different groups of Vikings took different, sometimes ping, routes.

The Europeans were scared of the Vikings for their strong weapons, swift attacks, and cruel fighting tactics. The Vikings were known for their bad treatment of women, children and monks where they fought. When the Vikings came to England, the kings paid them to leave the country. The Vikings took their money and sometimes fought them anyway. The payments were called Danegeld. From the 9th century to 1066, when the Duke of Normandy, who became King William I of England, conquered it, the Danish and Norwegian Vikings ruled large parts of England.

Because of their longships, which could float in 4 feet (1.3 m) of water, the Vikings made their way up rivers and land deep inside a country. They sailed up the River Shannon, in Ireland, and built a harbour 60 miles (100 km) from the coast.

There was a difference in who led Viking raids. In the 9th century, Viking raids were led by men who may have been exiles in their own countries. The later Viking raids in the late 10th century and the early 11th century were led by kings. Some of the early leaders tried to become kings with the riches that they had plundered from Europe and Russia. Some were successful, but most were not.

The Vikings were called Rus' by the peoples east of the Baltic Sea.  The Vikings who settled in Kyiv formed the first Russian state, Kievan Rus'. The Vikings (Rus') who served the Byzantine Emperors were called Varangians. They became the personal bodyguards to the emperor and were called the Varangian Guard.

The Vikings travelled through Russia, the Mediterranean Sea, Southern Europe, northern Africa and southwestern Asia. Some Vikings sailed across the Atlantic Ocean via Iceland and Greenland and may have explored places in North America. The ruins of a Viking settlement have been found at L'Anse-aux-Meadows, Newfoundland, Canada.

Archaeologists used radiocarbon dating to find out how old the settlement was. Their tests gave them a range of dates from about AD 700 to 1000.

Some English words and many place names come from the North Germanic languages such as Norse. For example, the words skirt and shirt came from the word skyrta, meaning a tunic. As English changed, the semantics altered to give the separate words 'skirt' and 'shirt' we know today. Skin came from the Norse word skinn, which meant to strip the meat off something. Some placenames in the areas that the Vikings conquered are still used. For example, places in Yorkshire end with thwaite, which means "clearing"; with dale, which means "valley"; and thorpe, which means "new village", such as Scunthorpe.

The Anglo-Saxons called the Vikings pagans for worshipping many gods. Viking gods belonged to two groups of gods in Norse mythology: the Aesir and the Vanir.

The pagan Vikings were exposed to Christianity from the beginning of the Viking Age. They were surrounded by Christian countries. Early Christian missionaries were either enslaved or put to death. The Vikings came into contact with Christianity when they raided other areas around them. Viking raids produced many Christian slaves who were brought back to Scandinavia. They called Christians "Cross-men" for using the cross in their worship. Many Vikings used the Thors hammer as their religious symbol. When Vikings settled in Christian areas, they converted to Christianity. There are still headstones in England with both a cross and a hammer. Perhaps, they thought that it was better to please both gods. As some Vikings turned from raiding to trading, they found a nominal (in name only) profession of Christianity to be helpful. Scandinavia, their homeland, was slower to change to the Christian religion. By the mid-11th century, most of Norway and Denmark had converted. Sweden was converted by the mid-12th century.

Viking religion affected Christianity as well. The pagan celebration of Yuletide became Christmas. Priests blessing the fields took the place of pagan fertility rites of spring, which were held to make sure that there was a good harvest. Norse kept their "farm gods" well after Christianity just to make sure they were protected. Santa Claus owes much of his legend to the Norse god Odin. With his snow-white beard, he travelled the midwinter sky on his eight-footed steed Sleipnir and visited his people with gifts. He became Father Christmas. Blended with the Christian Saint Nicholas, he became Santa Claus.

In the late 19th century, Richard Wagner and other artists in the Romantic period made operas and other artwork about ancient Germanic culture. They liked the Vikings because they were not Greeks or Romans.  They came up with the idea of Vikings wearing fur clothes and helmets with wings or horns on them and drinking out of hollowed-out animal horns.  Some ancient Germans wore helmets with horns on them, but real Vikings did not.  Wagner and his partners dressed the actors in the opera Ring des Nibelungen so they would look like ancient Germans and so the audience would feel like modern Germans came from medieval Vikings.

A tsunami (from Japanese, meaning “harbor wave”)  is a natural disaster, a series of fast-moving waves in the ocean caused by powerful earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, landslides, or a meteor impact in the ocean. A tsunami starts as a small wave and builds up into a larger wave, and starts suddenly. The waves travel at a great speed across an ocean with little energy loss. They can remove sand from beaches, destroy trees, toss and drag vehicles and houses and even destroy whole towns and cities. Tsunamis can even be caused when a meteorite strikes the earth’s surface, though this is very rare. A tsunami normally occurs in the Pacific Ocean, especially in what is called the ring of fire (a volcanically active region around the ocean’s edge), but can occur in any large body of water like lakes and seas.                                                                                                                                   If the coast is not steep, the water may pull back for hundreds of meters before a tsunami hits. People who do not know of the danger of tsunamis often remain at the shore.

Tsunamis cannot be prevented. However, there are ways to help stop people dying from a tsunami. International and regional warning systems, especially for the Pacific Ocean, issue alerts before the waves arrive. Because the earthquake that caused the tsunami can be felt before the wave gets to the shore, people can be warned to go somewhere safe.

Tsunamis are often called seismic sea wave or tidal waves because they usually rise and fall more slowly than ordinary ocean surface waves. This name is misleading, because tsunamis are not related to tides; they merely rise slowly as a series of fast-moving waves in the ocean caused by powerful earthquakes or volcanic eruptions.

The deadliest tsunami recorded in documented history was on 26 December 2004, and is known as the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami. It was caused by an earthquake. The earthquake was said to have a magnitude of 9.1 on the Moment magnitude scale. It was centered in the ocean near the coast of Sumatra, Indonesia. Over 230,000 people, mainly on the shores of the Indian Ocean, died from this disaster. The giant wave moved very quickly. Thousands of people in Indonesia, Sri Lanka, Thailand, India, Somalia, and other nations, were killed or injured by it.

Yet, the most expensive tsunami ever was the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami or Great Sendai Earthquake. It is said to have cost the Japanese government around $2200 billion USD, which is equivalent to about 12 trillion yen. It went a huge distance in  inland and mostly effected  Tōhoku region (northeastern Honshu). and it was the 4th largest tsunami in history.

There is another type of tsunami known as a megatsunami , which is mainly due to external impact on the ocean, like an asteroid or meteor crash, a landslide, or a rockslide. It is rare for a megatsunami to occur.

Tsunamis are very strong and can go many kilometers inland. Around 5 to 10 minutes before a tsunami hits, the sea seems to go back by an unusual distance. This is a warning that a tsunami can occur.

The best way to evacuate is to climb to an elevated area. If a person notices strange or unusual behavior in animals, they can also take that as a warning and go inland. However, if it still looks like the wave can absorb the person, the most suitable alternative will be to hold on to something sturdy, like a tree, so they do not totally get carried away and not injured and call the disaster rescue team.

William Shakespeare ( 23 April 1564 – 23 April 1616) was an English dramatist, poet and theatre actor. He wrote 40 known plays (with about half of them considered comedies) and two long poems in his lifetime. He lived in Stratford-upon-Avon, in Warwickshire, England. His plays are still performed today. He is often d in modern writing.

Shakespeare wrote his works between approximately 1592 and 1613. His plays are among the best known in English literature and are studied in schools around the world. Along with writing, Shakespeare also acted in The Chamberlain's Men acting company, starting in 1594.

Shakespeare wrote plays of different kinds, or genres. There are histories, tragedies and comedies. His four major tragedies are Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth and King Lear. There is a popular myth that Shakespeare was the first person to write a tragicomedy. Tragicomedies were being written well before Shakespeare's birth and baptism.

Shakespeare's plays are written in poetic language. Many of the plays are set in strange, distant places and times. The stories are often exciting, romantic and happy (in the comedies), or very sad (in the tragedies). These stories make people want to know what will happen to the characters. The plays talk about things that are still important today, like love, sadness, hope, pride, hatred, jealousy, and foolishness.

Shakespeare added new words and phrases to the English language. He made over 1,700 English words. He also made some words more popular.

Shakespeare was born in Stratford-upon-Avon in 1564. Though the exact date is unknown, historians accept 23 April 1564 as Shakespeare's birthday. He was probably the third of eight children. Shakespeare was probably educated at the King's New School in Stratford. Latin was popular in grammar schools during the Elizabethan era, so Shakespeare learned Latin very intensively.

When Shakespeare was 18, he married Anne Hathaway, a 26-year-old woman. Their wedding was rushed because Anne was already pregnant. They had three children: Susanna (who married John Hall); Hamnet (who died at the age of 11 from unknown causes); and Judith (who married Thomas Quiney). By 1592, Shakespeare had become an actor and was becoming well known as a writer of plays.

At the time of his death in 1616, only some of Shakespeare’s plays had been published in single editions. His plays were collected and published in 1623, seven years after he died. There is proof that people in Shakespeare's time thought highly of him. After his death, even his  Ben Jonson said:

Shakespeare was involved in the building of the Globe Theatre in 1599. (It burned down a few years later.). His plays are still performed at a new Globe Theatre, built in 1997 near the original.

Although Shakespeare was married to a woman and fathered three children, people have questioned his sexuality. Some people, such as Peter Holland of the Shakespeare Institute at Birmingham University, have pointed out that Shakespeare directed some of his sonnets towards young men. They say this is evidence that he may have been bisexual.

About 150 years after his death, some scholars suggested that Shakespeare did not actually write all of the works that are called his. They had various reasons for saying this. For example, the person who wrote "Shakespeare’s works" knew a lot about other countries (especially Italy and France), but there is not enough evidence to suggest that Shakespeare ever left England. Some scholars think he might have traveled to Scotland, because of his great and vast knowledge of Scotland in Macbeth, where the play was set in. Several other writers of "Shakespeare" have been suggested, such as Francis Bacon, Christopher Marlowe, and Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford. However, most scholars believe that William Shakespeare did write the works that bear his name.

The Hindu trinity of three main gods (Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva) is known as the Trimurti.

The Trimurti is a Hindu concept that refers to the three main gods in Hinduism: Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva:

The word Trimurti means "three forms". The three main gods are the three different aspects of Brahman, the Ultimate Reality, and they are responsible for the creation, preservation, destruction of the world. They are the foundation of Hindu belief and practice, guiding the universe through its cycles of creation, preservation, destruction.

The Aum symbol of Hinduism is representing the Trimurti, with the A, U, M phonemes representing creation, preservation, destruction of the universe. A conch's three lines also represents the Trimurti in Hinduism.

The Puranic period from the 4th century CE to the 12th century CE saw the rise of post-Vedic religion and the evolution of what R. C. Majumdar calls "synthetic Hinduism".

Following is a well-known verse from the Vishnu Purana (1.2.66) that mentions Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva together in a single verse, highlighting their roles within the cosmic functions of creation, preservation, destruction.

Translation: "In this way, the one supreme entity divides itself into three forms — Brahma, Mahavishnu (Vishnu), Maheshvara (Shiva)—taking on different aspects. It creates, preserves, destroys the universe in various ages."

This period had no homogeneity, and included orthodox Brahmanism in the form of remnants of older Vedic faith traditions, along with different sectarian religions, notably Shaivism, Vaishnavism, Shaktism that were within the orthodox fold yet still formed distinct entities. One of the important traits of this period is a spirit of harmony between orthodox and sectarian forms. Regarding this spirit of reconciliation, R. C. Majumdar says that:Its most notable expression is to be found in the theological conception of the Trimūrti, i.e., the manifestation of the supreme God in three forms of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva. But the attempt cannot be regarded as a great success, for Brahmā never gained an ascendancy comparable to that of Śiva and Viṣṇu, and the different sects often conceived the Trimūrti as really the three manifestations of their own sectarian god or goddess, whom they regarded as the Brahman or the Absolute Matter.The identification of Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva as one being is strongly emphasized in the Kūrma Purāṇa, wherein 1.6 states that Brahman is worshipped as the Trimurti; 1.9 especially inculcates the unity of these three main gods, and 1.26 relates to the same theme. Noting Western interest in the idea of trinity, historian A. L. Basham explains the background of the Trimurti as follows:There must be some doubt as to whether the Hindu tradition has ever recognized Brahma as the supreme deity in the way that Vishnu and Shiva have been conceived of and worshiped.The concept of Trimurti is also present in the Maitri Upanishad, where the three gods are explained as three forms of the supreme matter Brahman.

Shaivites hold that, according to the Shaiva Agamas, Shiva performs five actions – creation, preservation, destruction, hiding grace, revealing grace. Respectively, these first three actions are done by Shiva as Sadyojata (akin to Brahma), Vamadeva (akin to Vishnu) and Aghora (akin to Shiva) with the last two actions being Tatpurusha (akin to Ishvara), Ishana (akin to Sadashiva), a form of Shiva, a form of Shiva. Thus, Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, Shiva as Ishvara, Shiva as Sadashiva are not gods different from Shiva, but rather are forms of Shiva. As Brahma (Sadyojata), Shiva creates. As Vishnu (Vamadeva), Shiva preserves. As Shiva (Aghora), he destroys. As Tatpurusha (Ishvara), he hides grace. As Sadashiva (Ishana), he reveals grace. This stands in contrast to the normal idea that Shiva is only the god of destruction. Shiva is the supreme god of the universe and performs all the five actions, of which destruction is only one with four others (creation, preservation, hiding grace, revealing grace), thus he performs creation, preservation, hiding grace, revealing grace. Ergo, the Trimurti is a form of Shiva himself for the Shaivas. Shaivites believe that Shiva is the supreme god of this world, who assumes various critical roles and assumes appropriate names and forms for them, and also stands transcending all these. A prominent visual example of a Shaivism version of the Trimurti is the Trimurti Sadashiva sculpture in the Elephanta Caves on Gharapuri Island, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.

Despite the fact that the Vishnu Purana describes that Vishnu appears as Brahma in order to create and as Shiva in order to destroy and he appears as Vishnu in order to preserve and he appears as Hari to hide grace and he appears as Narayana to reveal grace, Vaishnavism generally does not acknowledge the Trimurti concept; instead, they believe in the avataras of Vishnu like Varaha, Narasimha, Rama, Krishna, etc. They also believe that Shiva and Brahma are both forms of Vishnu. For example, the Dvaita school holds Vishnu alone to be the supreme god, with Shiva and Brahma being subordinate to him, and interprets the Puranas differently. For example, Vijayindra Tirtha, a Dvaita scholar interprets the 18 Puranas differently. He interprets the Vaishnava Puranas as Sattvic and the Shaiva Puranas as Tamasic and the Brahmanya Puranas as Rajasic and that only Sattvic Puranas are to be considered to be authoritative over Tamasic Puranas and Rajasic Puranas as they both are unauthoritative. The tradition of Sri Vaishnavism in the south of India holds that all major deities that are hailed in the Puranas are in fact forms of Vishnu, and that the scriptures are dedicated to him alone.

The female deities-centric Shaktism denomination assigns the eminent roles of the three forms (Trimurti) of Supreme Divinity not to masculine gods but instead to feminine goddesses: Mahasarasvati (Creatrix), Mahalakshmi (Preservatrix), Mahaparvati (Destructrix). This feminine version of the Trimurti is called Tridevi ("three goddesses"). The masculine gods (Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva) are then relegated as auxiliary agents of the supreme feminine Tridevi.

Smartism is a denomination of Hinduism that places emphasis on a group of five deities as the supreme deities rather than just a single deity as a supreme deity. The "worship of the five" (pañchāyatana pūjā) system, which was popularized by the ninth century CE Hindu philosopher Adi Shankara among orthodox Brahmins of the Smārta tradition, invokes the five deities, namely Shiva, Vishnu, Ganesha, Tridevi, Surya. Adi Shankara later added Kartikeya to these five, making six total. This reformed system was promoted by Adi Shankara primarily to unite the principal deities of the six major sects on an equal status. The monistic philosophy preached by Adi Shankara made it possible to choose one of these as a preferred principal deity and at the same time worship the other four deities and a personal deity as different forms of the same all-pervading Brahman.

The World Wide Web ("WWW" or "the Web", "the Webspace") is the part of the Internet that contains websites and webpages. It was invented in 1989 by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN, Geneva, Switzerland.  Sir Tim Berners-Lee created a new markup language called HTML. Each Website is a group of pages linked by hypertext links that are written in HTML.

The software to see the World Wide Web is called a web browser. To access the World Wide Web, one also needs a connection to the Internet.

Many companies nowadays offer website hosting allowing one to make websites that can be displayed on the World Wide Web, including a custom domain (www.stuff.com) site.

The World Wide Web was created by Tim Berners-Lee in 1989 while he was working at CERN, a research center in Switzerland. He wanted to help scientists share documents and information easily over the Internet. He suggested a system using hypertext, which lets people click on links to move between documents.

In 1990, Berners-Lee made the first version of the Web. It included:

In 1991, the Web became available to researchers outside CERN. By 1993, it began to grow fast. That year, the Mosaic browser was released. It was the first popular browser with graphics, which made the Web end helped it spread worldwide.

In 1994, Berners-Lee started World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) at MIT to create a couple standards that would keep the Web open and accessible for everyone.

The World Wide Web works by combining several technologies so people can view and interact with content on the Internet.

When someone opens a website using a web browser, the browser sends a request to a web server asking for a web page. The server then sends the content back to the browser. This content is usually written in HTML (Hypertext Markup Language), which describes the structure of the page.

Web pages are connected to each other using hyperlinks. Clicking on a link tells the browser to open a new page.

These messages are usually sent using the Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) or its secure version, HTTPS.

Some websites also get extra content from other servers, like ads, videos, or social media tools. Many modern websites use dynamic content, which lets them update part of the page without needing to reload everything.

The Web uses several technologies to protect users and their data.

Most websites use HTTPS, which adds the TLS encryption layer on top of HTTP. This keeps data like passwords and personal information safe from eavesdropping and tampering. HTTPS also lets browsers verify a site’s identity using digital certificates, and ensures the content isn’t changed in transit.

Modern browsers block certain sensitive features unless the page is delivered via HTTPS. They also enforce security features like HSTS, certificate transparency, and improved cipher suites.

Browsers and privacy tools increasingly block third-party cookies and tracking scripts by default.

Wikipedia shows how a large, community-run site balances openness and privacy:

The Web consists of several key components that work together to display and interact with content online.

A web browser (such as Chrome, Firefox, Edge or Safari) requests web pages from servers, renders HTML/CSS/JavaScript, and provides tools like bookmarks, history, cookies, form support, and security features.

A web server is a computer (with server software like Apache, Nginx, CERN httpd) that listens for HTTP/HTTPS requests and returns web content—HTML, images, CSS, JavaScript. Servers can also generate pages dynamically using scripting languages.

The architecture of the Web defines how its parts fit together—from clients and servers to protocols and addressing systems.

The Web uses a client–server model: a web browser (client) sends requests to a web server, which then delivers content such as HTML pages, images, CSS, and JavaScript back to the client. Requests and responses typically travel over an Internet network, often using separate machines for client and server.

Each resource on the Web—like a page, image, or video—is uniquely identified by a URI (or URL). These identifiers let browsers locate and request resources.

These protocols run over the TCP/IP suite, which ensures reliable data transmission across networks.

The Web follows the REST architecture style, which promotes stateless, uniform interactions, linking between resources, and scalable systems. It was defined by Roy Fielding in 2000.

According to W3C's architecture documents, the Web is built around:

In recent years, the Web has evolved beyond static and interactive content into a more intelligent, immersive, and often decentralized ecosystem.

Also called Web 3.0, this movement uses technologies like blockchain, peer-to-peer networking, and smart contracts. It aims to return control over data, identity, and assets (e.g., NFTs) to users. Applications include decentralized finance (DeFi), decentralized apps (dApps), and alternative storage systems.

AI and machine learning power personalization, automation, and smart services. The Semantic Web adds meaning to data for better machine understanding and smarter search. Emerging agentic features include autonomous software agents that can act on the user’s behalf.

Web browsers now support 3D graphics directly through WebGL, upcoming WebGPU, AR/VR capabilities, and platforms like Web3D. This enables in-browser 3D models, virtual tours, and interactive experiences.

A rise in edge computing means more data is processed on devices like smartphones and sensors. Combined with the Internet of Things (IoT), it brings real‑world devices online for faster, localized computing.

There are rising concerns over deepfakes, AI manipulation, and the splintering of the Web into national or corporate islands. Some propose blockchain-based identity, content authenticity schemes, and decentralisation to restore trust, openness, and resist monopolistic control.

A word is something spoken by the mouth that is meaningful. It is usually part of a sentence which makes the meaning clear.

Words are also used in writing, which is a relatively modern invention. In alphabetic writing, a word is a collection of letters. The word then communicates a meaning that can also usually be pronounced. A logogram is also a word.

Some words have more than one meaning; for example, 'spring' can refer to the season, the device, or a conjugation of the verb. They are homonyms. Some words have different pronunciation; for example, 'wind' (the noun) and 'wind' (the verb) are pronounced differently.

Some words have different spelling; for example, 'color' and 'colour' are both correct. ‘Color' is used in American English, and ‘colour' is used in British English. Some words can be only one letter such as "a" and "I" in English. Besides English, all other languages have their own words. When written with an alphabet, words are usually separated by a space. When written with ideograms, each word is usually a separate symbol.

Words can be invented, which are then called neologisms. For example, radar was originally an acronym but became an actual word. Two words may be joined to make a compound word.

A word is the smallest thing that can be said with meaning. For example, hello is a word.

That contrasts with a morpheme, which is the smallest unit of meaning but may not stand on its own. A word may consist of a single morpheme (such as oh!, rock, red, quick, run, expect), or several (rocks, redness, quickly, running, unexpected), and a morpheme may not be able to stand on its own as a word (in the words just given, they are -s, -ness, -ly, -ing, un-, -ed).

The year (symbol: y or a, also known as the annum or annus) is about 365 days (except in a leap year). It is the time it takes the Earth to go completely around (orbit) the sun once. A year is actually almost 365.25 days long, but the Gregorian and Julian calendar has 365 days, except in a leap year, which has 366 days.

The year starts on January 1 and ends on December 31 in the Gregorian and Julian calendar.  A fiscal year or a school year can start or end on a different day.

Solar and lunar years are used by different calendars for daily life. The other measurements are used by astronomers.

Zoroastrianism is an ancient Iranian religion created by Zoroaster, who lived in eastern ancient Iran around 1000 BC.  Other names for Zoroastrianism are Mazdaism and Parsiism.

Zoroastrianism is a monotheistic religion. The Zoroastrian god is called Ahura Mazda.   The holy book of Zoroastrianism is the Zend Avesta.

Zoroastrianism is also dualist. Zoroastrians believe Ahura Mazda created good spirits (Spenta Mainyu) and demons (Angra Mainyu). Zoroastrians believe people are free to choose between good and bad.  Choosing good will lead to happiness, and choosing bad will lead to unhappiness. So it is best to choose good. Therefore, the motto of the religion is "Good Thoughts, Good Words, Good Deeds".

Zoroastrianism was the state religion of the Persian Empire starting in the 6th century BC, including the Sassanid dynasty.

Some historians believe that the Three Wise Men (Magi) who visited Jesus after he was born were Zoroastrian priests.

In the 7th century AD, Persia was conquered by Islamic Arabs, and most Persians became Muslims.

There is one God, called Ahura Mazda.  He is the one Uncreated Creator.  Zoroastrians worship only him.

Ahura Mazda created everything. There is a conflict between order (which he created) and chaos (or disorder). Everything in the universe is part of this conflict, including humans.

The conflict will not last forever. Ahura Mazda will win it in the end. When this happens, everything that Ahura Mazda created will be together with him again -  even the souls of people who died or who were banished.

When Ahura Mazda created everything, he made seven "sparks", called Amesha Spentas ("Bounteous Immortals"). Each of them represents a part of Ahura Mazda's creation. These seven sparks are helped by many "lesser principles", the Yazatas. Each Yazata is "worthy of worship" and also stands for a part of the creation.

People also need to do these things in order to be happy.  This active life is the basis of what Zoroastrians call free will.  They do not believe people should live on their own to find God (for example, in monasteries).

All bad things in the world are represented as Angra Mainyu, the "Destructive Principle". All good things are represented by Spenta Mainyu, the good spirit which Ahura Mazda created. Through Spenta Maniu, Ahura Mazda is in all humans.  In this way, the Creator interacts with the world.

Nowadays, there are about 100,000 to 120,000 Zoroastrians in the world. Most of them live in India, Iran, the United States and Pakistan. In Pakistan and India, they are called Parsis. Zoroastrian Fire Temples include one in Yazd City in Iran.

Yuri Alexeyevich Gagarin (; March 9, 1934 – March 27, 1968)  was a Soviet and Russian cosmonaut (astronaut). He was the first person to travel into space.

Yuri Gagarin was born in the village of Klushino near Gzhatsk (now in Smolensk Oblast, Russia), on 9 March 1934. Gzhatsk was renamed Gagarin in 1968 in his . His parents, Alexey Ivanovich Gagarin and Anna Timofeyevna Gagarina, worked on a collective farm. While manual workers are thought as "peasants," this may be too-simple if applied to his parents — his mother was said to love reading, and his father was a skilled carpenter. Yuri was the third of four children, and his elder sister helped raise him while his parents worked. Like millions of people in the Soviet Union, the Gagarin family suffered during the Nazi invasion in World War II. His two elder siblings were sent out to Nazi Germany for slave work in 1943, and did not return until after the war. While a youth, Yuri became interested in space and planets, and began to dream about his space tour which would one day become a reality. Yuri was thought by his teachers, as smart and hard-working, sometimes . His mathematics and science teacher had flown in the Soviet Air Forces during the war, which was said to make some impression on young Gagarin.

After starting an apprenticeship in a metalworks as a foundryman, Gagarin was selected for further training at a technical high school in Saratov. While there, he joined the flight club, and learned to fly a light aircraft. In 1955, after finishing his technical schooling, he entered military flight training at the Orenburg Pilot's School. While there he met Valentina Goryacheva. Yuri married her in 1957, after gaining his pilot's wings in a MiG-15. Post-graduation, he was told to go to Luostari airbase in Murmansk Oblast, close to the Norwegian border, where bad weather made flying risky. As a full-grown man, Gagarin was  tall, which was an advantage in the small Vostok cockpit. He became a lieutenant of the Soviet Air Force on November 5, 1957 and on November 6, 1959 he got the rank of senior lieutenant.

Gagarin kept physically fit throughout his life, and was a good sportsman. As the space explorer Valery Bykovsky wrote:

As well as being a good ice hockey player, Gagarin was also a basketball fan, and coached the Saratov Industrial Technical School team, as well as being an umpire/referee.

In 1960, after the search and selection process, Yuri Gagarin was selected with 19 other space explorers for the Soviet space program. Along with the other soon to be space explorers, he was tested by experiments made to test his physical and  score; he also underwent training for the upcoming flight. Out of the twenty originally selected, the final choice for the first launch was between Gagarin and Gherman Titov because of their performance in training, as well as their physical fitness.

On 12 April 1961, Gagarin became the first man to travel into space, launching to orbit aboard the Vostok 3KA-3 (Vostok 1). His call sign in this flight was Kedr (Cedar; ). During his flight, Gagarin famously whistled the song "The Motherland Hears, The Motherland Knows" (). The first two lines of the song are: "The Motherland hears, the Motherland knows/Where her son flies in the sky". This song was written by Dmitri Shostakovich in 1951 (opus 86), with words by Yevgeniy Dolmatovsky.

Around the same time, some Western people claimed that Gagarin, during his space flight, had made the comment, "I don't see any God up here." However, no such words appear in the direct record of Gagarin's talk with the Earth during the spaceflight. In a 2006 interview a close friend of Gagarin, Colonel Valentin Petrov, said that Gagarin never said such words, and that the phrase came from Nikita Khrushchev's speech at the fullness of the Central Committee of the CPSU, where the anti-religious  was talked about. In a certain context Khrushchev said, "Gagarin flew into space, but didn't see any God there."

After the flight, Gagarin became a world-famous celebrity. He toured in many places like in Italy, the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada, and Japan. He did this to promote the Soviet Union's achievements.

In 1962, he began serving as a deputy to the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union. He later came back to Star City. While there, he worked on designs for a  spacecraft. Gagarin worked on these designs in Star City for seven years. He became Lieutenant Colonel (or Podpolkovnik) of the Soviet Air Force on 12 June 1962. Then on 6 November 1963 he got the rank of Colonel (Polkovnik) of the Soviet Air Force. Soviet people tried to keep him away from any flights, being worried of losing their hero in an accident. Gagarin was backup pilot for Vladimir Komarov in the Soyuz 1 flight. As Komarov's flight ended in a deadly crash, Gagarin was banned from training for and helping out in further spaceflight/s.

Gagarin then became deputy training director of the Star City cosmonaut training base.  At the same time, he began to re-join as a fighter pilot. On 27 March 1968, while on a  training flight from Chkalovsky Air Base, he and flight instructor Vladimir Seryogin died in a MiG-15UTI crash near the town of Kirzhach. Gagarin and Seryogin were buried in the walls of the Kremlin on Red Square.

People are not sure what caused the crash, but a 1986 investigation thinks that the turbulence from a Su-11 'Fishpot-C' interceptor using its afterburners may have caused Gagarin's plane to go out of control.

Russian documents opened to the public in March 2003 showed that the KGB had changed their own  of the accident. In addition to this, one government and two military investigations. The KGB's report removed many  thoughts, instead of showing the actions of air base personnel added to the crash. The report says that an air traffic controller made Gagarin have old weather information. But by that time of his flight, conditions had become very bad. Ground crew also left fuel tanks on the aircraft. Gagarin's planned flight needed good weather and no outboard tanks. The investigation ended, saying that Gagarin's aircraft entered a spin, either because of a bird strike or because of a sudden move to avoid another aircraft. Because of the old weather report, the crew thought their altitude to be higher than it actually was, and could not properly react to bring the MiG-15 out of its spin.

In his 2004 book Two Sides of the Moon, Alexey Leonov tells that he was flying a helicopter in the same area that day when he heard "two loud booms in the distance." His thought was that the Sukhoi jet was flying below its minimum allowed altitude, and "without realizing it because of the terrible weather conditions, he passed within 10 or 20 meters of Yuri and Seregin's plane while breaking the sound barrier." The resulting turbulence would have sent the MiG into an uncontrolled spin. Leonov thinks the first boom he heard was that of the jet breaking the sound barrier, and the second was Gagarin's plane crashing.

The Yangtze River, or Yangzi (Simple Chinese: 扬子江 / Traditional Chinese: 揚子江), or Chang Jiang (Simple Chinese: 长江 / Traditional Chinese: 長江), is the longest River in China and Asia, as well as the world's fourth longest river (after the Amazon, the Nile and the Mississippi-Missouri-Jefferson river system). It is honored as one of the two main cradles of Chinese civilization. (another is Yellow River)

The river is about 6,236 km (3,876 miles) long and is one of the busiest waterways in the world. It goes from the western part of China (Plateau of Tibet) into the East China Sea, which is part of the Pacific Ocean. It has been thought of as a dividing point between northern and southern China. It helped start the Chinese civilization.

On the river is a big dam called the Three Gorges Dam, which is the biggest in the world. It forms a man-made lake that stretches almost  upstream.

The Yangtze River is home to many species. The Finless porpoise is endangered and the Lipotes vexillifer (Chinese river dolphin) which died in 2002.

Top tourist attractions for the Yangtze river cruise are Chongqing Dazu Carvings, Three Gorges, lesser Three Gorges, Bai Di City, Fengdu Ghost City and so on.

The Yangtze River is also known as the Yanugzi or Chang Jiange.

Etymology: "The name Yangtze" [... comes] from the name of the ancient fiefdom of Yang", according to media.

The Yangtze river is becoming extremely polluted. The Yangtze river contains oil, dead animals and rubbish including cans, bags, wrappers, glass and plastic bottles. In 2001 about 23.4 billion tons of sewerage and factory waste was dumped in the river.

Zen (禅, 禪, जेन्) is a Chinese school of Mahayana Buddhism. Buddhism was first brought to China from India, by Bodhidharma. It developed in China, into Zen, in the 6th century. From China it spread to Vietnam, Korea and Japan.

Zen is a Japanese word translated from the Chinese word Chán, which means "meditation".

Zen uses meditation to help practitioners go beyond simply thinking about Zen. The goal in Zen is to attain satori. This Japanese word translates as "enlightenment". The practice also includes using riddles, called Koans. Koans are also designed to help the practitioner not just engage in rational thought. The traditional Japanese place to learn Zen is a Zen monastery.

Japanese Zen scholars such as D.T. Suzuki became well known in the West. Suzuki spent over fifty years teaching Zen to the world with a series of books in English. In the 1960s in California, Aldous Huxley, Alan Watts, and others promoted the philosophy. From there it spread to many parts of the western world. Zen is now well established outside of Japan and China. Many Zen centers exist in the US and Europe.

Zen is now associated with some design styles, like Minimalism. The Japanese gardens found at Zen monasteries in Japan are an example of this style. They are called Zen rock gardens. They are not directly part of the teachings of Zen.

The World Health Organization (WHO) is part of the United Nations (UN), working on international public health, with its headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. The WHO was established by the UN on April 7, 1948. In the previous year they had already started an epidemiology service. WHO World Health Day is celebrated on April 7.

The International Sanitary Conferences (ISC), the first of which was held on 23 June 1851, were a series of conferences that took place until 1938, about 87 years. The first conference, in Paris, was almost solely concerned with cholera, which would remain the disease of major concern for the ISC for most of the 19th century. With the cause, origin, and communicability of many epidemic diseases still uncertain and a matter of scientific argument, international agreement on appropriate measures was difficult to reach. Seven of these international conferences, spanning 41 years, were convened before any resulted in a multi-state international agreement. The seventh conference, in Venice in 1892, finally resulted in a convention. It was concerned only with the sanitary control of shipping traversing the Suez Canal, and was an effort to guard against importation of cholera.

Five years later, in 1897, a convention concerning the bubonic plague was signed by sixteen of the nineteen states attending the Venice conference. While Denmark, Sweden-Norway, and the US did not sign this convention, it was unanimously agreed that the work of the prior conferences should be codified for implementation. Subsequent conferences, from 1902 until the final one in 1938, widened the diseases of concern for the ISC, and included discussions of responses to yellow fever, brucellosis, leprosy, tuberculosis, and typhoid. In part as a result of the successes of the Conferences, the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau (1902), and the Office International d'Hygiène Publique or "International office of Public Hygiene" in English (1907) were soon founded. When the League of Nations was formed in 1920, it established the Health Organization of the League of Nations. After World War II, the United Nations absorbed all the other health organizations, to form the WHO.

The WHO has played a crucial role in coordinating the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic, providing essential guidelines on preventive measures, supporting research on vaccines, and facilitating vaccine distribution through initiatives like COVAX.

During the 1945 United Nations Conference on International Organization, Szeming Sze, a delegate from China, conferred with Norwegian and Brazilian delegates on creating an international health organization under the auspices of the new United Nations. After failing to get a resolution passed on the subject, Alger Hiss, the secretary general of the conference, recommended using a declaration to establish such an organization. Sze and other delegates lobbied and a declaration passed calling for an international conference on health. The use of the word "world", rather than "international", emphasized the truly global nature of what the organization was seeking to achieve. The constitution of the World Health Organization was signed by all 51 countries of the United Nations, and by 10 other countries, on 22 July 1946. It thus became the first specialized agency of the United Nations to which every member subscribed. Its constitution formally came into force on the first World Health Day on 7 April 1948, when it was ratified by the 26th member state. The WHO formally began its work on September 1, 1948.

The first meeting of the World Health Assembly finished on 24 July 1948, having secured a budget of US$5 million (then £1,250,000) for the 1949 year. G. Brock Chisholm was appointed director-general of the WHO, having served as executive secretary and a founding member during the planning stages, while Andrija Štampar was the assembly's first president. Its first priorities were to control the spread of malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted infections, and to improve maternal and child health, nutrition and environmental hygiene. Its first legislative act was concerning the compilation of accurate statistics on the spread and morbidity of disease. The logo of the World Health Organization features the Rod of Asclepius as a symbol for healing.

In 1959, the WHO signed Agreement WHA 12–40 with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which says:

"whenever either organization proposes to initiate a programme or activity on a subject in which the other organization has or may have a substantial interest, the first party shall consult the other with a view to adjusting the matter by mutual agreement."

The nature of this statement has led some groups and activists including Women in Europe for a Common Future to claim that the WHO is restricted in its ability to investigate the effects on human health of radiation caused by the use of nuclear power and the continuing effects of nuclear disasters in Chernobyl and Fukushima. They believe WHO must regain what they see as independence. Independent WHO held a weekly vigil from 2007 to 2017 in front of WHO headquarters. However, as pointed out by Foreman in clause 2 it states:

In particular, and in accordance with the Constitution of the World Health Organization and the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency and its agreement with the United Nations together with the exchange of letters related thereto, and taking into account the respective co-ordinating responsibilities of both organizations, it is recognized by the World Health Organization that the International Atomic Energy Agency has the primary responsibility for encouraging, assisting and co-ordinating research and development and practical application of atomic energy for peaceful uses throughout the world without prejudice to the right of the World Health Organization to concern itself with promoting, developing, assisting and co-ordinating international health work, including research, in all its aspects.

The key text is highlighted in bold, the agreement in clause 2 states that the WHO is free to perform any health-related work.

1947: The WHO established an epidemiological information service via telex.

1949: The Soviet Union and its constituent republics quit the WHO over the organization's unwillingness to share the penicillin recipe. They would not return until 1956.

1950: A mass tuberculosis inoculation drive using the BCG vaccine gets under way.

1955: The malaria eradication programme was launched, although objectives were later modified. (In most areas, the programme goals became control instead of eradication.)

1958: Viktor Zhdanov, Deputy Minister of Health for the USSR, called on the World Health Assembly to undertake a global initiative to eradicate smallpox, resulting in Resolution WHA11.54.

1965: The first report on diabetes mellitus and the creation of the International Agency for Research on Cancer.

1966: The WHO moved its headquarters from the Ariana wing at the Palace of Nations to a newly constructed headquarters elsewhere in Geneva.

1967: The WHO intensified the global smallpox eradication campaign by contributing $2.4 million annually to the effort and adopted a new disease surveillance method, at a time when 2 million people were dying from smallpox per year. The initial problem the WHO team faced was inadequate reporting of smallpox cases. WHO established a network of consultants who assisted countries in setting up surveillance and containment activities. The WHO also helped contain the last European outbreak in Yugoslavia in 1972. After over two decades of fighting smallpox, a Global Commission declared in 1979 that the disease had been eradicated – the first disease in history to be eliminated by human effort.

1974: The Expanded Programme on Immunization  and the control programme of onchocerciasis was started, an important partnership between the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and the World Bank.

1975: The WHO launched the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical diseases (the TDR).  Co-sponsored by UNICEF, UNDP, and the World Bank, it was established in response to a 1974 request from the WHA for an intensive effort to develop improved control of tropical diseases. The TDR's goals are, firstly, to support and coordinate international research into diagnosis, treatment and control of tropical diseases; and, secondly, to strengthen research capabilities within endemic countries.

1976: The WHA enacted a resolution on disability prevention and rehabilitation, with a focus on community-driven care.

1977 and 1978: The first list of essential medicines was drawn up, and a year later the ambitious goal of "Health For All" was declared.

Three former directors of the Global Smallpox Eradication Programme read the news that smallpox had been globally eradicated, 1980.

1986: The WHO began its global programme on HIV/AIDS.  Two years later preventing discrimination against patients was attended to and in 1996 the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) was formed.

1988: The Global Polio Eradication Initiative was established.

1995: The WHO established an independent International Commission for the Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication (Guinea worm disease eradication; ICCDE).  The ICCDE recommends to the WHO which countries fulfil requirements for certification. It also has role in advising on progress made towards elimination of transmission and processes for verification.

1998: The WHO's director-general highlighted gains in child survival, reduced infant mortality, increased life expectancy and reduced rates of "scourges" such as smallpox and polio on the fiftieth anniversary of WHO's founding. He, did, however, accept that more had to be done to assist maternal health and that progress in this area had been slow.

2000: The Stop TB Partnership was created along with the UN's formulation of the Millennium Development Goals.

2001: The measles initiative was formed, and credited with reducing global deaths from the disease by 68% by 2007.

2002: The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria was drawn up to improve the resources available.

2005: The WHO revises International Health Regulations (IHR) in light of emerging health threats and the experience of the 2002/3 SARS epidemic, authorizing WHO, among other things, to declare a health threat a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.

2006: The WHO endorsed the world's first official HIV/AIDS Toolkit for Zimbabwe, which formed the basis for global prevention, treatment, and support the plan to fight the AIDS pandemic.

2006: The WHO launches the Global action plan for influenza vaccines

2016: The Global action plan for influenza vaccines ends with a report which concludes that while substantial progress has been made over the 10 years of the Plan, the world is still not ready to respond to an influenza pandemic.

2016: Following the perceived failure of the response to the West Africa Ebola outbreak, the World Health Emergencies programme was formed, changing the WHO from just being a "normative" agency to one that responds operationally to health emergencies.

2020: the World Health Organization announced that it had classified the novel coronavirus outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern. The novel coronavirus was a new strain of coronavirus that had never been detected in humans before. The WHO named this new coronavirus "COVID-19" or "2019-nCov".

2022: The WHO suggests formation of a Global Health Emergency Council, with a new global health emergency workforce, and recommends revision of the International Health Regulations.

2024: WHO has declared the spread of mpox (formerly monkeypox) in several African countries a public health emergency of international concern, marking the second such declaration in the last two years due to the virus's transmission.

The World Trade Organization (WTO) is a large international organization to regulate trade that was established in 1995.  As of 2018, there are 164 members and 23 observer nations.  In the WTO, agreements are made on trade between countries. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) means that countries have to lower barriers to international trade, such as tariff on goods crossing borders. This lets businesses operate in many different countries.

The WTO describes itself as "a rules-based, member-driven organization—all decisions are made by the member governments, and the rules are the outcome of negotiations among members".

There are about 30 such agreements. Based on these agreements, the member countries trade with each other. They sell items to each other and follow a set of rules. They have to give a special job to the other country. The phrase used (for such and many alike items) is to give the other country a special job – this is known as to give the other country a most favored country job. From 2004, if a member sells any item to another member country, the same type of item should be offered to all other member countries.

While it is highly regarded, from its beginning the WTO has also received criticism.

A writing system (also called a script) is a system of symbols used to represent language. There are different kinds of writing systems, with symbols that represent different things. For example, English uses an alphabet (the Latin alphabet).

The fundamental principle is that symbols stand for sound, but there is more to it than that. The term "writing system" includes more than just (for example) an alphabet. Alphabets are part of a "graphic inventory" which includes punctuation, diacritics, ideograms (e.g. numbers) and logograms (standing for specific words such as $, & etc.).

There are many different types of writing systems. Each grapheme, or symbol, can mean different things in different writing systems. Depending on what an individual symbol means, such as a whole word or a sound, each writing system is categorized as a different type.

A phonetic writing system is one where symbols mean individual sounds (or phonemes). There are different types of phonetic writing systems.

A true alphabet is a writing system with symbols that mean both consonants and vowels.

Examples of alphabetic writing systems are the Latin alphabet, (used in large parts of the world), the Greek alphabet (used in Greek), and the Cyrillic alphabet (used in many countries in Eastern Europe and Central Asia, where Russia had a major influence during the days of the Soviet Union).

Alphabets that only write consonants (and do not write vowels) are called abjads. The logic is that people in those areas know what vowels are used when the words are spoken. Many modern Abjads use optional diacritics to clarify their vowels, known as an Impure Abjad (less commonly, Voiced Abjad or Alphasyllabary). These are different from vowel letters in alphabets, as they are not written on their own but only as attached to a consonants.

Examples of abjads are the Arabic alphabet, which is used in much of the Muslim world, and the Hebrew alphabet used for Jewish languages like Hebrew and Yiddish. Both of these abjads are written in lines that run from right to left.

Abugidas are alphabets where consonants are written as a symbol, and vowels are written as diacritics. Diacritics in Abugidas are mandatory, as the lack of diacritic implies a default vowel sound (e.g. क (k) in Devanagari is pronounced 'ka' with no diacritic).

Examples of abugidas are many writing systems of India and Southeast Asia, such as Devanagari (used in Hindi and Sanskrit).

A syllabary is a writing system with symbols that each mean a syllable. This is different from Abugidas, as syllables with similar consonant or vowel sounds do not necessarily share similar symbols (e.g. か (ka) and き (ki) in Japanese).

Examples of syllabaries are hiragana and katakana (used in Japanese) and the Cherokee syllabary (used in Cherokee).

A logography is a writing system with symbols that mean whole words or symbols that represent ideas. These symbols are called "logograms" or "logographs". In practice, no writing system is fully logographic: many symbols are combinations where one part represents the sound and another part represents the meaning. (e.g. 女 (nǚ), “woman”, and 马 (mǎ), “horse”, create 妈 (mā) "mother" in Mandarin Chinese).

Examples of logographies are Chinese characters (used in Chinese) and hieroglyphs.

Each writing system can be written in different directions. English (which uses the Latin alphabet) is written from left to right. Some languages, like Arabic, are written from right to left.

Some languages can be written vertically, such as Chinese and Japanese (from top to bottom), and Hanuoo (from bottom to top).

Besides being written horizontally and vertically, languages could theoretically be written diagonally, but no known examples of this exist.

Édith Piaf (aka. "La Môme Piaf") (December 19, 1915 – October 11, 1963) was one of France's most-loved singers. Her real name was Édith Giovanna Gassion. She became a national icon. Her music was an image of her tragic life. Piaf was known for singing ballads in a heartbreaking voice.

As child at her grandmother's  in Normandy, she suffered from keratitis, but

1925 - 10  A pilgrimage to Lisieux in the Normandy honoring  Saint Thérèse of Lisieux / (Sainte Thérèse de l'Enfant-Jésus),  and the intense devoutness of the family resulted in a miraculous healing, Édith said.

1930 – 15  Her manager gave her the stage name "", "la Môme", Édith Piaf, or just Piaf. She was only  tall and puny, but sharp and lively like a sparrow. She always wore a black dress on the stage.

She sang first in Pigalle, then in Le Gerny,  the nightclub of  Louis Leplée near the Champs-Élysées.

She met Raymond Asso (1901-1968) and Marguerite Monnot (1903-1961), who wrote and composed her best songs; she stroke up an acquaintance with actor and singer Maurice Chevalier.

1948 – 32  The love of Piaf's life, the boxer Marcel Cerdan, middleweight champion of the world, died in a plane crash in October 1949, in the Azores, while flying from Paris to New York City to meet her.

1952 – 36  Piaf married Jacques Pills in 1952 (her matron of honour was Marlene Dietrich). She divorced him in 1956. In 1962, she wed Théo Sarapo (Theophanis Lamboukas), a Greek hairdresser who was 20 years her junior.

She suffered from different illnesses  during her life, especially after several car crashes.

1963 – 47  Piaf died of liver cancer at Plascassier, near Grasse (Département Alpes-Maritimes), on 10 October 1963.

Among her most famous songs are "Mon légionnaire" (1936), "Le fanion de la Légion" (1936), "La vie en rose" (1946), "Hymne à l'amour" (1949), "Padam... Padam..." (1951), "l'Accordéoniste" (1955), "Les amants d'un jour" (1956),"La foule" (1957), "Milord" (1959) and "Non, je ne regrette rien" (1960).

Although she was denied a solemn funeral mass, her funeral procession from her residence, Boulevard Lannes (Paris, XVI arr.) drew tens of thousands  of mourners onto the streets of Paris, that caused a huge traffic jam. The ceremony at the cemetery‚ Le Père-Lachaise (Paris, XX arr.), was attended by more than 100,000 fans.

Albums: Chansons Parisiennes (1949)Chansons des Cafés de Paris (1950)Edith Piaf (1953)Le Tour de Chant d'Édith Piaf a l'Olympia - No. 1 (1955)Le Tour de Chant d'Édith Piaf a l'Olympia - No. 2 (1956)Le Tour de Chant d'Édith Piaf a l'Olympia - No. 3 (1958)Récital 1961Récital 1962

Zheng He  (Chinese 郑和; 1371–1433) was a Chinese explorer, diplomat, and admiral during the Ming Dynasty. Zheng He was the leader of a very large fleet of ships that traveled all over the Indian Ocean and Southwest Asia. Zheng He was an eunuch of China's Imperial Court. The fleet that Zheng He commanded had 317 ships that were very large. 28,000 Chinese soldiers were on board these ships.

Zheng He was born in Kunyang, a village in Yunnan. He was born with the name Ma He (Chinese 马三宝). He and his family were Muslim. At the time, Yunnan was ruled by Mongols. In 1381, however, a Ming army invaded and took control of the area.

Ma He was taken as a prisoner by the Ming armies. He was about 10 years old. He was castrated and then taken away to serve the Prince, Zhu Di (the future emperor). Ma He became a servant at the Imperial Court. The name Zheng He was given to him by the Prince. He also came to be called "Sanbao", a reference to the Three Jewels of Buddhism.

From 1405 to 1433, Zheng He went on seven journeys to the Indian Ocean, or what the Chinese people called the "Western Ocean". He was the leader of a large fleet of ships and a big army.

In his first three journeys he visited the countries of Southeast Asia, India and Sri Lanka. In his fourth to seventh journeys he went as far as the east African coast. In his journeys he gave the countries he visited gifts of silk, porcelain, gunpowder and other goods. He got lots of unusual gifts as well, including giraffes and zebras.

Zheng He had his first journey from 1405–1407, but it is not known why the journey was made. He travelled from the mouth of the Yangtze River to Vietnam, as well as the south of India. His fleet was made up of 317 ships, more than 27,000 men, and the cargo included porcelain, silk, and lacquerware. He used a treasure fleet which is known as the largest wooden ships ever built, being  long, and about  wide. On his first voyage, he defeated a famous piraate, Chen Zuyi, in the Strait of Malacca.

For the next 28 years, Zheng He traveled on six more voyages. From 1407–1409, he visited Calicut, Thailand and Java. From 1409–1411, he saw Ayutthaya, Malaya, Sumatra and Sri Lanka. From 1413–1415, he went to Sri Lanka, Bengal, India, Hormuz, Arabia and Aden. On his fifth journey, from 1417–1419, he visited the Ryukyu Islands, Brunei, and east Africa. Then from 1421–1422, he expanded on his fifth journey. His final journey, from 1433–1435, he revisited many of the previous places and brought back gifts from many rulers.

Zheng He visited over 30 countries, and is believed to have died in 1433 on the journey home during the final treasure fleet voyage. After Zheng He died at sea in 1433, his treasure fleet quickly faded, even though his voyages had been a success. Less than 100 years after his death, all of the ships from China were destroyed.

The World Bank is an international bank that lends money and other help  to developing nations for infrastructure. The World Bank has the  of reducing poverty.

The World Bank is part of the World Bank Group. The World Bank is made up of only two institutions: the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) and the International Development Association (IDA). The World Bank Group has these two, but also three more: International Finance Corporation (IFC), Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).

The World Bank is one of five institutions started as the Bretton Woods system in July 1944.  The International Monetary Fund is another one. Many countries sent people to attend the Bretton Woods Conference. The most powerful countries with people there were the United States and United Kingdom, which controlled most of the negotiations.

The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are both based in Washington DC, but the World Bank is headed by an American, while the IMF is led by a European.

From the start until 1967 the bank did not lend as much money as it does now. Careful screening of loan  was common. The bank wanted to provide loans for reconstruction and development, but if they lent out too much, there would be less trust in the bank.

Bank president John McCloy chose France to be the first country to receive a loan from the World Bank; Poland and Chile applied but did not receive one. The loan was for $987 million, half the amount that France actually asked for. There were very  rules about the use of the funds. Bank staff made sure that the French government would have a balanced budget and pay back what it owed to the World Bank first before it paid back other countries. The United States State Department told the French government that the Cabinet should not have any communists. To get the loan, the French government d the Communist coalition government. The loan to France was given very quickly after that.

The Marshall Plan of 1947 meant that many European countries already got help, so the World Bank began to lend to non-European countries. Until 1968, loans were used mainly to pay for projects that would help the country pay it back (such projects as ports, highway systems, and power plants).

From 1968 to 1980 the bank worked mostly on meeting the basic needs of people in poor countries. The amount of money being loaned out grew bigger, and more loans were given. This was because the loans were not just given for infrastructure, but also for social services and other things.

These changes were made by Robert McNamara who became the president in 1968. McNamara managed the Bank in the same way he had worked when he was United States Secretary of Defense and President of the Ford Motor Company. McNamara changed the focus toward things such as building schools and hospitals, improving literacy and farming. McNamara started a new system of gathering information from nations applying for loans. This helped the bank to process loan applications much faster. To give out more loans, McNamara told bank treasurer Eugene Rotberg to find new sources of money, because the northern banks that had lent out the money did not have enough. Rotberg used the bond market to increase the amount of money that the bank could lend. One result of lending so much to help poor countries was that the countries in the Third World started owing a lot more money. From 1976 to 1980 developing world debt rose at an average of 20% a year.

From 1989 World Bank  changed, because many people were complaining. Environmental groups and NGOs were also lent money, to help fix the things that the people were complaining about. Now bank projects include caring for the environment.

The World Bank's current focus is on meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). This means lending mainly to countries that are not very poor, at interest rates which are a little bit higher than the ones it borrows at. The IDA provides low or no interest loans and grants to the poorest countries. The Bank’s mission is to help developing countries to develop more and become less poor. They will also meet the MDGs by helping countries to become good places for investment, jobs and sustainable growth. This (it is postulated) will help the country's  growth through investment and help the poor to share the results of economic growth.

The World Bank says that there are five key factors necessary for economic growth:

For the poorest developing countries in the world, the bank’s plans are based on poverty reduction strategies. The World Bank looks very carefully at local groups of people, and the needs of the country, to develop a strategy that works best for that country. The government then says what it will do to help stop poverty, and the World Bank works with it.

Forty-five countries gave US$25.1 billion in "aid for the world's poorest countries", aid that goes to the World Bank International Development Association (IDA) which distributes the money to eighty poorer countries. While richer nations sometimes pay for their own aid projects, Robert B. Zoellick, the president of the World Bank, said when the gifts were announced on December 15, 2007, that World Bank money "is the core funding that the poorest developing countries rely on".

In 2012, Jim Yong Kim became President of the Bank. He is responsible for chairing the meetings of the Boards of Directors and for running the Bank. The Bank President has always been a US citizen chosen by the United States, the largest shareholder in the bank. The person is then approved by the Board of Governors. They are president for five years, and after that they might be chosen again.

The Executive Directors, represent the Bank's member countries. They make up the Board of Directors and usually meet twice a week to approve and discuss loans and guarantees, new , the budget, ways to help countries and other important decisions.

There are 24 Vice-Presidents, three Senior Vice Presidents and two Executive Vice Presidents.

In 2010, voting powers at the World Bank were changed so that developing countries, especially China, have a bigger vote. The countries with most voting power are now the United States (15.85%), Japan (6.84%), China (4.42%), Germany (4.00%), France (3.75%) and the United Kingdom (3.75%). Under the changes, other countries that saw big gains included Brazil, India, South Korea and Mexico. Most developed countries' voting power was reduced. Russia's voting power was not changed.

The World Bank has been criticized by non-governmental organizations, such as Survival International, and academics, including its former Chief Economist Joseph Stiglitz. Critics say that the free market that the Bank supports is  to economic development if done badly, too quickly, in the wrong order or in weak economies.

In Masters of Illusion: The World Bank and the Poverty of Nations (1996), Catherine Caufield argued that the way the World Bank works is bad for southern nations. Caufield said that the World Bank focuses too much on "development". To the World Bank, different nations all need the same "remedy of development". She argued that to have even modest success, Western practices are used instead of traditional economic structures and values. A second thing the World Bank thinks is that poor countries cannot become modern without money and advice from other countries.

A number of academics in developing countries have said that the way the World Bank works only blames the poor for being poor.

One of the strongest criticisms of the World Bank is the way it was run. While the World Bank represents 186 countries, it is run by a small number of powerful countries. These countries choose who runs the World Bank, so what they want is what the bank does.

The World Bank is two different things: a political organization and a practical organization. As a political organization, the World Bank does what donor and borrowing governments, private capital markets, and other international organizations want. As a practical organization, it must be neutral, working mainly in development aid, technical assistance, and loans. Because the World Bank has to do what donor countries and private capital markets want, it says poverty is best solved by "market" policies. Many people think this is wrong.

In the 1990s, the World Bank and the IMF made the Washington Consensus. Many now agree that the Washington Consensus looked too much at the growth of GDP, and not enough how long the growth lasted or whether growth was even good at all.

Some studies show that the World Bank has increased poverty and been bad for the environment, public health and cultural diversity. Some critics also say that the World Bank has always supported Neoliberalism, forcing developing countries to follow rules which have been damaging.

People also say that the World Bank pushes U.S. or Western interests in certain parts of the world. Even South American nations have established the Bank of the South in order to cut down on US influence there. The fact that the President is always a citizen of the United States, nominated by the President of the United States makes some people unhappy. The US has just over 16% of the shares in the bank; some people say this makes the voting unfair because they have too much power, as decisions only happen if the countries that support it have 85% of the bank's shares. The World Bank also does not need to explain what it does to anyone.

A lot of the criticism has led to protesting. The World Bank Oslo 2002 Protests, the October Rebellion, and the Battle of Seattle are among the protests that have happened. Such demonstrations are held all over the world, even amongst the Brazilian Kayapo people.

In 2008, a World Bank report found that biofuels had driven food prices up 75%. This was important news, but it was never ed. Officials said that they thought it because George W. Bush would be .

The World Bank has been criticised for the way it carries out “the production, accumulation, circulation and functioning” of knowledge. The Bank’s production of knowledge has become important to explain why big loans are given out. The Bank uses many scientists around the world, organisations and other people to help make data and strategies.”. The information is created to stop people looking too closely at what the Bank does. The only knowledge system that is used is the Western one, meaning that the systems that other countries used are put aside and the Western one forced in. Knowledge production has become very useful for the Bank, which plans carefully how to use it to explain why they focus on development.

The effect of structural adjustment policies on poor countries has been one of the most important criticisms of the World Bank. The oil crisis in the late 1970s made many countries have serious money issues. The World Bank decided that it would help by giving out special loans called "structural adjustment loans", which meant the policies of the country had to be changed to reduce inflation. Some of these policies included encouraging production and investment, changing exchange rates and changing the way government resources were used. These were most effective in countries where these policies could be implemented easily. For some countries, especially in Africa, inflation became worse. Stopping poverty was not part of these loans, so the poor usually became poorer because the governments were told to spend less money and raise food prices.

By the late 1980s, people realised that structural adjustment policies were worsening life for the world’s poor. The World Bank changed structural adjustment loans after that. In 1999, the World Bank and the IMF introduced the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper to replace structural adjustment loans. Some people say that the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper approach is just another way of using structural adjustment policies as it continues to do a lot of the same things. Neither way has solved the problems of why some countries are so poor. By making some countries owe others money, many believe that the World Bank has taken over those countries' power to choose how they run their economy.

Despite the goals of “good governance and anti-corruption″ the World Bank needs sovereign immunity from countries it deals with. Sovereign immunity means nothing the World Bank does can be punished. Some people say sovereign immunity is a “shield which [The World Bank] wants resort to, for escaping accountability and security by the people.” Because the United States has veto power, it is the only country that can stop the World Bank from doing things it doesn't like.

The World Bank's work on a way to fix climate change and environmental threats has also been criticized.

People say it has no real vision and purpose, and  a limited focus on only what it can do in global and regional governance. People also say it ignores some specific issues in certain parts of the world, like. issues of rights to food and land, and sustainable land use. Critics have also seen that only 1% of the World Bank's lending goes to the environmental sector.

Environmentalists are asking the Bank to stop worldwide support for coal plants and other things that pollute the environment. For instance, many people have criticized the 2010 decision of the World Bank's approval for a $3.75 billion loan to build the world’s 4th largest coal-fired power plant in South Africa.  The plant will increase coal mining, and cause more pollution.

Zhu Xi or Chu Hsi (, 18 October 1130 – 23 April 1200) was a Confucian scholar during the Song Dynasty. Zhu Xi was one of the three most important Confucian philosophers. He organized the classic works of Confucianism and contributed to the philosophy of Neo-Confucianism.He was from Fujian province in China.

Zhu Xi was born Wu Yuan, North East Jiangxi province. His father died when he was at the age of thirteen. He continued his studies until he passed the test for a government job. He taught for many years in the Wuyi Mountains and he is also remembered for the time he spent teaching at the Yuelu Academy in Changsha and at his retreat near the White Deer Grotto in Lushan. In his life his ideas were not generally accepted and he was fired from quite a lot of official positions. After his death nearly 1000 people were at his funeral and his tablet was put in a Confucian temple.

During the Song Dynasty, Zhu Xi's teachings were considered to be unorthodox. Rather than focusing on the Book of Changes like other Neo-Confucians, he chose to emphasize the Four Books: the Great Learning, the Doctrine of the Mean, the Analects of Confucius, and the Mencius as the core curriculum (thing to learn) for aspiring scholar officials. For all these classics he wrote extensive commentaries (big reviews) that were not widely recognized in his time; however, they later became accepted as their standard commentaries. The Four Books served as the basis of civil service examinations all the way down to 1905.

According to Zhu Xi, knowledge and action were indivisible components of truly intelligent activity. Although he did distinguish (tell apart) between the priority of knowing, since intelligent action requires forethought (thought before), and the importance of action, as it produces a discernible effect, Zhu Xi said "Knowledge and action always require each other. It is like a person who cannot walk without legs although he has eyes, and who cannot see without eyes although he has legs. With respect to order, knowledge comes first, and with respect to importance, action is more important."

World War I (WWI or WW1), also called the First World War, or the Great War, began on 28 July 1914 and lasted until 11 November 1918. It was a global conflict and lasted exactly 4 years, 3 months and 2 weeks. Most of the fighting was in continental Europe.

Soldiers from many countries took part, and it changed the colonial empires of the European powers. Before World War II began in 1939, World War I was called the Great War, or the World War. 135 countries took part in World War I, and almost 10 million people died while fighting.

Before the war, European countries had formed alliances to protect themselves. However, that made them divide themselves into two groups. When Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria was assassinated on 28 June 1914, Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia and declared war on it. Russia then declared war on Austria-Hungary, which set off a chain of events in which members from both groups of countries declared war on each other.

The two sides were the Allied Powers (mainly Russia, France, the British Empire and later Italy and the United States)  and the Central Powers (mainly German Empire, Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire).

There was fighting in many different fronts (areas). The French and the British fought the Germans on the Western Front in France and Belgium. Germany had tried to defeat France quickly with the Schlieffen Plan but were stopped in the First Battle of the Marne. Most of the fighting on the western front was trench warfare. The Russians fought the Germans and Austro-Hungarians on the Eastern Front in Central and Eastern Europe. Fighting on the eastern front was not trench warfare as in the west, but mobile warfare. The other main areas of fighting were in the Middle East, in the Gallipoli region of the Ottoman Empire and between Italy and Austria-Hungary. Fighting also took place in southeastern Europe, Africa, China, at sea and in the air. World War I was the first major war in which tanks, airplanes and submarines (or U-boats) were important weapons.

In 1917, the Russian Revolution led to Russia leaving the war in March 1918. Also in 1917, the United States entered the war, but it took a year for most of its army to arrive. From the time of the Russian departure, before the American arrival, the Germans launched a huge attack in March 1918 to try to win the war, but it failed.

From August to November 1918, the Allied Powers won a large victory against the Germans during the Hundred Days Offensive. Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire then agreed to stop fighting. The German government collapsed, and a new government was forced to agree to stop the fighting on 11 November 1918. Basically, the Germans ran out of men.

Also, the influenza pandemic of 1918 had a big influence. It killed many people in Europe: it lasted for three years, from January 1918 to December 1920. About 500 million people were infected across the world which then had a population of 1.80 billion people.

The war was ended by the signing of many different treaties, the most important being the Treaty of Versailles. It also led to the creation of the League of Nations, which was meant to prevent wars. People were shocked by the size of the war, how many people it killed and how much damage it caused. They hoped it would be "the war to end all wars". Instead it led to another, larger, world war 21 years later.

By 1914, trouble was on the rise in Europe, and many countries feared invasion from others. For example, Germany was becoming increasingly powerful, and the British Empire saw that as a threat. Countries formed alliances to protect themselves, but that divided them into two groups. Germany and Austria-Hungary had been allies since 1879 and formed the Triple Alliance with Italy in 1882. France and Russia became allies in 1894 and later formed the Triple Entente with Britain.

In 1908, Austria-Hungary had taken over Bosnia, a region next to Serbia. Some of those who lived in Bosnia were Serbs and wanted to be part of Serbia. The Black Hand was an organization that agreed with the idea and sent men to kill Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria while he was visiting Sarajevo, the capital of Bosnia. All of them failed to kill him with grenades while he passed through a large crowd. However, one of them, a Serbian student, Gavrilo Princip, shot him and his pregnant wife with a pistol.

Austria-Hungary blamed Serbia for the assassination. Germany supported Austria-Hungary and promised full support in case of war.  Austria-Hungary sent the very harsh July Ultimatum to Serbia and threatened war unless Serbia agreed to all of its terms. Many historians think that Austria-Hungary already wanted a war with Serbia. Serbia agreed to most of the conditions, but Austria-Hungary still declared war on Serbia, which quickly led to a full-scale war. The countries had allies that entered the war in a matter of days.

Russia joined the war to help Serbia because both Serbs and Russians are Slavs. Russia began to assemble its army (mobilize), which caused Germany to begin to mobilize its forces.  Germany declared war on Russia in support of Austria-Hungary and began to carry out its plan to fight a war in Europe.

Germany is in the middle of Europe and so it had to worry about enemies to its east and west. Germany's plan was the quick defeat of France in the west before Russia was ready to fight, then Germany would move its armies to the east to face Russia. However, Germany could not quickly invade France directly because France had put so many forts on the border. That made Germany invade the neighboring country of Belgium to invade France through the undefended French-Belgian border.

Britain then joined the war and said that it was to protect Belgium. However, some historians think that even if Germany had stayed out of Belgium, the British would have still joined the war to help France.

Soon, most of Europe became involved. The Ottoman Empire (now Turkey) joined the war on the side of Germany and Austria-Hungary. It is not clear why the Ottomans entered the war, but they had become friendly to Germany. Italy had allied with Germany and Austria-Hungary but refused to help them since those countries had not been attacked first. Italy noted that Austria-Hungary had attacked Serbia first. Also, Italy had long disliked Austria-Hungary and wanted to take part of its land. It later joined the war for the Allies because they had promised land across the Adriatic Sea.

Germany was afraid that because Austria-Hungary had attacked Serbia, Russia would attack Austria-Hungary to help Serbia. That made Germany feel that it had to help Austria-Hungary by attacking Russia first.

The problem was that Russia was allied to France, and the Germans thought that the French might attack them to help Russia. That made Germany decide that it could win the war by quickly attacking France first. The Germans could mobilize first since they had a list of all men who had to join the army, where they had to go, and the times of every train that would carry them to where they had to go.

France was slower in doing the same thing. The Germans thought that if they attacked France first, they could knock it out of the war before Russia could attack them.

Russia had a large army, but Germany mistakenly thought that it would take six weeks to mobilize and a long time before they could attack the Central Powers. However, the Russian Army mobilized in ten days and drove deep into Austria-Hungary.

In the east, the Russians attacked the Germans. The Russians pushed back the Germans, but the Germans then defeated the Russians at the Battle of Tannenberg.

The United Kingdom quickly joined the war and said that it was to protect Belgian neutrality. Germany passed through Belgium to reach Paris before Russia could mobilize and open up a second front. On 4 August 1914, the British declared war against Germany in support of Belgium. The British Empire was larger than any other empire and ruled over a quarter of the world. If Germany won in France, it might take British and French colonies and become the most powerful and largest empire in the world.

Britain was also worried about Germany's growing military power. Germany was developing its large army into one of the most powerful in the world. The British Army was quite small, but the Royal Navy was the largest and the best in the world, which in the 19th century was enough to keep other naval powers from attacking Britain.

Germany was a land power, and Britain was a sea power. However, Germany was building a large navy, which was seen as a threat to Britain. Germany's generals had decided that the best way to defeat France was to go through Belgium using a plan called the Schlieffen Plan by German Army Chief of Staff Alfred Von Schlieffen. The Germans could then attack the French army at the north side and the south side at the same time. The German Army went into Belgium on 4 August. The same day,  the British declared war on Germany. The British had said in 1839 that they would not let Belgium be invaded, and they kept their promise.

When the Germans got to the Belgian city of Liège, the Belgians fought very hard to stop them from coming into the city. The Germans finally pushed the Belgians out of the city, but it had taken longer than the German generals had planned. The Germans then attacked the north side of the French army. The French and the British moved men up to fight the Germans because the Belgians had fought so long at Liège. However, the Germans pushed the French back at the frontiers, and the British held the Germans back at Mons, but they also fell back to join up with the retreating French Army until they were stopped at the river Marne. This was the First Battle of the Marne or "Miracle of the Marne".

The British government might have decided differently if anyone had foreseen how long the war would last and what a terrible price Britain would pay.

Most people thought that the war would be short. They thought the armies would move around quickly to attack each other and one would defeat the other without too many people getting killed. They thought the war would be about brave soldiers and did not understand how war had changed. Only a few people, such as Lord Kitchener said that the war would last long.

The Ottomans joined the war because they were secretly allied to Germany, and two Ottoman warships, manned by German Navy personnel, bombarded Russian towns.

Britain fought against the Ottomans only for supporting Germany and had no other problem with them. However, by fighting them in the Mesopotamia region in what is now Iraq, in the Arabian Peninsula and in other places, Britain defeated them with the help from the British Indian Army. After the war ended, Britain got some Ottoman areas and added them to the British Empire.

Greece went into the war because its leader supported the Allied cause. Greece and Serbia had become independent, but many Greeks still lived in lands that had once been Greek but were now Ottoman. Having recently won the Balkan Wars, the Greeks wanted especially to control other land to the north that was under Bulgarian and Ottoman rule and so they declared war. The Ottomans killed most of the Greek Army as they tried to regain parts of the Ottoman Empire. Another war started when the Greeks bombed a train. The Ottomans swept the Greeks back into their own territory. From then on, the Greeks never again declared war, but the Ottomans had one of the largest armies in the world. The two main allies of the central powers in Africa were Lij Iyasu, a Muslim emperor of Abyssinia, and Sultan Diiriye Guure, the monarch of the Dervish Kingdom. The Kingdom of Diiriye Guure in Taleh was destroyed in 1920, and that of Iyasu was replaced with the first female emperor Zewditu.

Bulgaria, like Greece and Serbia, had been part of the Ottoman Empire but later became independent. Bulgaria claimed a lot of Ottoman land. The Serbians and the Greeks felt cheated because they felt that the land belonged to them and took back the land. That angered Bulgaria and led to it becoming an Ottoman ally. Bulgaria declared war on Serbia and Greece but lost the war.

Trench warfare killed many soldiers. New weapons, such as machine guns, and long-range artillery had an increased rate of fire that cut down huge numbers of soldiers during mass charges, a tactic left over from older warfare.  The men on both sides took spades and dug holes because they did not want to be killed. The holes joined up into trenches until the lines of trenches went all the way from Switzerland to the North Sea. In front of the trenches was barbed wire to cut anyone who tried to climb over it and land mines to blow up anyone who tried to cross. Late in the war, poison gas also was an important weapon.

The new machine guns, artillery, trenches, and mines made it very difficult to attack. The generals had fought many wars without them and so they ordered their armies to attack in the old style of marching in rows, which allowed the enemy to shoot them down easily. At the 1916 Battle of the Somme, 60,000 British men died in a single day, one of the bloodiest days in the history of the British army. Late in the war, the British and French invented tanks and used them to attack entrenched Germans, but they could not make enough of them to make a big difference.  The German Empire responded by making their own tanks but they had even fewer.  The Germans also invented special Sturmabteilung tactics to infiltrate enemy positions.  This was also too little, too late.

The British used whistles to communicate to other soldiers and so before they shelled the German trenches, they would sound the whistle. However, the Germans caught on to this tactic and so after the shelling, when the British soldiers came to finish off the German soldiers, the Germans were ready with their machine guns because they knew that the British were coming.

Airplanes were first used extensively in World War I. They were first used for reconnaissance, and pictures of enemy land were taken to help direct artillery. Generals, who are military leaders, were using airplanes as an important part of their attack plans at the end of the war. World War I showed that airplanes could be important war weapons.

Airplanes in World War I were made of wood and canvas, a type of rough cloth. They did not last long and could not fly very fast at the beginning of the war. They could only fly up to 116 kilometers per hour, or 72 miles per hour. At the end of the war, they could fly up to , much slower than modern planes. Guns were put on planes for the first time during the war. Pilots, people who fly the plane, used the guns to shoot enemy planes. One pilot used metal sheets to armor his airplane. Other pilots began using metal sheets too. Pilots also made their airplanes better with machine guns, guns that shoot bullets much faster. That made fighting harder and more dangerous between airplanes.

Pilots had to wear certain clothes when flying an airplane in World War I because they flew high, where the air is cold. The pilots' clothes kept them warm and protected them from the wind and cold. Pilots wore a leather coat to protect their bodies, a padded helmet and goggles, which are large glasses with special lenses, to protect their head and face. They wore a scarf around their neck to keep the wind from blowing against their neck when they turned their head.

The German leaders decided to use submarines, called U-boats, from the German word Unterseeboot (meaning "underwater boat"). The U-boats attacked passenger ships such as RMS Lusitania carrying civilians to the United Kingdom. They did not follow the laws of war because the British could easily destroy them otherwise. America was selling weapons to Germany's enemies but not to Germany and so was not neutral since the US had taken sides during the conflict. Many American and British noncombatants were killed by the submarines although they were not fighting.

Germany also wrote a secret telegram note to Mexico in code that suggest that both countries work together to attack the United States. This note is called the Zimmerman Telegram because it was sent by Arthur Zimmerman. It offered Mexico land in the Southwestern United States that the United States had taken in the Mexican-American War. British spies found out about the note and told the United States. The Americans became angry, and many decided that their country should enter the war against Germany. The Zimmermann Telegram and the sinking of American ships by German U-boats made the United States on 6 April 1917 declare war against Germany and join the Allies.

The defeat of Russia on the Eastern Front caused unrest there, which led to the Russian Revolutions.  This made Russia fight both Germany and the Bolsheviks at the same time.  Russia wanted to end the war against Germany and just fight the Bolsheviks in the Russian Civil War.  Russia gave Germany money and land to stop the fighting between those two countries.

In 1917, there was a revolution in Russia. Tsar Nicholas II had to give up power and a new government was established. At first, it was thought that Russia would fight harder now that he was gone. However, the Russians did not want to fight anymore because there was too little food, weapons or adequate roads to supply its army. The war had been putting burdens on the Russians, and many of them were poor and hungry. They began to hate their new government because it would not stop the war.

Another revolution happened in Russia in which the Mensheviks lost to the Bolsheviks (these were two rival groups of communists).  The leader of the Bolsheviks was Vladimir Lenin (1870-1924).  The new Bolshevik government asked the Germans for peace and signed the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with the Central Powers in March 1918 at the city of Brest-Litovsk.  Lenin later died in 1924 and was  replaced by  Joseph Stalin.

The Germans and Russians stopped fighting.  Russia gave Germany parts of the Russian Empire in Eastern Europe and along the Baltic Sea, including the Baltic states, Poland, Ukraine and Belarus.  Also, Finland gained its independence by the treaty.

After the war, the Germans had to agree to the Treaty of Versailles, which stated that Germany had to pay approximately $31.5 billion in reparations and had to take full responsibility for the war.

Also, the countries of the world were to come together to make an international organization to stop future wars: the League of Nations. The United States Senate did not agree with the League even though it was the idea of United States President Woodrow Wilson. Although Wilson tried to tell the American people to agree to join the League, the United States never joined it.

Problems with the treaty in Germany, where it was hated, later led to World War II in 1939.

World War II, or the Second World War, was a global conflict (1 September 1939 – 2 September 1945) which involved fighting between the Allies and the Axis. Most of the world's countries, including all of the great powers, fought as part of two military alliances: the Allied Powers include the United States, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the Axis Powers include Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy and the Empire of Japan.

The war was one of the biggest and deadliest wars in human history, where about 60 million people died. During the war, many atrocities were done by countries, including The Holocaust, genocide of over 6 million Jews and many others by the Nazis. During the war, strategic bombings became common, including the atomic bombings over Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the only use of nuclear weapons on any war until today.

The war in Europe began when Nazi Germany invaded Poland on 1 September 1939. France and the United Kingdom reacted by declaring war on Germany. By 1941, most of Europe was under German control, including France, Norway, Austria, Hungary, Denmark, Czechoslovakia, and Poland. Only the British remained fighting against the Axis in North Africa, the Mediterranean, and the Atlantic. Germany gave up plans to invade Britain after losing the air Battle of Britain. In June 1941, Germany invaded the Soviet Union, starting the largest land invasion in history. On 7 December 1941, Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor and invaded British and French colonies in Asia, and two fronts developed: the Western Theater and the Pacific Theater.

The Japanese victories were stopped in 1942, and the Soviets won the huge Battle of Stalingrad in early 1943. Then, the Allies started to win in multiple areas. The Axis were forced back from the Soviet Union, weakening in the Scorched Earth tactic. German leaders had not expected the invasion to last until the hard Russian winter. The Axis also lost North Africa. Starting in 1943, they were forced to defend Italy. Allied forces had a hard time pushing into Italy from Sicily due to its strong defenses. In 1944, the Allies invaded France. The invasion was called D-Day, held in 6 June 1944. They came into Germany itself from the West, while the Soviets came in from the East. Germany surrendered on 8 May 1945, ending the war in Europe.

Japan surrendered on 2 September 1945, after the Soviets beat the Japanese in Manchuria and the United States dropped two nuclear bombs, "Little Boy" and "Fat Man," had been dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, respectively. This was the only time a nuclear weapon has been used in a real war. As of the present day, the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki have been the only instances in which nuclear weaponry has been used in wartime.

After the war, the United Nations was built to develop support between countries and to prevent future wars. After World War I, the League of Nations had been built too, but it was not effective. The Cold War by the major winners soon started, but they did not fight each other in an actual war. The decolonization of Asia and Africa (where many places controlled by European countries were given their ) happened as well since Europe had been weakened by the war. Economic  and political integration (the process of uniting countries) were among other results of the war.

The countries that joined the war were on two sides: the Axis and the Allies.

The Axis Powers at the start of the war were Germany, Italy, and Japan. There were many meetings to create an alliance between those countries. Finland (though they never signed the Tripartite pact like other axis members), Slovakia, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary, Croatia, Vichy France, and Thailand joined the Axis later. As the war continued, some Axis countries like Italy changed sides to join the Allies instead.

The Allied Powers were the United Kingdom and the rest of the British Empire, France, Poland, Yugoslavia, Greece, Belgium, Denmark, Norway, various south and Central American nations after the Japanese attacks on Pearl Harbour, and Finland after September 1944 the Netherlands Belgium and Luxembourg and China, the last of which had been fighting a civil war. In June 1941, Germany attacked the Soviet Union in Operation Barbarossa, which made the Soviets join the Allies. In December 1941 came the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor against the United States, which then also joined the Allies. Finland also joined the Allies, in September 1944).

World War I had greatly changed the ways of diplomacy and politics in Asia, Europe, and Africa with the defeat of the Central Powers.  The empires that had sided with the Central Powers were destroyed.  Even the Russian Empire, which was on the Allied side, broke up and became the USSR (Soviet Union) after the Russian Civil War.  The war also changed the borders in Eastern Europe, with many new countries being born.  Germany was forced to sign the Treaty of Versailles.  The Germans also lost 13% of their homeland area and all of their colonies, and they had to pay back a large amount of money to the Allies.  The size of their army and navy was also limited, and its air force was banned, except for the 100 airplanes working for the coalmines.

In Italy, nationalists were unhappy with the Versailles Treaty since they thought that their victory as an Ally in WWI should have gained them far more territory from the defeated Austria. The fascist movement in the 1920s brought Mussolini to the leadership of the country. He promised to make Italy a great power by adding to its colonial empire.

After the Kuomintang (KMT), the governing party of China, unified the country in the 1920s, the Chinese Civil War between it and the Communist Party of China began. In 1931, Japan used the Mukden Incident as a excuse to take Manchuria and set up a puppet state, Manchukuo, and the League of Nations failed to do anything to stop it. The Tanggu Truce, a ceasefire, was signed in 1933. In 1936, the Kuomintang and the communists agreed to stop fighting against each other and to fight Japan instead. In 1937, Japan started the Second Sino-Japanese War to take the rest of China.

After the end of the German Empire, the democratic Weimar Republic was set up. There were disagreements among Germans that involved many political ideologies, ranging from nationalism to communism. The fascist movement in Germany rose because of the Great Depression. Adolf Hitler, the leader of the Nazi Party, became the German chancellor in 1933. After the Reichstag fire, Hitler created a totalitarian state, in which there was only one party by law. Hitler wanted to change the world order and quickly rebuilt the German army, navy, and air force, especially after Saarland voted to return to Germany in 1935. In March 1936, Hitler sent the army to Rhineland. The Spanish Civil War began in July 1936. The war ended in 1939 with the Nationalist victory because of support from Italy and Germany.

In March 1938, Germany sent its army into Austria, known as the Anschluss, which had little reaction from European countries since many Austrians wanted to be part of Germany. Soon, Western Europe agreed to give the Sudetenland, a part of Czechoslovakia that was mostly German, to Germany if Hitler promised to stop taking land. However, the rest of the country had been forced to surrender or be invaded by March 1939. The Allies now tried to stop him by promising to help Poland if it was attacked. Just before the war, Germany and the Soviet Union signed a peace agreement that openly stated that they would not attack each other for ten years. Secretly, they also agreed to divide Eastern Europe between them.

World War II began in Europe on 1 September 1939, when Germany invaded Poland. On 3 September, Britain and France declared war on Germany. They did not do much to help Poland but sent only a small French attack on Germany from the west. The Soviet Union soon invaded eastern Poland, on 17 September. Finally, all of Poland was divided.

Germany then signed an agreement to work together with the Soviet Union. The Soviet Union forced the Baltic countries to allow it to keep Soviet soldiers in their countries. Finland did not accept the Soviet call, and so it was attacked in November 1939. With peace, the world war broke out. France and Britain thought that the Soviet Union might enter the war for Germany and the Soviets were expelled from the League of Nations.

After Poland was defeated, the Phoney War began in Western Europe. British soldiers were sent to the Continent, but no large battles were fought between the two sides. Then, in April 1940, Germany decided to attack Norway and Denmark so that it would be safer to transport iron ore from Sweden. The British and the French sent an army to disrupt the German occupation, but had to leave when Germany invaded France. Neville Chamberlain was replaced by Winston Churchill as British prime minister in May 1940 because of the invasion.

On 10 May, Germany invaded France, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg and quickly defeated them using massive force tactics. The British were forced to leave mainland Europe at Dunkirk. On 10 June, Italy invaded France, and declared war on France and the United Kingdom. Soon, France was divided into occupation zones. Some were directly controlled by Germany and Italy, and the other was the zone of unoccupied Vichy France.

By June 1940, the Soviet Union moved its soldiers into the Baltic states and took them, followed by Bessarabia in Romania. Although there had been some collaboration between the Soviet Union and Germany earlier, that event made it serious. Later, when both countries could not agree to work more closely together, relationships between them became worse to the point of the war.

Germany began an air battle over Britain to prepare for a landing on the island, but the plan was canceled in September when they failed to gain the upper hand. The German Navy destroyed many British ships transporting goods in the Atlantic. Italy had begun its operation in the Mediterranean. The United States remained neutral but started to help the Allies. By helping to protect British ships in the Atlantic, the United States found itself fighting German ships by October 1941 but was not officially at war.

In September 1940, Italy began to invade British-held Egypt. In October, Italy invaded Greece, but that resulted in only an Italian retreat to Italian-occupied Albania. Again, in early 1941, an Italian army was pushed from Egypt to Libya in Africa, but Germany soon helped Italy. Under Erwin Rommel's command, by the end of April 1941, the British were pushed back to Egypt again. Germany also successfully invaded Greece, Yugoslavia and Crete by May. Despite the victories, Hitler decided to cancel the bombing of Britain after 11 May.

Meanwhile, Japan's progress in China was still not much, although the nationalist and communist Chinese began fighting each other again. Japan was planning to take over European colonies in Asia while they were weak, and the Soviet Union could feel a danger from Germany and so a non-aggression pact between the Soviets and the Japanese was signed in April 1941. Germany kept preparing to attack the Soviet Union by moving its soldiers close to the Soviet border.

On 22 June 1941, the European Axis countries attacked the Soviet Union. This opened a new Eastern Front (World War II). During the summer, the Axis quickly captured Ukraine and the Baltic regions, which caused huge damage to the Soviets. Britain and the Soviet Union formed a military alliance in July. Although there was great progress in the last two months, when winter came, the tired German army was forced to delay its attack just outside Moscow. That showed that the Axis had failed its main targets, and the Soviet army was still not weakened. This marked the end of the blitzkrieg stage of the war.

By December, the Soviet Red Army facing the Axis army had received more soldiers from the east since it no longer feared the Japanese. The Soviets began a counterattack and pushed the German army to the west. The Axis lost a lot of soldiers but still had most of the land that it already controlled. By November 1941, the British counterattacked the Axis in North Africa and got all the land back that it had lost. However, the Axis pushed the Allies back again until it was stopped at El Alamein.

In Asia, German successes encouraged Japan to call for oil supplies from the Dutch East Indies. Many Western countries reacted to the occupation of French Indochina by banning oil trading with Japan. Plans to take over European colonies in Asia to create a great defensive area in the Pacific was made by Japan to give it more resources. However, before any future invasion, Japan first had to destroy the American Pacific Fleet in the Pacific Ocean. On 7 December 1941, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor as well as many harbors in several South East Asian countries. That event led the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, and the Western Allies to declare war on Japan, but the Soviet Union remained neutral. Most of the Axis nations reacted by declaring war on the United States.

By April 1942 the Singapore strategy had failed and many southeast Asian countries (Burma, Malaya, the Dutch East Indies, and Singapore) had almost fallen to the Japanese. In May 1942, the Philippines fell. The Japanese Navy had many quick victories, but in June 1942, Japan was defeated at Midway. Japan could no longer take the land because a large part of its navy was destroyed during the Battle of Midway.

Japan then began its plan to take over Papua New Guinea again, and the United States planned to attack the Solomon Islands. The fight at Guadalcanal began in September 1942 and involved many troops and ships from both sides. It ended with a Japanese defeat in early 1943.

On the Eastern Front, the Axis defeated Soviet attacks during summer and began its own main offensive to southern Russia along Don and Volga Rivers in June 1942 to try to take over oil fields in Caucasus, which were critical to the Axis for fuelling their war effort, and as well as a great steppe. Stalingrad (now Volgograd) was in the path of the Axis army, and the Soviets decided to defend the city. By November, the Germans had nearly taken Stalingrad, but the Soviets surrounded the Germans in the winter After heavy losses, the German army was forced to surrender the city in February 1943. Even though the front was pushed back farther than it was before the summer attacks, the German Army still had become dangerous to an area around Kursk. Hitler devoted almost two-thirds of his armies to The Battle of Stalingrad, which was the largest and deadliest battle of the time.

In August 1942, because of the Allied defense at El Alamein, the Axis army failed to take the town.  A new Allied offensive drove the Axis west across Libya a few months later, just after the Anglo-American invasion of French North Africa forced it to join the Allies. That led to Axis defeat during the North African Campaign in May 1943.

In the Soviet Union, on 4 July 1943, Germany started an attack around Kursk. Many German soldiers were lost because of the Soviets' well-created defenses. Hitler cancelled the attack before it had any clear outcome. The Soviets then started their counterattack, which was one of the war's turning points. The Soviets, instead of the Germans, then became the attacking force on the Eastern Front.

On 9 July 1943, affected by the earlier Soviet victories, the Western Allies landed on Sicily, which resulted in the arrest of Mussolini in the same month. In September 1943, the Allies invaded mainland Italy, following the Italian armistice with the Allies. Germany then took control of Italy, disarmed its army, and built many defensive lines to slow the Allied invasion. German special forces rescued Mussolini and created the German-occupied puppet state of the Italian Social Republic. In late 1943, Japan conquered some islands in India and began an invasion of the mainland of India. The British Indian Army and other forces expelled it in early 1944.

In early 1944, the Soviet army drove off the German army from Leningrad (now Saint Petersburg) and ended the longest and deadliest siege in history. After that, the Soviets began a large counterattack. By May, the Soviets had retaken Crimea. With the attacks in Italy from September 1943, the Allies succeeded in capturing Rome on 4 June 1944, and made the German forces fall back.

The Italians in the far east were in a difficult situation after September 1943. They would neither surrender to Japan nor declare war on Japan. The Chinese leaders moved the headquarter and military bases to western China. That was due to 6 years' aggression against Japan. They did not pay much attention to Italy during that period of time. Italy declared war against Japan in July 1945.

6 June 1944 was D-Day, the day that the Allies began the invasion of Normandy, France. The codename of the invasion was Operation Overlord. The successful invasion led to the defeat of the German forces in France. Paris was freed in August 1944, and the Allies continued eastward while the German front collapsed. Operation Market Garden was the combined aerial invasion of the Netherlands and was launched on 17 September 1944. The purpose was to seize a series of bridges that included a bridge in Arnhem, which spanned the Rhine River. The airborne invasion was called Market. The ground invasion, named Garden, reached the Rhine but could not take the bridge.

On 22 June, the Soviet offensive on the Eastern Front codenamed Operation Bagration, destroyed almost all of the German Army Group Centre. Soon, the Germans were forced to retreat and to defend Ukraine and Poland. The arriving Soviet troops caused uprisings against the German government in Eastern European countries, but they failed to succeed unless they were helped by the Soviets. Another Soviet offensive forced Romania and Bulgaria to join the Allies. Communist Serbian partisans under Josip Broz Tito retook Belgrade with some help from Bulgaria and the Soviet Union. By early 1945, the Soviets had attacked many German-occupied countries: Greece, Albania, Yugoslavia, and Hungary. The Soviets made Finland switch to the Allies.

On 16 December 1944, the Germans tried one last time to take the Western Front by attacking the Allies in Ardennes, Belgium, in a battle known as the Battle of the Bulge. It was the last major German war attack, and the Germans were unsuccessful in their attack.

By March 1945, the Soviets had moved quickly from Vistula River in Poland to East Prussia and Vienna, and the Western Allies had crossed the Rhine. In Italy, the Allies pushed forward while the Soviets attacked Berlin. The Western Allies eventually met up with the Soviets at the Elbe River on 25 April 1945.

Hitler committed suicide on 30 April 1945, two days after Mussolini had been killed. In his will, Hitler appointed his navy commander, Grand Admiral Karl Donitz, to be his successor.  Donitz surrendered to the allies, and opposed Hitler for wanting Germany to continue fighting.

German forces in Italy surrendered on 29 April 1945. Germany surrendered to the Western Allies on 7 May 1945, known as V-E Day, and was forced to surrender to the Soviets on 8 May, 1945. The final battle in Europe ended in Czechoslovakia, on 11 May 1945.

In the Pacific, American forces arrived in the Philippines in June 1944. By April 1945, American and Philippine forces had cleared many of the Japanese forces, but fighting continued in some parts of the Philippines until the end of the war. British and Chinese forces had advanced in Northern Burma and captured Rangoon by 3 May 1945. American forces had taken Iwo Jima by March and Okinawa by June 1945. Many Japanese cities were destroyed by Allied bombings, and Japanese imports were cut off by American submarines.

The Allies wanted Japan to surrender without conditions, but Japan refused to do so. The United States dropped two atomic bombs over Hiroshima (6 August 1945) and Nagasaki (9 August 1945). On 8 August 1945, the Soviets entered the war against Japan and invaded Manchuria and quickly defeated the primary Imperial Japanese Army there. On 15 August 1945, Japan surrendered to the Allies. The surrender documents were formally signed on board the USS Missouri on 2 September 1945, which ended the war.

The Allies managed to occupy Austria and Germany. Germany was divided into four. The Soviets controlled the east, and the United States, United Kingdom, and France controlled the west. The Allies began denazification, removing Nazi ideas from public life in Germany, and most high-ranking Nazis were captured and brought to a special court. Germany lost a quarter of its land in 1937, mostly to Poland and the Soviet Union. The Soviets also took some parts of Poland and Finland as well as the three Baltic countries. The United Nations was formed on 24 October 1945 to keep peace between countries in the world. However, the relationship between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union had worsened during the war and, soon after it, each power quickly built up their power over the controlled area. In Western Europe and West Germany, it was the United States, while in East Germany and Eastern Europe, it was the Soviet Union, which turned many countries into communist states. The Cold War led to the formation of the American-led NATO and the Soviet-led Warsaw Pact.

In Asia, Japan was put under American occupation. In 1948, Korea was divided into North Korea and South Korea, each claiming to be the legal representative of the Koreans, which led to the Korean War in 1950. The civil war in China continued from 1946 and resulted in the KMT retreating to Taiwan in 1949 after the communists had won the mainland. In the Middle East, the Arabs disagreed with the United Nations plan to create Israel, which marked the beginning of conflicts between the Arabs and Israel.

After the war, decolonization took place in many European colonies. Bad economies and people wanting to rule themselves were the main reasons. In most cases, that happened peacefully, except in some countries, such as Indochina and Algeria. In many regions, European withdrawal caused divisions among the people who had different ethnic groups or religions.

Economic recovery was different in many parts of the world, but in general, it was quite positive. The United States became richer than any other country; by 1950, it had taken over the world's economy. It also decided on the Marshall Plan (1948–1951) to help European countries. The German, Italian, and French economies recovered. However, the British economy was badly harmed and continued to worsen for more than ten years. The Soviet economy grew very fast after the war was over. That also happened with the Japanese economy, which became one of the largest economies in the 1980s. China returned to the same production level as before the war by 1952.

The exact number of deaths in the war is not known, because many were unrecorded. Many studies state that more than 60 million people died in the war, mostly civilians. The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people, almost half of the recorded number of deaths, which means that 25% of the Soviets were killed or wounded in the war. About 85% of the total deaths were on the Allies, and the other 15% were on the Axis. Mostly, people died because they were sick, hungry to death, bombed, or were targets of genocide.

The Nazis selected many groups of people to be killed in what is known as known as The Holocaust. They killed Jews, Roma, Poles, Russians, homosexuals, disabled people, and other groups. Around 11 million to 17 million civilians died. Around 7.5 million people were killed in China by the Japanese. The most well-known Japanese crime is the Nanking massacre, in which hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians were raped and murdered. There were reports that the Germans and Japanese tested biological weapons against civilians and against prisoners-of-war.

Although many Axis war crimes were brought to the first international court, no Allied war crimes were.

Other than the Holocaust, about 12 million people (mostly Eastern Europeans) were forced to work for the German economy. German concentration camps and Soviet gulags caused many deaths. Both sides treated their prisoners of war very badly. That was the case even for Soviet soldiers who survived and returned home.

Japanese prisoner-of-war camps, many of which were used as labor camps, also caused many deaths. The death rate of Western prisoners was 27.1%, seven times that of prisoners under Germans and Italians. More than 10 million Chinese civilians were made slaves and had to work in mines and war factories. Between 4 and 10 million people were forced to work in Java.

Between 1942 and 1945, US President Franklin Roosevelt signed an order that made Japanese Americans go to internment camps since he feared that they would help Japan invade the US. Some Germans and Italians were included as well.

The Allies agreed that the Soviet Union could use prisoners of war and civilians for forced labor. Hungarians were forced to work for the Soviet Union until 1955.

Before the war in Europe, the Allies had a larger population and economy than the Axis. If colonies were included, the GDP of the Allies would be twice that of the Axis. In Asia, however, China had a GDP only 38% higher than Japan if colonies were counted.

The Allied economy and population compared with the Axis lessened with the early Axis victories. However, that was no longer the case after the United States and the Soviet Union joined the Allies in 1941. The Allies had a higher production level than the Axis because of more natural resources. Also, Germany and Japan did not plan for a long war and even had no ability to do so. Both tried to improve their economies by using slave laborers.

When men went off to fight for the war, they had to leave their jobs. Women were not usually allowed to fight, so they took over many of the mens' jobs. At factories, women were employed to make bombs, guns, aircraft, and other equipment.  In Britain, thousands of women were sent to work on farms as part of the Land Army. Others formed the Women's Royal Naval Service to help with building and repairing ships.  Even Princess Elizabeth, who later became Queen Elizabeth II, worked as a mechanic to aid the war effort. By 1945, some weapons were being made almost entirely by women.

In the beginning, women were rarely used in the labor forces in Germany and Japan. However, Allied bombings and the German change to a war economy made women take a greater part.

In Britain, women also worked in gathering intelligence at Bletchley Park and other places. The mass evacuation of children also had a major impact on the lives of mothers during the war years.

Germany had two different ideas of how it would occupy countries. In Western, Northern, and Central Europe, Germany set economic policies that would make it rich. During the war, the policies brought as much as 40% of total German income. In the east, the war against the Soviet Union meant Germany could not use the land to gain resources. The Nazis used their racial policy and murdered a lot of people they thought were non-human. The Resistance, the group of people secretly fighting Germany, could not harm Germany much until 1943.

Japan claimed to free colonized Asian countries from European colonial powers in Asia. Although it was welcomed at first in many territories, its cruel actions soon turned people against it. During the occupation, Japan used 4 million barrels of oil that had been left behind by the Allies. By 1943, Japan produced up to 50 million barrels of oil in the Dutch East Indies, was 76% of its 1940 rate.

The war brought new methods for future wars.  The air forces improved greatly in fields such as air transport, strategic bombing to use bombs to destroy industry and morale, radar, and weapons for destroying aircraft. Jet aircraft were developed and were used worldwide in air forces.

At sea, the war focused on using aircraft carriers and submarines. Aircraft carriers soon replaced battleships, mainly for being cheaper. Submarines, a deadly weapon since World War I, also played an important part in the war. The British improved weapons for destroying submarines, such as sonar, while the Germans improved submarine tactics.

The style of war on the land had changed from World War I to be more mobile. Tanks, which had been used to support infantry, changed to being primary weapons. The tank was improved in speed and firepower during the war. At the start of the war, most commanders thought that using better tanks was the best way to fight enemy tanks. However, early tanks could harm armour only a little. The German idea to avoid letting tanks fight each other meant tanks facing tanks rarely happened. That was a successful tactic in Poland and France. Ways to destroy tanks also improved. Vehicles became more used in the war, infantry remained the main part of the army.

Submachine guns became widely used, especially in cities and jungles.  The assault rifle, a German development combining s of the rifle and submachine gun, became the main weapon for most armies after the war.

Other developments included better encryption for secret messages, such as the German Enigma.  Another feature of military intelligence was the use of deception, especially by the Allies. Others include the first programmable computers, modern missiles and rockets, and the atomic bombs.

Most authorities now agree that of the 30 million Soviets who fought, there were 13.6 million military deaths.

Deaths of civilians during this war, many of which resulted from famine and internal purges, such as in China and the Soviet Union, were colossal but less well recorded than those by the fighting forces. Although the figures here are the best available from authoritative sources of the scale of civilian losses, the exact numbers will never be known.

Germany, Italy, Japan, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Thailand, Croatia

United States, British Empire, France, Soviet Union, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, Greece, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, South Africa, Yugoslavia

There is no exact number of deaths because many were unrecorded. Many studies said that more than 60 million people died in the war, mostly civilians. The Soviet Union lost around 27 million people, almost half of the recorded number of deaths, which means that 25% of the Soviets were killed or wounded in the war. About 85% of the total deaths were on the Allies, and the other 15% were on the Axis. Mostly, people died because they were sick, hungry to death, bombed, or the wrong ethnicity.

The Nazis selected many groups of people to be killed in what is known as known as The Holocaust. They killed Jews, Roma, Poles, Russians, homosexuals, and other groups. Around 11 million to 17 million civilians died. Around 7.5 million people were killed in China by the Japanese. The most well-known Japanese crime is the Nanking massacre, in which hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians were raped and murdered. There were reports that the Germans and Japanese tested biological weapons against civilians and against prisoners-of-war.

Although many Axis war crimes were brought to the first international court, no Allied war crimes were.
